C5044 14870322 102755
PURPURA ANGLICANA, BEING A DISCOVERY OF A SHELL-FISH. Found on the Shores of the Severn, in which there is a Vein containing a Juice, giving the delicate and durable Tincture of the Antient, Rich, Tyrian PVRPLE; of which it is an undoubted Species: The Knowledg of which, hath been lost for many Ages. With Experimental OBSERVATIONS upon it, and Figures of the Shells. First printed at Oxford, in the Year 1686. In a large Philoso∣phical Transaction, No. 178. Now re-printed alone, at the Desire, and for the conveniency of many, who are not disposed to buy the BOOK. By W. C. the AUTHOR. LONDON, Printed by Joseph Streater. MDCLXXXIX.
PURPURA ANGLICANA THere being many Natural things, which I have former∣ly, and of late, happily found in the South and West Parts of England, not as I can find published by any Author; be∣sides many more which have been discovered by the industrious Exquisitions of divers ingenious and curious Searchers of Nature; (as also others which were before thought to be Exotiques;) I have reason to believe, that there are very many more (for in¦couragement of such Inquirers) yet undiscovered in this our Native Country. Among others, that of the Purple-Fish, which I found the last Winter, on the Sea Coasts of Somerset-shire, and the shores of South-Wales opposite to it; which also I doubt not but may be found on the other Coasts of England, especially the South and Western parts, (in which I am almost assured I have formerly seen them, tho' then unknown to me,) where there are Rocks and great Pebbles, and where the Tides run not too strong. Which Discovery I do not pretend to be so made by me, as ha∣ving no hint of it before: For in October, 1684, there were two Ladies at Mynehead, where I then was, who seeing what Collecti∣ons I had made of Natural things in those Parts, told me, there was a certain Person living by the Sea-side, in some Port or Creek in Ireland, who made considerable gain, by marking with a de∣licate durable Crimson Colour, fine Linnen of Ladies, Gent. &c. sent from many parts of that Island, with their Names, or other∣wise as they pleased; which, they told me, (as they were infor∣med,) was made by some liquid substance taken out of a Shell-fish;
upon which I shewed them all the Shells I had found on that Coast; one of them thought it to be taken out of a Limpot; the o∣ther out of that Shell here figured and described; but neither of them could inform me out of what part it was taken in either. Af∣ter their departure from that Port, I made Experiments on all the Shell-fishes, in which I might probably think to find it; and brake them while the Fishes were alive in them, and with a short poin∣ted Pencil of Horse hair (no other instrument being so conve∣nient) I tryed every part of each, which I imagined might yield the Colour; but upon washing the Linnen which I had marked, in scalding water, with sope, there appeared nothing of any colour on them; upon which I was ready to give over any farther search; but at length trying that part, in which I least thought the Tincture lay, it immediatly turned to a light green; which being presently dryed and washed, as before, there ap∣peared that delicate colour they told me of, as aforesaid. The whole process, upon my oft repeated Experiments, was as followeth. These Shells, being harder then most of other kinds, are to be broken with a smart stroak of a hammer, on a plate of Iron, or firm piece of Timber, with their mouth downwards, so as not to crush the Body of the Fish within: The broken pieces being pickt off, there will appear a white Vein, lying transversly in a little furrow or cleft, next to the head of the Fish, which must be digg'd out with the stiff point of the Horse hair pencil, being made short and tapering; which must be so formed, by reason of the viscous clamminess of that white Liquor in the Vein, that so by its stiffness, it may drive in the Matter into the fine Lin∣nen, or white Silk; which, altho' I  not yet tryed it, will (I think) be better then on Linnen, and make the colour ap∣pear more bright and vivid by its reflection, since which I have it on white Sarsnet, and find it so. The Letter, Figures, or what else shall be made on the Lin∣nen or Silk (as much forced in, as it can be by the pencil) will
presently appear of a pleasant light green colour; and if placed in the Sun, will change into the following colours, i. e. if in Win∣ter, about noon, if in the Summer, an hour or two after Sun ri∣sing, and so much before setting, for in the heat of the day, in Summer, the colours will come on so fast, that the succession of each, will scarce be distinguisht; next to the first light green, it will appear of a deep green; and in few minutes change into a full and very fair Sea green; after which in a few minutes more, it will alter into a Watchet blew; from that, in a little time more, it will be of a Purplish red: after which, lying about an hour or two, (supposing the Sun still shining) it will be of a very deep Purple red, beyond which the Sun can do no more. Note, that these changes are made faster or slower, accor∣ding to the degrees of the Suns heat. But then the last and most beautiful colour, (after washing in scalding water and sope) will (the Matter being again put out into the Sun or wind to dry) be much a differing colour from all those mention'd, i. e. of a fair bright Crimson, or near to the Prin∣ces Colour; which afterwards, notwithstanding there is no use of a∣ny Stiptic to bind the colour, will continue the same, if well order∣ed; as I have found in handkercheifs, that have been washt more than 40 times; only it will be somwhat allayed from what it was after the first washing. I made large Letters on so many cloaths, as there are distinct colours, to put them into a Book, which kept them from the Air; I have several months after, shewed the various colours distinct, as aforesaid; yet by often opening the Book, and so exposing them to the Air, all the co∣lours, excepting the two last (I mean before washing either) will fade; but all the colours, being washt, will be one and the same. While the Cloath so writ upon, lyes in the Sun, it will yield a very strong fetid smell; (which divers who have smelt it could not endure) as if Garlick & Assa-faetida were mixt toge∣ther; which I proved but few days before I wrote this, tho' it had been at least twelve months, kept in a Book; which before
it was laid in the Sun, had very little of that smell. I have far∣ther observed, that the cloath dryed and washt soon after it is wrote on, will appear fresher and brighter, then after being kept in a Book; as I found by some I newly caused to be washt, after they had been 14 months so kept. The Shells are of divers colours, but the most part of them white; some are red, when newly taken off the Rocks; some yellow; others of both those colours; some a blackish brown; many a Sandy colour; and some few striped with white and brown parallel lines: I have herewith sent you most of the co∣lours, with one of the largest I have found, and one of the least, with several of the middle sized. vid. the Figures, The first linnen Cloaths marked with Letters and Names, I sent to Dr. Plot in Nov. 1684, being then one of the Secretaries to the Royal Society in London, to whom he communicating my Letter containing my first Observations, and also shewing the Linnen so markt (at the same time) advised me that it was so acceptable to them, that they were pleased to order him to re∣turn me their thanks; and that they had appointed some Gent. to wait on His late Majesty with them; who (with divers Per∣sons of Honour to whom they were shewn) was much plea∣sed with the sight, and relation of the discovery, as new to him. After which I was desired to send up some Shells with the Fishes alive in them; which could not be done any other way, then by sending them in some Ship bound for London, in an open Ear∣then Pan; renewing the Sea-water every day: after which man∣ner I have kept them near a fortnight, and longer I might, had I not made use of them; for it seems to be a kind of Amphibious Animal, alternately living in both Elements every Tide. Being out of their native place, and in want of such Vicissitudes, they take this course to find the Air; when any of them are put into a Vessel of Sea-water, (for in fresh they soon expire) after they have lain some time on the bottom of the Vessel, they creep up to the superficies of the water, and by extending a kind of Lipp,
with their Operculum's cling to the side of the Vessel or Pan, (which is most convenient for their ascent,) with about half that part aboue the water, sometimes creeping down under it, and re∣turning again to their station, between Wind and Water. This I designed to accomplish, and was contriving this way to grati∣fy their desires; to the end His Majesty the great Patron and Founder of their Society, might have the pleasing diversion of see∣ing the Experiment made in His Royal Presence; but a stop was put to this design by a Calamity, too great and publick to be mentioned. There are other imperfect observations, which I have made of this our Purple-Fish; which I may in some time give you a bet∣ter account of, viz. 1. At what Age of the Moon, and time of the Tides (i. e. Spring or Neap) their Veins are fullest, and give the best Tincture. For I have found a difference, they being sometimes fuller and whiter, and the juice more viscid; at other times more flaccid and watery. 2. Whether they are in greater perfection in Summer or Win∣ter; having not, as I expected, received any of them this last Summer, to make that Experiment, by reason of our Western Troubles in the Duke of Monmouth's Invasion. Such as are in∣clined to these Inquiries, and have more liberty from business then I have, may make farther improvements of it, in the pre∣parations of it by Urine, Salt, &c. mentioned by Pliny and o∣ther Authors. And altho' the Shells are small, yet their abun∣dance on some of our Shoars, may yield matter enough, (with the more pains) to dy a quantity of fine Wooll, or Silk, so as to render the discovery some way useful, and to answer the vul∣gar objection of cui bono, made by such persons, who own no good but what relates to the Body. I am of opinion there may be found on our marine Coasts, some bigger Shells, which may have a colouring juice, though not the same with this, for that I know few Natural things both of Animals and Vegitables, but what have divers Species of the same kind, sometimes in the
same place. This may be a sufficient intimation to all Ingenious persons living near the Sea, to imploy some time to find this out. My purpose was, with this discourse to have drawn and sent you Figures of these Shells, with the Fish pulled out and exten∣ded beyond the Vein, together with their Operculums; to which end I sent lately for some of them, but they being not yet come (to satisfy the desires of some Gent. of the Society) I have sent it now, (in that particular) not so perfect as I could wish. As for the qualities of this Fish, I can yet say but little, only I was assured, by some who had boyled, drest, and eaten of them, that they are wholsome food; as good at least, and tast as well as Lympots or Winkles, only the flesh something harder. For what Use Nature hath designed this Vein of colouring juice unto the Animal, will be difficult to find out; perhaps it may be the spermatick and prolifick Matter, by which they propa∣gate their kind; which I am inclinable to think, from its con∣sistence, virulent and faetid savour. A Microscope (which I had not then by me) might have given some light in this Mat∣ter, and confirmed it, if those Animalcula are to be found in it, which are in the Masculine Sperm of Fish, and other living Creatures (as some affirm from the many late Experiments they have made.) Or else it may be a Humor in this Animal, which by its Vital Energie, as the spring of life and motion, sup∣plies the want of heart, liver, blood, &c. as in other exanguini∣ous Animals. Those who seek after them may find, as I have done, some of those Purple Shells, in which are the Cancelli, or rather Astaci, (unto which they are more like,) and so may mi∣stake; for those little Craw-fishes, I have found in most of our English-Shells, excepting the bivalved, and Patella's; of which in many parts, especially in the West-Indies, there are many sorts, and some very large; which our Country-men there call Soldiers; for that they say, they enter by force, kill, and take possession of those Houses they have not built; and when they
grow too big, forsake them and enter into larger: Whether that be true I know not: This I have found, when I have bro∣ken some of the Shells in which those Vagrants are, so as not to bruise their Bodies, and then put them naked into the water, I have beheld them with nimble springing Motion, to run to and fro, till they find a Stone to hide themselves under; which not finding, they bury themselves in loose sand: and this observa∣tion gave me full satisfaction, that they were not (at least all the kinds) connate and coalescent with their Shells, as other testace∣ous Animals of the Sea and Land are; but this being besides my purpose, I return to the Purpura. There is no doubt, but that it is a Species of that kind; of which there are many sorts, differing in bigness, structure, colour of the Shell, according to the nature of the Sea-Grounds, depth or shallowness of water, Rocks, Gravel, Mud, as also the Latitude where they are found; and so differing also in the va∣rieties of colours of the tinging juice in their Veins, as black, li∣vid, violaceous, deep Sea-green, light and deep red, Amethy∣stine, &c. As the Histories of this Animal doe mention. But the best of all were found in the Tyrian Seas, near that Island, on which the renowned City of Tyre was built, now an inconsi∣derable Town called Sur; this was celebrated, and prised above all the rest, for that it excelled them all in its illustrious colour, called in former Ages by divers Names, as Ostrum Sarranum, Pe∣lagium, Venenum Tyrium, Purpurissum, Flores Tyriani, &c. Al∣most all Authors agree, that it lyes in a certain Vein in the Fish, and some of them mention it to be white and viscous, as this of ours is. It were to little purpose to give the History at large of all the Purpurae; and when and how first discovered to Phoenix the Son of Agenor, the second King of the Phoenicians, by means of a Shepheards Dog devouring one of the Fishes, and colour∣ing his lips with that excellent dye: By which its Antiquity ap∣pears. In succeeding Ages it received improvements, to the
time of Pliny, in whose days (being in the Reign of the Vespasians) it seems to have arrived at its highest perfection; of which he hath made more particular Observations than I can find in other Au∣thors; for which he had great opportunity, living in the Impe∣rial City of the World, where the Artists in Preparations of that Tinging Succus, for dying the Robes and other Vestments of the Emperors, Senators &c. strove to excell each other in new fashioned Purples for their own gain, and  to gratify the luxuriant excess of the Great Ones of those times, by preparing and mixing the colour (found in the several sorts of Shells, as a∣foresaid.) This colour sold then at great Prises; that which was fine double dyed Purple of Tyre, called Dibapha, yielded 1000 Roman Denarii the pound, which is computed to be more than Thirty Pounds Sterling: and this of ours being so excellent a colour, without other preparation or addition of any thing to it, may now, or at least hereafter (by farther improvement) vye with the Tyrian Purple. Iohnston out of Aristotle, mentions a Species of these Fishes, under the Name of Littorales quae par∣vae & flore sunt rubro; this agrees with ours, which may be named Purpura littoralis (sive Teniensis) parva turbinata. Since the importunity of some Friends hastned this Dis∣course sooner than I intended (and so prevented those farther Experiments, which I might have made this next Summer) per∣suming on your favourable acceptance, and excusing the im∣perfections of it, which could not be so well digested (in the Method of it) as it might have been, were I not ingaged in a publick Imployment, which requires my dayly Attendance; I have therefore now presented you with it as it is: And if I find it gratefull to you, and to such others, as shall happen to read it, I shall be incouraged to impart many other things, which I e∣stem no less considerable than this; to the end that the stupen∣dious Works of Nature, or rather of the God of Nature (in which are clearly seen his infinite Wisdom, Power, and Good∣ness)
may by us, as his Instruments, be celebrated for his Glo∣ry: In whose Service I am one of the least of your . WILLIAM COLE.
A TABLE of Troy-weight. 32 Grains of Wheat make 24 Artificial Grains.gr. 24 Grains make 1 Penny Weight.p. w. 20 Penny Weight make 1 Ounce.oun. 12 Ounces make 1 Pound.lb. A TABLE of Aver du pois Weight. 4 Quarters make 1 Dram. 16 Drams make 1 Ounce. 16 Ounces make 1 Pound. 28 Pounds make 1 Quarter of a hundred of 112 pounds. 20 Hundred make 1 Tun. A TABLE of Liquid Measure. 1 Pound of Wheat Troy weight make 1 Pint. 2 Pints make 1 Quart. 2 Quarts make 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles make 1 Gallon. 8 Gallons make 1 Firkin of Ale, Soap, Herrings. 9 Gallons make 1 Firkin of Beer. 10 Gallons and a half make 1 Firkin of Salmon or Eels. 2 Firkins make 1 Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins make 1 Barrel. 42 Gallons make 1 Tierce of Wine. 63 Gallons make 1 Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads make 1 Pipe or But. 2 Pipes make 1 Tun of Wine. A TABLE of Dry Measure. 2 Pints make 1 Quart. 2 Quarts make 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles make 1 Gallon. 2 Gallons make 1 Peck. 4 Pecks make 1 Bushel Land-measure. 5 Pecks make 1 Bushel Water-measure. 8 Bushels make 1 Quarter. 4 Quarters make 1 Chalder. 5 Quarters make 1 Way. A TABLE of Long Measure. 3 Barly Corns in length make 1 Inch. 12 Inches make 1 Foot. 3 Foot make 1 Yard. 3 Foot nine Inches make 1 Ell. 6 Foot make 1 Fathom. 5 Yrds and a half make 1 Pole, or Perch. 40 Poles make 1 Furlong. 8 Furlongs make 1 English Mile. A TABLE of Time. 60 Minutes make 1 Hour. 24 Hours make 1 Day Natural. 7 Days make 1 Week. 4 Weeks make 1 Month of twenty eight days. 13 Months 1 day and 6 hours make 1 Year very near.
