C5931 11192417 46652
The CONSPIRACY: OR, The Discovery of the Fanatick Plot. To the Tune of, Let Oliver now be forgotten, &c. I. LEt Pickering now be forgotten, Old Rumbold has wip'd off his scores; Since Presbyter Jack went a Plotting, The Jesuit's turn'd out of Doors: For Brewing, swilling of Treason, King-killing without reason, Of all the Pack, Noble or Peasant, None can exceed old Presbyter Jack. II. First, the hot Sectaries Voted, 'Twas Treason to murther the King; And next the bold Regicides Plotted To compass the very same Thing: Their Votes and Arbitrary Power, That sent the Lords to the Tower, We now see plain, Every hour, They'd the old Game play over again. III. Rumsey and Rumbold indented At Hodsden their Ambush to bring; But Heav'n and the Fire prevented, And Providence guarded the KING: The Whigs the Treason propounded; But when the Trumpet sounded For Cambridgeshire, All were confounded, Taken or fled both Peasant and Peer. IV. M— for Wit, who was able To make to a Crown a pretence, The Head and the Hope of the Rabble, A Loyal and Politick Prince: But now He's gone into Holland, To be a King of no- Land, Or else must be Monarch of Poland; Was ever Son so Loyal as He? V. Lord G—y, and A—ng the Bully, That Prudent and Politick Knight, Who made of His Grace such a Cully, Together have taken their flight: Is this your Races, Horse-matches, His Grace's swift Dispatches From Shire to Shire, Under the Hatches, Now above-Deck you dare not appear. VI. Brave R—l, and S—y the Bully, That stood for the holy Old Cause; And Trenchard drawn in for a Cully In spight of Allegiance and Laws; And Wildman too, with his Cannon, With Walcot, Smith, and Aaron, With Mead and Bourn, Every Man, on To Tyburn goes the next in his Turn: VII. Next Valiant and Noble Lord H—, That formerly dealt in Lambs-wool, Who knows what it is to be Tower'd, By Impeaching may fill the Jayls full: And next to him Cully B—n The Wit; and famous Hambden Must take his place, Who did abandon All Loyalty, Religion and Graco. VIII. Hone, and Rowse, the King and His Brother That they were to kill 'em confest, And now they hang up one another, Holms, Blaney, Lee, Walcot and West: May all such Traytors discarded, To Tyburn be well guarded, And ev'ry thing Be so rewarded, That would oppose so Gracious a KING. Printed Anno Domini, 1683.
