C6265 12711243 66096
Self-Imployment IN SECRET; CONTAINING I. Evidences upon Self-Examination. II. Thoughts upon Painful Afflictions. III. Memorials for Practice. Left under the Hand-Writing of that Learned & Reverend Di∣vine, Mr. Iohn Corbet, Late of CHICHESTER. With a Prefatory Epistle of Mr. Iohn Howe. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible & Three Crowns, in Cheap∣side, near Mercers-Chappel, 1681
THE PREFACE. THE Character of this Holy Ser∣vant of Christ, is already gi∣ven by an eve∣ry-way sutable In his Funeral-Sermon. Hand, in what Part it lay open to the Observa∣tion of others. His more Interiour Portrai∣ture, which is contained in
these Papers, was (as it could only be) drawn by Him∣self. Why it is now exposed to publick view, there is no need to be scrupulously care∣ful in giving an Account. It must be acknowledg'd there is usually with the Ho∣liest Men, a modest shyness of Communicating these privacies of their own Souls. Their Inner Man doth shew its own Face with the more difficulty, by how much it is more beautiful, and wor∣thy to be beheld. And so it was with this excellent Person as his Inscriptions upon these Papers shew, [The State of my Own
Soul] and [Qotes for my Self] signifying their in∣tended Use, was that of a Mirrour to represent himself to his own Eye, not to o∣ther Mens. Yet this Aversion (though great) hath not been always Invincible, or such as no Rea∣sons to the contrary could o∣versway. What are the Psalms of David, and sundry Me∣moires of Holy Men in Scrip∣ture, that were remotest from Ostentation and vain Glory, but records of the most secret Dispositions and Moti∣ons of the hidden man of the Heart, made publick for the instruction of their own, and succeeding Ages. As
also the other published Me∣ditations, and Soliloquies, of some of the greatest Worthies in the Christian Church, must be understood to have had the same Pious Design. Nor, hath a gene∣rous Benignity, in some Heathens, permitted them to Ingross to themselves, or envy to the World those pleasant Sensations of their own Minds, which they thought might be some way Instructive and Useful to o∣ther Men. As that Marcus Anto∣ni Renown∣ed Philosopher and Emperour is instance, that scrupled not to Write and leave behind him for
this purpose, Twelve Books concerning his own Life. The thing cannot be Cul∣pable if the Design be Inno∣cent, which will in great part be discernable in the man∣ner of doing it, when it is with unaffected simplicity, and without studied Dis∣guise: As we commend a Picture, not so much for its being Specious, as that it is like the Face. So have good Men in giving Accounts of themselves not spared to put in the Distempers, and Dis∣affections of their Spirits, that are as great Blemishes and Deformities, as a Wart or Mole on the Face; which the faithful Pencil must as
curiously Express, as the greatest Decencies. However, if this Publica∣tion be Praise-worthy, no∣thing is to be Arrogated to the Author, as, if it be thought Blameable; nothing is to be Derogated. For though the Work it self (which carries its sufficient Praise with it) be owing entirely to him (or rather to the Grace of God in him) the making it pub∣lick, is from the advice, and desire of some Friends, wil∣ling to impart what was once most private, for a publick Good. It is but the Dissection of his Soul; less to be regretted by Friends, when he is now
cut of Sight, and much more Useful, than that of his late∣ly Pained Body. And as Anatomy disco∣vers all the curious Contex∣ture of our Bodily Fabrick: Here are ived Representa∣tions of Faith, Love, an Hea∣venly Mind, of Humility, Meek∣ness, Self-denyal, Entire Resign∣edness to the will of God, in their First and Continued Mo∣tions: with whatever Parts, and Principles besides, Com∣pose the whole Frame of the New Creature, as if we could perceive with our Eyes, how the Blood in an Humane Body, Circulates through all the Vains and Arteries, how the Heart Beats, the Spirits
Fly to and fro, and how each Nerve, Tendon, Fibre, and Muscle, perform their several Operations. Here it may be seen how an Heart toucht from above, Works, and Tends thither∣ward, how it depresses it self in Humiliation, Dilates it self in Love, Exalts it self in Praise, Submits it self under Chastenings, how it Draws in its Refreshings, and Suc∣cours as there is need. To many who have seen so Steady, Uniform, and Amia∣ble a Course and Tenour of of Life; How grateful is it to behold the secret Motions of those inward latent Prin∣ciples, from whence all pro∣ceeded?
Though Some others, would look no further than the Advantages in external Respects that accrue by it. As though Some content them∣selves to know by a Clock, the Hour of the Day, or par∣take the beneficial use of some rarer Engine; The more curi∣ous, especially, any that de∣sign Imitation, and to Com∣pose Some like thing, would be much more Gratify'd, if through some pellucid Inclo∣sure, they could behold all the inward Work, and observe how every Wheel, Spring, or Movement, perform their several Parts, and Offices to∣wards that Common Use. What is here Presented,
as it may be of great Use∣fulness to all that seriously design the Christian Life: so it hath a special Use for such as design it not, and who think there is no such thing. It may peculiarly serve to Convince such, as are wil∣ling to think as Ill as they can of the Calling, and Office of the Ministry, that there are Some that serve the Lord in that Work, who do not Study such Subjects as are here Exemplify'd, only to frame Discourses of them, wherewith to entertain the People for an Hour; but for their own Use and Practice too. That do Live the things they Teach. And Eat of the
Food they prepare for others. That are in good earnest, and most intent to Save them∣selves, and them that hear them: And do really venture their own Souls upon the same Bottom, upon which they would perswade their Hea∣rers to venture theirs, taking all possible Care, Left when they Preach to others, they should themselves be Cast-a∣wayes. The very Opinion that we Preach, only for Forms sake, and to keep up the Custom, and believe, or regard not what we our selves say (as well as the thing it self) is no small (nor perhaps un∣common) hinderance to the
success of Preaching at this Day. It is hard to be seri∣ous in Hearing, what I think, he is not serious in himself who Preaches it. If I Apprehend he Trifles, 'tis a great Temptation to me, to do so too! You may see this Worthy Man considered the Gospel, as a Gospel of Sal∣vation, and not only Taught, but Used it accordingly. How Sollicitous was he to ground Substantially, and Strongly, his Hope of Eternal Life! How warily did he feel his Way; and Labour to Understand, and Know Practically, upon what Terms he might safely appear before his Judge! To them who do not so,
this ought to be taken for a Reprehensive Example, and may be very Directive to them that do. That it may attain its pro∣per Ends, is the serious Pray∣er of One desirous to promote the Common Salva∣tion, Iohn Howe.
Mr. CORBET's ENQUIRY INTO THE State of his Soul. His Introduction. IN order to peace of conscience and assurance of my good estate towards God, it must in reason be supposed, that I may rightly under∣stand the marks of sincerity set down in Gods Word, as also the predomi∣nant inclination and motions of my own soul; and that I may be so far
assured of my right understanding of the things aforesaid, as to have no reasonable ground of doubting there∣of. For I have no other ordinary way to know my sincerity in order to the said peace and assurance, but to examine, it according to my best understanding by the marks there∣of set down in Gods Word. In this Self-Examination it is requisite that I use all Diligence and Impar∣tiality with Constancy; and that I earnestly pray for Gods assistance in it, and heartily offer my self to his search, as David did, Psal. 139. 23. Wherefore if upon the most im∣partial and diligent search, that I can make according to the best of my understanding, together with earnest and constant Prayer to God to assist me therein as in my grea∣test concern; it doth most ratio∣nally appear to me, that the pre∣dominant inclination and motions of my soul are agreeable to the marks
of sincerity set down in Gods Word, then my conscience doing its office aright is to judge for me accordingly, viz. that I am sin∣cere. And in this judgment I am to acquiesce, because it is the Judg∣ment of Gods Agent and Mini∣ster, which he hath set up within me to judge under him of my in∣ternal state, according to his Law, by which he himself doth and will judge me. God hath the same aspect upon the Soul, which Conscience his Vicegerent hath, as it from time to time, or ordinarily judgeth not against him or without him, but under him and according to his judgment, either acquitting or condemning. To this purpose the Apostle speaketh, 1 John 3. 20, 21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart and knoweth all things; If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God.
The State of my Own SOUL According to the strictest Search that I can make. Psal. 139. 23, 24. Search me O Lord and know my Heart, try me and know my Thoughts, and see if there be a∣ny wicked way in me and lead me in the way Everlasting, Amen. The following particulars were set down in Decemb. Jan. Feb. An. 1663. AS far as I am able to discern my heart and wayes, I have chosen the Lord for my portion, I take up my rest in him and not in the Creature. To love
and fear and admire and bless him, and to have communion with him is my chief joy. And the eternal Vision and Fruition of God is my great hope. I would not only have God herafter, but here in this World for my chief good. He is even now better than all the World. I come to God by Jesus Christ. And as I believe in God, I believe also in Christ, and rejoyce and glory in him, and acknowledging my own sinfulness and unworthy∣ness, I rest intirely on him as the ground of my justification to Life, and of all favour and acceptance with God. I receive Christ as my Lord, and give up my self to him. I let him into my heart by Faith. I esteem him precious and am wil∣ling to suffer the loss of all, that I may win him; I desire to know him in the Power of his Death
and Resurrection, and am much grieved, that I do so weakly ex∣perience that power, and feel it no more operative in me in my dying to sin and  World, and in living and walking in the Spirit. I do not cease to lament the more heinous sins of my Life, and cannot forbear the continual im∣ploring of the pardon of them. I do not return again to them, and I resolve never so to do; I watch and pray and strive against all sin, but especially against those sins, to which I am more especially incli∣ned; my conflicts are daily, and am put hard to it. But I do not yield up my self to any sin, nor lie down in it, yea I do not suffer sinful Cogitations to lodge in me. Howbeit I am many times much discomposed, damped in Spirit, deadned in Duty, distracted in my Studies, and molested and hindered every way by the sin
that dwelleth in me. But I re∣solve that sin shall have no rest in my soul, and that I will never injoy it. Though I cannot keep sin out of my heart, yet it doth not reign in my mortal body, nor do I yield my members to the service of it. I would fulfil all Righteousness, and owe nothing to any man but love. I had a hundred - sold ra∣ther suffer wrong than do wrong. It was said of Christ, that no guile was found in his mouth, and of the faithful Company that followed the Lamb, that no guile was found in their mouth. And that it may be so with me I in∣deavour with my whole heart. I trust God with my chiefest outward Concernment, even with that, about which I am most So∣licitous, and wherein to be satis∣fied is of great moment to me, for that it hath as great an influence
upon my Spirit, as any outward thing hath. And I do believe that God will provide for me herein, or otherwise supply the want of it. My earnest desire of God is, that my outward condition may be so stated by his Wife and Gracious providence, as I may be least ex∣posed to temptation, and best dis∣posed, and furthered unto Du∣ty. I have an Inclination to seek Self, particularly in vain applause, and that in Religious services; and herein I have been highly guil∣ty, but I shame my self for it be∣fore God, and I am willing to be satisfied in the Praise, that comes from him alone; and I trust through his Grace, that I can deny my self in matter of Reputation to do his Will. I love the Lord Jesus Christ and all his Saints. The broken estate of the Church, especialy by in∣testine
Evils, is a great trouble to my Spirit. The scandals of professors I am truly grieved at, and I would not by their weak∣nesses seek to excuse my own faults, or an advancing of my own Virtues. I have no setled Bitterness and Revenge against my Enemies, but I love, pitty and pray for them. As concerning God's Enemies I am more provoked, but I would not be inhumane or cruel against them. For the wrath of Man worketh not the Righteousness of God. I contemn none, I would not imbitter the Spirit of any. I would answer all obligations of courtesy, as accounting it a Righ∣teousness. I would not insult o∣ver the weakness of any; and this is partly out of Natural tender∣ness and Moral Considerations, and I find that the goodness, and
kindness of God, the meekness gentleness of Christ hath here unto made Impression upon me. I find upon the review of my Life past according to the clearest judgment, that I can make, that I have not gone backward, but proceeded forward, in the wayes of Godliness. And this increase I reckon not by sudden fits now and then hapening, but by the main progress of the work in the total Sum. I have been grieved that I am no more elevated in the hope of Heaven, and that I cannot attain to a longing desire to be gone hence, and to be there with Christ. I have laboured to raise up my heart, and have had enlargement, even when deadness and flatness had been upon me. I think with my self sometimes, were my Evi∣dences clear for Heaven, I would exalt to be gone hence this very
hour; but I find not this readi∣ness at all times. When I have had a good en∣terprize in hand for God's Glory and some publick benefit, I watch∣ed against Vanity of mind and vain Glory in carrying it on; and I desire purely to aym at God's Glory, and to be satisfied with my reward in him. And I take heed, that I forget not my Mor∣tality, when I am pursuing that design; but I would fain bring up my self to this frame, to be con∣tented to be taken hence in the midst of it, as judging that I shall be no looser by my removal, and God cannot stand in need of that Service. Lord forgive my inordinate self-love, which hath disturbed the Actings of pure Charity in divers passages of Moment. For self-love in my sensitive appetite hath had motions contrary to the Love of
God and my Neighbour. Ne∣vertheless my Judgment hath dis∣allowed it, and I have for the most part acted against it, and for that, which the Love of God and my Neighbour did command. O Lord forgive my ten thou∣sand Talents. I come to Jesus Christ, who hath made satisfacti∣on, and lay this heavy reckoning to his account. Lord forgive my Iniquity, for it is exceeding great. These following passages were set down, March 4. An. 1675. UPon the Review of the fore∣going Evidences, after Twelve Years, I find through Grace the same abiding in me, and more and more Rooted. And some particulars which did make
me more to doubt of my good Estate, I find to be since that time in a greater degree vanqui∣shed. I have done what in me lies, to call to remembrance all my remarkable Sins, from my Child∣hood and Youth till now: And as far as I can Judg, I have Re∣pented of them, both generally and particularly. And I now Re∣pent of them all, from the bot∣tom of my Heart, with a self Ab∣horrence, if I can know my own Heart by the strictest, and most impartial search that I can make. Upon the best Judgment that I can make of the Nature of Sin, and the Frame of my own Heart, and Course of Life; I know no Sin lying upon me, which doth not consist with habitual Repen∣tance, and with the hatred of Sin, and with an unseigned consent that God be my Saviour, and
Sanctifier, and with the Loving of God above all. The Mercy of God towards me, in the prolonging of the day of Grace, in the strivings of his Spirit, in his Chastisements, in the checks of Conscience, in the Recovery of my Soul out of Distempers and Backslidings, doth greatly affect my Heart, and strongly engage me to Him; and doth often call upon my Soul, and all that is within me, to Bless his holy Name. Though my Spiritual growth be very low and slow; yet to this present time, I have not grown Worse, but Better, spea∣king of growth in the whole space, or greater spaces of my time past, and not every parti∣cular Day. By Prayer, and Endeavours long continued, I have in some measure overcome a special ve∣ry
Sinful Distemster of Mind, and gained the contrary Temper against a natural Propensity. Though my Faith in Christ be weak, yet to have part in his Promises, I am ready to part with all that is dear in this World, and I have no hope of Happiness, but in Christ. Though I have had doubtings touching the promised Salvation, yet I know that as to my own Felicity, I prize nothing more than that Salvation, being the glorifying, and injoying God for Ever, and I Embrace it as my best Good. I Love Christ, whom I have not seen, and I am af∣fected towards him, as towards a person, who taught and did the most excellent Things, and promised a most excellent State to his Followers, and purchased their Redemption at the dearest rate.
I am heartily grieved for lo∣ving God so little, yet I am sure, This I Wrote according to a full perswasion at that time. I Love nothing more than God, and in my esteem and choice, I prefer the Spiritual, Divine, and Hea∣venly Life, imcomparably before the Carnal, Animal, Earthly Life. And this esteem and choice, is made good by performance in Ordinary. I Love to Love God. And I desire this Love not only as an e∣vidence of my Salvation, but for it self. I had much rather have a heart to love him perfectly than to have all the Riches, Honours and Pleasures of this World. My Conscience beares me wit∣ness that in the present exercise of my ministry, I have no self-end of Worldly Advantage, or Reputation among Men, or a∣ny Interest of the Carnal Mind:
but if the Command of Christ, and the necessities of Souls did not oblige me to this Service, I should gladly retire to Privacy and Solitude. My Temporal Estate is mean and low, yet I am Contented with it, and humbly bless God for what I have. I Live in as narrow a compass for Expences, as I can, that I might have some∣thing to give to the Poor, and to be helpful to those that are in Need, according to my Abi∣lity. And as God hath requi∣red of us to Love Mercy; and our Saviour hath said, It is a more Bles∣sed thing to give, than to receive; so I have more pleasure in giving a Portion to the Needy, as far as my mean Estate will bear, than in laying out for the De∣light of my own Sense, or Worldly Conveniences. And this proceeds not from a conceit
of Merit in any thing that I can do, but from a Love to please God, and do Good. Though I have a good Know∣ledge about the premises, yet I am apt to waver about the Con∣clusion. And though I apprehend the Evidences of my Sincerity to be clear, yet a Timorousness remains in me. Though I have not as yet o∣vercome the Fear of Death, yet I am sure that the unwillingness that is in me to Dye, is not that I might enjoy the pleasures of Sense, or any Gratification of the Animal Life. I feel in my self a burden of Sin and Corruption, much Sen∣suality, Earthliness, Selfishness; nevertheless I judg, there is that Predominancy of Love to God, and Holiness, which I hope is unmoveably seated in my Soul; whereupon I hope that it can∣not
be, that I should be cast out of his blissful Presence into that Perdition, which is a State of immutable hatred of him. And I apprehend that the most hor∣rid, and hellish state of Hell it self, lyes in its Everlasting, and utmost Enmity against God. Thus I am searching and try∣ing my heart and wayes, and what I find by my self I write down, that I may have it by me for my relief in an Evil day, and an hour of temptation. For I must expect the time, when by weak∣ness or anguish of Body or mind I may be disabled to recollect my self, and duly to state the case of my own Soul. And the Pow∣ers of Nature may so fail, that I may have but a very weak Ap∣prehension of what I have to do in this great Concernment. I am warned by the parable of the ten Virgins to look to it,
that together with my Lamp I may have Oyl in my Vessel, and be ready to enter in with the Bridegroom at his coming. Lord be Merciful to me a sin∣ner, to me one of the chiefest of Sinners. O my exceeding sinful∣ness! O the Riches of thy good∣ness towards me! Should not I loath my Carnal self, should not I grieve for grieving thy Spirit? I desire to do so, I hope to do so. Do what thou wilt with me, so thou pardon, and Sanctify and save me. I am afraid of thy judgments, I can endure but lit∣tle, O how weak is my heart! Nevertheless I will endeavour, and I trust through Grace that that I shall be enabled to bear thy correcting hand. Thou art Wise and Holy, Thou art Mer∣ciful and Gracious, Thou re∣tainest not thine Anger for ever, because thou delightest in mercy.
O spare me, and consider me, and deal with me not after my Sins, and reward me not after mine Iniquities; but as far as the East is from the West, so far remove my transgressions from me; comfort me and satisfy me, for I wait for relief from thee. Whatsoever befalls me, I will put my trust in thee. I be∣lieve, O Lord help my unbelief. Lord increase my Faith. O my God I lie at thy feet and Mercy, I put my sinful distressed Soul into the hands of Jesus Christ, and I rest on the Covenant of grace made in him, as all my Salvation, and all my desire, A∣men.
More Observations touching the State of my Soul. March the 27th. 1676. O The wonderful mercy of God towards me a most vile and etched sinner, in convincing, rebuking and awakening me unto a self-abhorrence, and an utter de∣testation of my sins, my special sins; so that I cannot be reconciled to them. Since the more powerful awakening of my Conscience I ne∣ver have, and am perswaded never shall return to those former sins which made a breach between God and my Soul. I hate every sin impartially. A sinful state is in my internal sense an horrid and an hellish state. I finde my self firmly resolved
to give up any part of my world∣ly Estate, that I shall be found to hold to anothers Wrong. If it be doubtful where the Right lies, I am resolved first to indea∣vour a Reference to Conscien∣tious knowing Men; and if that cannot be fitly had, to submit it to a Legal Tryal, with a desire that Right may take place. I know not that I hold any  Estate, or that there is any doubt of my Legal Right to any thing that I possess: but I have made supposition for the Tryal of my own Spirit. When I had a Father or Mo∣ther, I would have trusted them, to defend or deliver me from a∣ny Evil, from which it was in their power to defend or deli∣ver me. In the same manner I now trust to my loving Wife. Why then should I be suspicious of God, in whose Hands I am?
Why should I doubt of his Dear Love, and Tender Mercy towards me, or call in question his good Will to preserve, or deliver me from any Affliction, that would be too hard for me to bear, or to sustain, and comfort me un∣der any Suffering, which he sees fit to inflict upon me? If when I was more careless, and forgetful of God, and when I ventured upon breaches with him, he was pleased to convince, me of my Sin, and to rouze me up to a greater Care, and to make me more earnest for Par∣don, and for Healing, and for all needful Grace, and more throughly Resolved to follow him throughout; surely he will not re∣fuse me in my Addresses▪ for more Grace, and a more confir∣med State of Holiness. If I fol∣low on to know the Lord, I shall know him, and see his Salvation.
Though Death and Judgment be of dreadful Consideration; though God be Holy and Just, and I be vile, and guilty, and worthy of eternal Perdition; yet why should I doubt of Mer∣cy and Forgiveness, and of Sup∣port and Comfort in the Dark∣ness of Death, and of Justifica∣tion in the Day of Judgment, from a Merciful and Faithful God, through a Powerful Redeemer and Advocate; seeing as a hum∣ble Penitent Believer, I lye at his Feet, and cast my self into his Arms, and wait on his Grace, and am resolved to keep his Wayes, and never to return to Folly. I more desire to be Sincere, than to know that I am so. The comfort and delight of being and doing Good, I fet not so much by, as the very being and do∣ing Good. To Love God, and
to be Conformable to him, is that, which I most of all desire should be in me. I will trust God in his Wayes. I will strive against an over-ti∣morous sollicitude about my own Salvation, and will commit my self to God, who is the infinite Goodness and Love, and I will lye down, and take my Repose therein. I am grieved, when I observe, or hear of the Scandals of some Professors, and the disorders of those, that are in Charity to be∣judged Sincere, and the follies, and frailties of the more Sincere and Upright. And it humbles me, by causing me to reflect up∣on my self, and my own Faulti∣ness, and Weakness, and Proness to Offend; and it makes me more to desire the Heavenly So∣ciety, and to be among the Spi∣rits of Just Men made perfect.
My Sins of Sensuality in eve∣ry kind and degree, I search out, and Repent of. I am kept by Grace, from gross Sins of this sort. In the Gratifications of Sense, which are Lawful in ge∣neral, I Scrupulously dread Ex∣cess, and unduness of Circum∣stances. How earnestly do I de∣sire an absolute Purity! All Envy, Unrighteousness, Uncharitableness, Uncompassio∣nateness, Undutifulness, and base Selfishness, which is the Root of all, I have Seen, Lamented, and Abhorred. The motions and stir∣rings of Mind, that way are sup∣pressed and dislodged: I will ne∣ver give way thereunto. Self-applauding, Self-seeking in matter of Praise and Honour before Men, I strive against. I desire to be as Sincere to ano∣thers Reputation, as to my own. I would not value others, by
their regard to me, but by their true Worth. I would be con∣tented to be little in the Eyes of others. This I unfeignedly de∣sire and endeavour, and I hope that I have it in some good De∣gree. All my Omissions, and Negli∣gences in the Work of the Mi∣nistry, in Preaching, in Personal private Application I bewail, and heartily resolve upon more dili∣gence and faithfulness. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, but Re∣member me, and Spare me ac∣cording to thy great Mercy in Christ Jesus the great Propitia∣tion for Sin, in whom I desire to be found, and under the Co∣vert of whose Wing I stand, that I may be Saved from thy Wrath, and injoy thy Peace, and live in thy Presence, where is fulness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.
Feb. 22. 1678/9 GOd will never Damn in Hell any Soul, that hath the ha∣bitual, predominant Love of God, though culpably Remiss, and o∣therwise Sinful, while he remain∣eth such; yea Hell, and such Love of God are inconsistent. I Love the Holy Will of God with all my Heart, and hate all Disconformity to it. Nothing is more Grievous to me, than to▪ displease God, and nothing is more Pleasant to me, than to please him. I strive after Christian perfecti∣on. I labour to be unbottomed of Self, to dye to Self-advancement, to Self-gloriation, and to all sel∣fish joys, and to live wholly in, and to God, and to have Self
swallowed up in the Love of Him. I labour in the work of Self-resignation, that my Will may be confined to, and included in the Will of God. I strive after Patience in its perfect Work, and do find a willingness to yield to Gods Will in my Chastisements. I still Ju∣stify God, and do not entertain an hard Thought of his Dealing with me, but conclude that it is altogether Holy, Just, and Good, and for the best. I feel my Sin a greater bur∣den to me, than my Affliction. I had rather have Health of Soul in a Body full of Pain, than Health and Ease of Body with a Distem∣pered Soul. And the Sense of my great Sinfulness disposeth me to Patience, under my Afflicting Infirmities of Body. I narrowly watch my Heart,
that it may not lodge, or admit a vain Thought. When I am surprized with Vanity, I suppress it as soon as I observe it. I am very fearful of offending in a Word. When on the Sud∣den, and by Incogitancy I have spoken a Word, which upon Se∣cond Thoughts is doubtful to me, though I had not such doubt in the speaking of it, I have been much perplexed about it, and have engaged my self to a grea∣ter Watchfulness. Aug. 1680. SUrely Christ hath my Heart. Whensoever I swerve from Christ in a Thought, Word, or Deed, it is by inadvertency and surprizal against my fixed Prin∣ciple; and I have great Regret at it, and Loath my self for it.
If I were out of all fear o damnation I had rather be holy then unholy; and I take pains and use Gods means to be holy in opposition to the flesh, and I make it my chief care. And I do this, because I make the enjoying of God my chief good, and ra∣ther than lose the hope thereof I would willingly undergo the sufferings of this Life, which lead to that blessed fruition, not ex∣cepting the fiery-trial it self. Aug. 1680. I Hope, when the end cometh, my God will say to me, dear Child thy warfare is accompilsh∣ed, thine iniquity is pardoned, enter thou into my Rest. There∣fore I will both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. I will hope to the end. Strengthen
me O my God that I faint not. October the 4. 1680. I Have no design, I pursue no∣thing contrary to God's inte∣rest: but all my designes and pur∣suits are for God and Holiness. I think I am sure of this, if I be sure of any thing. My great aim and care and labour is to cleanse my self from all filthyness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holy∣ness in the fear of God. To whom I yield my self a Ser∣vant, to obey, his Servant I am. But I do not yield my self a Servant to sin, to obey it; but I do yield my self a Servant to God to obey Him. The design and business of my life is to do his Will.
THE WORKINGS OF MY HEART IN MY AFFLICTION. Aug. the 5th. 1680. THe Will of God in laying this affliction upon me, I un∣feignedly approve as Holy, Just, and Good; And I am unfeigned∣ly willing to bear the Affliction, as it is an Evil laid upon me by his Will, till the time come, in which he thinks fit to remove
it. I watch and pray and strive that I may not give way to a re∣pining thought against his holy Hand. In this point thē Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak. My mind doth really consent to Gods dispensation and to my sub∣mission, and being most agreea∣ble to his wise and gracious Go∣vernment, and most conducing to my Salvation. But my sensitive part, and my mind also as it is in part unrenewed, weak and sinful doth greatly reluctate, so that I am put hard to it, and I must say, I am willing, Lord help my unwillingness. I have not observed in the several dayes that a thought of direct or posi∣tive discontentment or vexatious commotion of mind hath been admitted by me, nevertheless I see to my grief, that I fall exceed∣ing short of that quietness, con∣tentation, and cheerfulness in my
condition, and of that sreeness of Self Resignation to Gods Will, that I desire, and his goodness calls for. I wrestle with God by impor∣tunate prayer, that this thorn in the flesh might depart from me; that this distemper might be re∣moved, or so mitigated, that I might be in some comfortable ease, and get a more cheerful freedom in doing my duty. Yet I would not wrest this relief out of his hands unseasonably, and without his good Will, and his Blessing. I would wait his time, and desire to have▪ it with his love and favour, and with a saving benefit. And so my earnest de∣sire thereof is limited with sub∣mission to his holy Will. Yet I find that this submission is no easy matter, but that I must take pains with my own heart, and that it is God, who must work
my heart to it, and keep under the flesh, which is alwaies ready to rebel. It is hard to be willing to bear my wearisom condition. And O how weak is my heart, and ready to sink, if it be not upheld by a strength above my own! O let His Grace be suffici∣ent for me, and let His Power be made perfect in my weakness! I feel my self bettered in the inner man by this chastening. It hath furthered Mortification and Self-denyal, and done much to the breaking of the heart of Pride, and to bring me on to∣wards that more perfect Self-Examination, for which I labour. It hath much deadned the World to me, and my desire to the World. It makes me know in earnest the Emptiness of all crea∣tures, and how great my concern is in God. It drives me close to him, and makes me to fetch all my
comforts from him. I see of how little value all outward content∣ments are; and not only in my present afflicted state, but if I were at ease and in full prosperi∣ty. The sense of this benefit to my soul is the great means of bringing my Will to that weak de∣gree of submission to God's Will, to which I have atatined. O that I could live more by Faith in this trying affliction. I indeavour to impress upon my Soul those arguments, which the Scripture affords for Patience and Long-suffering with joyfulness. But this will not do the work, unless the Spirit of Faith and Pa∣tience be given from him, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift. I pray, I cry to my Father, that he would give me the Holy Spirit according to his Gracious promise, that I might shew forth the Power of his grace,
and that I might not dishonour him, nor discourage his Chil∣dren, nor reproach Religion by my weakness. And in my bearing of it well, my Reputa∣tion is nothing regarded by me in comparison of the honour of Christ. Him I desire to Glory∣fy both in my obedience and pa∣tience. I do not love God the less be∣cause of his correcting hand upon me. As my necessities drive me, so His Love draws me, and my Love brings me to him. I look to him as my Father. And shall I not honour my Father, and give him reverence, when I am chast∣ned of him? The Lord is my Por∣tion saith my Soul, therefore will I hope in him. I will wait for the Lord, who hideth his face, I will look after him; He re∣taineth not his Anger for ever, because he delighteth in Mercy.
Therefore he will turn again, and have compassion upon me. If he kill me I will put my trust in him: for he will not cast me off for ever, if I cleave to him with Faith unseigned, but even through Death it self will he save me. He will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his Righteousness. When I say, what shall I do in case of such or such troublesome or dangerous con∣sequents, my heart answers, be not careful, God will provide, I will leave it to him. Besides a Natural desire of ease and rest, the sense of the temp∣tation which I am liable in this condition, makes me importunate to be delivered from it. I feel∣lingly know the weakness of my own heart, and I am not igno∣rant of the Devil's malice and subtilty, and how he will make the fiercest assaults, where I am
weakest. Whereupon I trem∣ble in my self for fear of being tempted, and shaken and greatly amazed. And upon this ground respecting my Souls safety, I judg an humble and patient importu∣nity with God for the removing or moderating of my distemper, to be my Duty. Yet to keep me from being over solicitous and anxious in this thing, I consider that God doth govern and limit all our temptations, and will not suffer us to be tempted a∣bove what we are able, but will with the temptation open a way for us to escape. Nevertheless I find, that I do much offend by too great a vehemence of desire to be delivered from this grie∣vous burden without due sub∣mission; also by too much disqui∣etness and dejection, when after some expectation of a benefit by that means, I perceive that my
hope thereof is like to be frustra∣ted. The Lord help me to carry it better, and as I ought to do, and keep my mind in its right frame. My business under this Afflicti∣on is to be careful about my own part, and to leave God's part to his care. My part is to do my duty, and to get the be∣nefit of the Affliction, but to re∣move it is God's part. Let me perform what belongs to me, and what belongs to God, he will certainly perform in his own time and way. The Sum of my duty is Graciously to comply with the dispensation and to be∣have my self suitably to it, and to please and honour God un∣der it. Accordingly in this I Labour, and in this way I seek for comfort. And first I justify God and judg my self. God ex∣ercises his own holiness and justice
in this Castigation. His justice and holiness I approve, and ac∣cept the punishment of mine I∣niquity, and exercise an hatred of the Sin, for which I now smart. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, and I repent with a self-abhorrence; And I lye in the dust at his feet, and wait on him, untill that he have Mercy upon me, and I am glad to re∣ceive Mercy upon his terms. I have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope that is set be∣fore me. I do most heartily take God for my portion, and I had rather Live the divine Life in Conformity to him and Fellow∣ship with him, here in the first∣fruits of the Spirit, and hereafter in the fulness of Glory, than live in the fulness of the delights and Contentments, that belong to the Natural Life upon earth in a way
of Sin, and allienation from the Life of God. I do most hear∣tily take Christ according to the offer of the Gospel, not only to be justified from my Sins and de∣livered from the wrath to come by his merits; but also to be Sanctified by his Word and Spi∣rit, and to be governed by his Laws, and to be brought by him unto the aforesaid fellowship with God. And my Life and practice in the main Bent and ordinary course thereof is according to this choice, in a daily walking not by sight and sense, but by faith; not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, in setting my heart not on earthly, but on heavenly things. I cast off vain desires and hopes, and my expectations of good are from God according to the te∣nor of his promises. When I walk in darkness, and see no light of outward comfort, hu∣mane
helps, and visible means, I will trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay my self upon my God. I strive with my own spi∣rit to subdue it to the will of God; And in whatsoever I am tempted to be most impatient, therein I labour most for pati∣ence. My great care is that I may not sin against my God in any kind, and more especially that I may not sin by a rebelli∣ous impatience under his correct∣ing hand. In this present distress I look upon my self, as being up∣on my Tryal, and therefore I look more diligently, to my be∣haviour in it. Now a price is put into my hand for the proof of my sincerity, and I labour ac∣cordingly to make good proof of it. I am willing to serve God in pain and patience, else I were unworthy of so good a Master. I am willing to be conformable
to Christ in suffering, else I were unworthy of him. But here I must say again, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak; Lord help my unwillingness. I am called to deny all the plea∣sures of sence and to mind them no more; and I am heartily will∣ing of it. I am called to declare to others by the exercise of Faith and Patience the Righteonsness of the Lord, and his tender Mer∣cies, and great Faithfulness, and that he alone▪ is Alsufficent. O that the power of his grace may be thus magnified in me! This is the fruit of the Afflictions, that I look after; And in this will I labour more and more. And through the help of Divine Grace I will not doubt of a good Issue, while I am found in the Way of Duty. To them, who by Patient Continuance in Well-doing seek for Glory and Honour and Im∣mortality,
God, who cannot lye, hath promised to give Eternal Life. I am desirous to be delivered from this Affliction (if it be the Will of the Lord) upon this ac∣count, that I might have a more notable proof of my freer choosing of God for my Portion, when I am not thus driven to Him, as now, because I can go no where else for Comfort; also of my freer turning from the World, even then when I am capable of in∣joying it. To have such a proof of these things in my self, I should take for a great Advantage, and be greatly Thankful. Neverthe∣less, for the quieting of my Mind, I consider that my present Af∣flicted State doth better secure me from Temptations, which might draw my Heart from God to the Love of the World; in which respect, Prosperity is far
more Dangerous than Adversity. Moreover, my present State gives me Advantage for a higher proof of the Grace that is in me, and of the Power of Divine Aid, upholding me in a Life of Faith and Patience, by which I Live upon God alone, when Worldly Comfort fails me, and by which I am enabled to overcome things Grievous to Nature, and to get a∣bove, not only the Pleasures, but the sharp Pains of Sense, and to Live, and endure with little natural, or bodily Rest. Also, it gives me the advantage of ex∣ercising a resolved, willing Self-Resignation to God in this Dis∣pensation, which is harsh to Flesh and Blood, and a resting in Hope, when there is no present appea∣rance of help, and a waiting, and looking for the Lord, who hides his Face, and a cleaving to him▪ by constant Love, though he doth
fore Bruise me. If I continue in the exercise of these Graces, they will give me a Good Proof, that the Heavenly Nature is in me, and will make way for great Assurance towards God, and full Consolation in Christ Jesus. And yet further, I trust that I have long before this distress, chosen God for my Portion, and drawn off my Heart from the flattering Vanities of this World. And I know, that in this Distress, I do not come to Him constrainedly, or meerly as driven. For I de∣light to draw nigh to Him, to pour out my Heart before Him in Prayer and Meditation. My Meditation of Him is Sweet to my Soul, and I do not Love to be Diverted from it. And when my Distemper is any whit more easy, it Works unto a Rejoy∣cing in Him. And it is for en∣largement of Heart towards Him,
that I chiefly desire bodily Ease and Rest. Hear my Cry O God, Attend unto my Prayer. I will Cry un∣to Thee, when my Heart is o∣verwhelmed: Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I. God the infinite Goodness and Love, will not cast off a poor Soul that lies at his Feet, and cryes for the Help of his Grace, when it is ready to sink under the Bur∣den, and is willing to have Mer∣cy upon his Terms. Therefore, I will still cry to Him, and look for Him, and lean upon Him, & will not depart from Him by an Evil Heart of Unbe∣lief. This I resolve in his Strength. Lord Strengthen me unto the per∣fect Work of Patience. Lord, I heartily consent that Thou shouldest use me as Thou pleasest, so Thou use me, as one of those that Love thy Name.
Disposal is an effect of Proprie∣ty, but it is alwayes a regular, and a loving Disposal of the Sub∣jects of his Government. O! Deal favourably with thy Ser∣vant. Thou Knowest my Frame, Remenber that I am but Dust. The Lord will Perfect that which concerneth me: Thy Mer∣cy O Lord Endureth for Ever. Forsake not the Works of thine own Hands. O Lord, without Thee I can do nothing. There∣fore I must Beg, and Thou wilt give Grace sufficient, without which I cannot Subsist. For there∣in is the Life of my Spirit. For Ever, O Lord, Thy Word is settled in Heaven. Pitty me O Lord, as a Father Pittyeth his Children. Comfort me O Lord, as one whom his Mother Comforteth. The Lord will wait, that He may be Gracious unto you: For
the Lord is a God of Judgment; Blessed are all they, that wait for Him. Can I be in a better Hand? As my professed Judgment is con∣cerning Gods Proceeding, so let me stand Affected towards it.
NOTES FOR My Self. KEep thy Heart with all Di∣ligence; for out of it are the Issues of Life. Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue. Entertain not a sensual Imagina∣tion for a Moment; and give not way to the least Glance of the Eye towards Vanity.
Be alwayes expecting some Trou∣ble or other, to interrupt thy outward Peace and Rest. Never expect any thing from the World; and when it offers thee any thing that is good for thee, receive it; but catch not at it greedily. Be alwayes mindful what thou may'st do for thine own and others Salvation, in every Instant, upon e∣very Occasion. Dye daily. In arguing with another, watch against every inordinate Heat of Passion, loud Speaking, and every rash Word. If any neglect or slight thee, care not for it, yet observe it. Any Matter of Tryal to thee, reckon among thy gains. Take no delight of Sense, but in a manifest and direct Subser∣viency to Spiritual Ends; and use not that delight to irritate, but to allay Sensuality.
When a sensual Imagination or Passion breaks in, then excite a Tast of the Powers of the World to come; and delay not to recover the Divine Frame. What thou doubtest, do not. In thy Actions, consider not on∣ly what is lawful, but what is best in the present Circumstances; and do that. In every Delight of Sense, watch against all Brutishness. When thou art in Company, where the Talk is but vain, watch to put in a Word, that may be to Edifica∣tion. If any despise thee, do not bear a grudge against him for it. And be not offended with any, meerly be∣cause they do not honour thee. When thou art framing Excuses, take heed of speaking an Untruth, or approaching near to it; lest in avoiding the Offence of Man, thou make too bold with God. Take
heed of this also, when thou wouldst speak pleasingly, and avoid Offence in speaking. Use no Recreation or Delight of Sense, but what thou canst at that very time desire of God, that it may be sanctified to spiritual Ends. When thou hearest that another hath spoken any thing to thy In∣jury or Disparagement, beware of a Transport of Anger, that thou speak not harshly or unadvisedly a∣gainst Him, or too passionately for Self, or as too much concerned for Self. Uphold the Reputation of thy Col∣league, or any that is joyned with thee in Service, as thou wouldst thine own. Watch against all secret Plea∣sure, in the lessening of another for advancing thy self. Pray heartily for the Success of thy Colleague and others, who per∣form the same Service that thou art
ingaged in. And rejoyce in what∣soever good is done by them, as in what is done by thy self, and own it before Men. Use not Animosity and Conten∣tion in any Matter, that may be brought to a good Issue in the way of Peace. Engage not hastily as a Party in a Difference between others; but reserve thy self impartial, and un∣ingaged, that thou mayest moderate between them. Whil'st thou lamentest thy Weak∣ness in some Cases, and seekest more Strength, be sure to use that grea∣ter Strength in all other Cases, whereunto thou hast attained; and be not remiss or forgetful in any Duty, that is more facil to thee: So shalt thou have Comfort in thy willing Mind, and honest Care, and do much towards the Attainment of that, which thou yet wantest, and reachest after.
In the Time of Prayer, let no Business divert thee from it, that is not of present Necessity. When thou hast an Opportunity of speaking a Word for the Good of anothers Soul, defer not the do∣ing of it till another time. Watch against all bitter, and o∣ver-passionate Speeches against ma∣lignant Opposers of the Truth. For Meckness of Spirit and Behaviour, is more according to Christ, than wrathful Zeal. Be not transported with Passion against those Conformists, who are more sober than many others; yet manifest too little Compassion to their suffering Brethren. For e∣ven in the Regenerate, there is a Remainder of the Spirit of Envy, Partiality, and Selfishness, and too much of Wrath, and Bitterness, and other Parts of the Serpentine Na∣ture, though in a mortifyed Degree. And we are to yield Grains of Al∣lowance,
for the Temptations of Prejudice, Interest, &c. to which good Men, as well as others, are obnoxious. In thy Zeal against the Sins of others, be mindful of thine own ex∣ceeding Sinfulness: Call to remem∣brance thy great Offences, which though they be unfeignedly repented of, give thee to understand what cause thou hast to be meek, and humble, and patient towards all Men. Watch against the Motions of Pride and Hypocrisie, in the Pre∣sence of any Person, whose Favour and Opinion thou much esteemest. What is Man that thou shouldst pass to be judged by Man's Judgment, or seek Applause from Man! Be not discomposed about some petty Absurdities of Behaviour, or little Indecorums, or Over-sights: For so to be, is Pusillanimity. When thou hast conceived a dis∣like
of any Person, his Wayes, or Actions, or dost ill resent his Car∣riage towards thee; take heed, thou do not take any secret Plea∣sure in the Fore-sight of Evil com∣ing upon him; or in hearing or observing any such Folly of his, as tends to his Reproach or Ruin, or notable Dammage. If thou hast fore-spoken the Ca∣lamity, or any Evil, that in Rea∣son is like to befal one, who doth un∣advisedly manage himself, and his Affairs, take heed of wishing or willing, that the Evil should come to pass, lest thy Judgment or Fore-sight should seem to be disparaged; yea, take heed of any Motion ri∣sing towards such a Wish or Will. My own exceeding Faultiness ingages me in seeing and hearing the Faults and Follies of others, to pitty them, rather than to rejoyce or glory over them; and to cover or lessen those Faults, rather than to
aggravate, or display them. The Mercy and Forgiveness, that I have found and hope for at the Lord's Hand, ingages and dispo∣ses me to forgive Injuries and A∣buses done to me. And I should not think it much, that I, who am so sinful, should bear some Contume∣lies, or Abuses from Men. It is displeasing to me, to hear the Faults of others insisted on, whether they be Matters of Folly and Inconsiderateness, or of Per∣verseness and Malice; but espe∣cially if the Matter be not evi∣dent. I find, that petty Dammages and Injuries are apt to be Vexatious, especially in a matter the Whole whereof is but Little; as in a litile Farm or Living. Where∣fore, I endeavour, that I be not surprized with a troublesom Ap∣pearance, and consider the Moment of a thing, how light it is.
Abhor every Thought, Word, and Deed, which is contrary to Love, and tends to the Hurt of others. The more Men wrong thee, the more watchfully maintain thy Love towards them. After thy publick Ministrations in Prayer and Preaching, be not thoughtful or much concerned, how Men like thy Performance; but be concerned for this, how acceptable it is to God, and how effectual and successful to holy & saving Means. If God single me out for speci∣al great Suffering, I have no rea∣son to judge amiss of it: For such is the state of things in the World to come, that some Individuals must of necessity suffer for the good of the People. And, Why not I, as well as another? God is my Owner, and he may do with me, as with any other, even as he plea∣seth; and he is my Father, and he will use me well, and make me
sufficient Amends for all my Suf∣fering; and I shall be no Loser, but an exceeding Gainer thereby in the End. In this present State of Tryal, it is requisite that there be a suf∣ficient Difficulty and Hardship, for all those that shall be saved, to grap∣ple with. For all our Boasts of Free-will, unless there were some heavy Weights of Sufferings cast by Providence in∣to the Ballance, to poise against our Propensions to follow Lusts, and Pleasures, and Worldly Allure∣ments, we should never seriously set our selves to the severe and self∣denying Duties, which belong to true Godliness. To avoid Inconveniences to thy self, expose not any to Danger, whose Safety thou art bound to pro∣vide for. In all Accusations, whether pub∣lick or private, when thou hast
made a sufficient Defence, enter not into needless Matters for Osten∣tation, or such further Vindicati∣on, as is not necessary, if thou stand in a slippery Place; but lye at a close Guard, lest thou be en∣tangled, or in some point circum∣vented. I will never wittingly and wil∣fully do amiss, by Commission or Omission, in a greater or lesser Mat∣ter, because I shall too often do a∣miss, at least in smaller Matters, through Ignorance, or Inadverten∣cy, or Surprizal of Passion, do what I can. Watch every Opportunity to put in a savoury Word, for the good of a Soul, with whom thou hast occa∣sion of Converse. Remember thou hast nothing of thine own, but all is the Lords; and accordingly use all that thou hast to no Carnal Interest, but to
serve Him, as being wholly devoted to Him. Be as serious and hearty in thy Prayers to God for the Concerns of others, as for thine own. Watch against Selfishness, lest it work unto great Uncharitable∣ness. When thou hast Evidences of thy Sincerity, which cannot in reason be gain-said, hold to them, and take Comfort in them; yet still endeavour by Reviews, and further Searchings, to clear it more and more. We keep our Evidences, by keeping our Graces in their Lively Exer∣cise. Fetch thy Comforts from Hea∣ven, and not from Pleasures or Hopes here below. Do not overvalue any Worth that is in thy self; but think it rather less than more, than it is indeed. If any slight thee, be neither de∣jected
nor provoked. Do not value Men according to their Esteem of thee, but ac∣cording to their true Worth. Watch against the Expectation of hearing thine own Praise; and when such a Thought arises, in∣stantly suppress it. When thou art commended, let not thy Thoughts dwell on it with Delight; but let it be to thee as nothing. Take heed of too great a Valua∣tion of thine own Work, or Useful∣ness in thy Place; and lay not too great a stress thereon. When Friends out of Love over-value thee, it concerns thee not to over-value thy self; nor to take more than thy due, though they give it. Have a Habit of Compassion to∣wards the Afflicted, firmly fixed in thee, that the Motions thereof may be sutably stirred up on every Oc∣casion.
Let an Abhorrence of any Con∣tent in anothers Sufferings, be deeply imprinted on thee; that eve∣ry Thought thereof may be pre∣vented, or instantly suppressed: Yea, hate all Disregard to ano∣thers Misery. Watch against all Eagerness, and immoderate Delight in Eating and Drinking; and against minding any kind of Food, for the pleasing of the Sense. Come to thy Meals not like a Bruit, but as becomes a Saint. Never terminate in the sensitive Pleasure, but make use of it to raise thy Heart to God. When thou hast eaten so much, so that thou thinkest more is not expedient, or is better forborn than taken, proceed not to a Bit more, lest thou be intangled or disturb∣ed. Still consider, Is this Act, I go about, agreeable to one that hath Communion with God? Will this
Act promote Communion with God? Do I come to this Act, so as to have Communion with God thereby pro∣moted. Seek the lawful Contentment of any that are about thee, as thou dost thy own; and be as glad to gratify them as thy self, so far as it is convenient for them. Hate and shun all Motions of unworthy Selfishness: And see, that others be sharers with thee in thy pleasant Things, and be not content to have them to thy self alone. Be not over sollicitous, for hu∣mouring thy self in sensitive Sua∣vities, but rather suspicious of it, and be abstemious from it. Always mind and do the pre∣sent Duty. Comply with the pre∣sent Dispensation, and make the most of it. Thy business is to please God, and God will provide for thy Comfort.
Lay thy Heart to Rest in the Will of God. For there is no other Rest for the Soul, to be thought on. I will not indent with God for any good, but what is included in the Covenant of Grace. I will ex∣pect no good but according to the Tenor of that Covenant, which is all my Salvation, and all my De∣sire. I am resolved that Pride shall not set me to Study, or Preach, or Pray, or carry me on in any Ser∣vice. If thoughts of Men-plea∣sing or Mans Applause, steal in with my honest intentions, I will instantly cast them out, as soon as they be discovered, and I will VVatch and Pray for the preventing of them. I will Watch, when I go forth in my service for God, that Pride do not send me forth: Mens Opinion of me shall be nothing with me, but the pleasing
of God and the doing of good, shall be my whole scope. In performing Prayer, I am in∣tent upon God, and his Hearing, and observing my Thoughts and Words; and I earnestly purpose and strive against Thoughts about mens observing and judging of my Per∣formance. Nevertheless, I do find that together with my sincere and earnest Intention directed to God, Thoughts of Regard to Mens E∣steem, and Judging, will too often thrust in, do what I can, so as either to be pleased, or troubled, as I think they judge. These Thoughts have greatly troubled my Spirit. Hereupon I consider, That a due Regard to Expressions for Mens sake, that they be Af∣fecting and not Offensive, is not faulty but necessary; and therefore must be heeded. And I think that my thoughts above mens judging have this intention at last chiefly,
that my Expressions be Affecting, and not Offensive, yet I am jea∣lous of the mixture of Corruption and Vanity. I earnestly indea∣vour to have my Heart so filled with the Apprehension of God's in∣finite Majesty, and my Infinite Concernment in him, that all Im∣pertinent thoughts may be quite swallowed up. All designing and indeavouring to please men for my own praise I do at that very time detest and abandon, yea at that very time I am sure I do very little regard either the Approbation and praise, or the disallowance and dis∣praise of those very Persons, about whom my thoughts are apt to run out, as aforesaid. I do my utter∣most to prevent, restrain, and sup∣press all such thoughts, they are a burden to me. There is scarce any thing that stirs within me, which hath less of my Will, than these thoughts have. There is scarce
any thing, against which I do more watch and pray and strive, than against these thoughts. And what∣soever tincture of Vanity and Cor∣ruption be found in them, I am Heartily sorry for it, I hate and loath it, and I hope that the mer∣ciful God will not Impute it to me, to the rejecting of my Prayer or to any breach between him and me. I find that my very fear of this Evil, and desire to avoid it, doth draw my thoughts to it, as a mans great desire to sleep, and his fear that he shall not sleep doth com∣monly keep him waking. These thoughts I abhor, not on∣ly before and after, but in the ve∣ry time they come in. And I strive with might and main against them. If God approve my Service and own me in it, I shall be abundant∣ly satisfied, though men (what so∣ever or how-many soever they be)
should despise and loath it. On the contrary, If men should never so highly approve it, I can never be satisfied, if God do not accept and bless it. This I am sure of, if I be sure of any thing. I discern that by care I have brought it to that pass, that my thoughts of others present with me in prayer are not with regard to their praise which I value not, but to what is fit to be done by me in that service, and to their being affected with it. I find I am prone to be anxious∣ly scrupulous: yet I should consi∣der that there be insuitable weak∣nesses (as Impertinent thoughts) accompanying the best Performan∣ces. FINIS.
His WRITINGS Pub∣lished are: 1. HIs History of Col. Mas∣sy's Military-Actions at and near Glocester. 2. The Interest of England, 1st and 2d Part. 3. A Discourse of the Religi∣on of England, asserting, That Reformed Christianity, setled in its due Latitude, is the Stability and Advancement of this King∣dom: In two Parts. 4. The Kingdom of God a∣mong Men: With a Discourse of Schism: and an Account of himself about Conformity,
Books Printed for Thomas Parkhurst. THe Art of Divine Meditati∣on by Edmund Calamy late of Aldermanbury, London. Mr. Thomas Wadsworth's Re∣mains, with Remarkables of his Holy Life and Death. There is Printing a Discourse of Mr. Nathaniel Vincent, of Self-Examination, and Meditati∣ons on the Sacrament. One Hundred Select Sermons of Thomas Horton, late of St. Hellens, London. A Discourse of Actual Provi∣dence, by John Collings, D. D. An Exposition on the Six First Chapters of the Revelations, by Charles Phelps.
Sermons of Grace and Temp∣tation, by Thomas Froysel. Ark of the Covenant by George Gelaspy. A New-Years-Gift, by Thomas Lamb. Christ Display'd, by Nathaniel Heywood. Heaven or Hell, in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nathaniel Vincent. Incomparable Excellencies of God, in his Attributes and Word, by George Swinnock. Glimpse of Eternity, by Abram Coley. An Exposition on the Assem∣blies Catechism, by Thomas Doo∣litle. Another Exposition by Thomas Lye. Another by Thomas Vincent. Morning-Exercise against Po∣pery, by sundry Ministers of the Gospel.
Four useful Discourses by Je Burrough, Published by Matthe Mead. Present State of New - Eng∣land. Husband-man's Companion, it divers suitable Meditations, by Edward Bury. Revival of Grace, by Henry Hurst. Shepherdy Spiritualized, by John Wood. Antidote against the Fear of Death, by Edward Bury.
