d1244 17008108 105745
THE Devouring Informers OF Bristol, &c. Being an Additional Account of some late Proceedings of those Ravenous Beasts of Prey, against Dissenting-Protestants. Bristol April 22. 1682. FOr thes two days our Old Informers Mr. Helliar and Accomplices, Lugg, Tilley, Casse, Patrick, Hoar and Watkins with their Assistants, have been Levying Distresses upon several Protestant-Dissenters, and in the Management of it, behaved themselves with that Fury and unpralel degree of Violence and Arbi∣trary Force, that it fills our Hearts with Sadness, and our Thoughts with no less Terrour then Amazement.
Part of them, (for they divide themselves in two Bodies) that is, Mr. Hellar, Tilley, Lugg and Watkins, the Marshal, with their late Assistant Summers the Butcher, came to the House of Mr. Richard Marsh n Cornstreet, who is a person known to be one of the Considerablest Merchants of this City. These entring his House to make a Distress for 10 l. broke open his Countr Door, and searched for Money, and then went into an Inward Counter, and there seiz'd and car∣ried away his Journal, Leiger, Cash, Invoyce Books, and several other Books of Accounts to the number of thirty, also a Bundle of Written Papers, and several sorts of Houshold Goods. Not content with this, they seized also the Provisions of Victuals then in the House, being three pieces of Pork and two pieces of Beef, two Pullets, 4 Neats-Tongue, all which they carried away; be∣sides this they seized a Gammon of Bacon, and other Victuals and Drink which they Consumed on the place, spending near three Hours time in Commanding his House, and Ransacking several Chambers, parti∣cularly the Chamber of his Wife, then Lying in: During this stay in his House, their Behaviour were so Insolent, that they greatly affrighted not only his Ser∣vants, but all those Spectators, whose occasions and Respect called them into his House. The Servants they Hectored and Treated in Language to this pur∣pose. How dare you touch any thing now we are here. Of the Spectators, one a Butcher, another a Butter-Woman, bringing Meat, and Butter into his House being Market day, was forced to carry away both, and escaped with difficulty of their having it taken from them. This Gentleman Mr. Marsh had formerl taken from him, a Tun of Wine worth 20 l. which they Sold for 4 l. and to make up the Distress 10 l. they forced themselves into his Man Counter, and took
from him in Cash 6 l. odd Money; He is not alone un∣der this Oppression. For these Informers have made several Distresses upon others, to the value of several Score of Pounds; a certain Account of Particulars you may expect by the next. Their manner of Levy∣ing of Distress is as follows, viz. When they enter a Shop, albeit there is abundance of Goods in view, yet they break open Chests, Counters, &c. And thence take away the Money, if no Money to be had, then they take either Shop of Houshold Goods, and of them generally to double the value; if any durst speak to them by way of Reproof for these unreasonable Pro∣ceedings, they then Huff and Threaten to send them to Prison, which Power they assume to themselves commonly when they go to disturb the Quakers Meet∣ings, thinking no doubt, but that-they are priviledged to it by their Office of Constable, and the example of their Grand Abettor, and Brother Informer Sheriff Knight, as these Actions bring great Anxiety and Fear upon several of His Majesties Subjects, to think what is the thing there designed; so they are aggravated the higher in the Breast of many on this Consideration, that its generally believed by the long date of the War∣rants, these Distresses have been Levied for Con∣victions, made Clandestinely in a Tavern, which was what the May or and some of the Justices last Sessions gave a publick Reproof to, and would have taken up the Warrants, but were denyed by Sheriff Knight, who was menaced deservedly with the good Beha∣viour for it: One thing is more observable, that the great Havock made in these two days Distresse, is, that the Fines they Distrain for, are for a Meeting, where there is no Preaching, Praying, or any actual exercise of Religion to distinguish it from the Liturgy of the Church.
The Malice of the Informers are so great against Mr. Ch. Jones Junior, that all their Family is likely to suffer for it. Yesterday and this day, they took from his Father, and himself, and two Brothers, about 80 l. value in Goods: Great are the Consternations of the People on these Proceedings. For further Informa∣tion, the Reader is referred to the late Printed Letter, Entituled, More Sad and Lamentable News from Bristol. I rest Yours, &c:
