d194 11896639 50557
DANGERFIELDS Dance. Giving an Account of several Notorious Crimes by him Committed; VIZ, He pretended to be a DUKE, And feigned Himself to be MONMOUTH, With several other PRANKS: For which he was Sentenced To Stand in the Pillory, to be VVhip'd at the Carts Arse, and to be sent back to Prison. This may be Printed, July 2. 1685. R. L. S. Entred according to Order. For a Seditious LIBEL. SPECTATƲM ADMISSI RI∣SƲM TENEATIS AMICI. IT is no Wonder in this Crittick Age, To see Offenders mounted on the Stage, And Shameful Punishment on them attend, Who on their Shamming Wits so much depend; Scourging and Pillorys fall to their share, But all too little to make them beware: And Impudence to such a heighth is grown, As I believe the like was never known. Here you may see how Dangerfield's Aspir'd! Who needs would be a Duke! by all admir'd! His subtile Crotchets, and his cunning Pate, Hath brought his Person to a dreadful State. How he did Scamper, if you did but mind, When on his Back he did the Torment find Of Scourging Justice, it would make you Smile, To see how Fortune did his hopes beguile; And brought his feigned Highness to the Lash, Till brinish Tears his Brazen-Face did Wash. O hapless Dangerfield! thou art mistook, That did for Honour and Obedience look. Thy great Ambition all Men do Rebuke, Could nothing serve, but thou must be a DUKE? Fie, fie, it was too great and high a Stile, Tho' Fortune for a moment seem'd to Smile; Yet from thy Honour thou cam'st tumbling down, When she once fac'd about on thee to Frown: Old Newgate was the place to Entertain The Shamming DUKE, where thou didst long remain; Till thou wert Whipt and Scourg'd along the Streets, Which seem'd Sowre Sauce after so many Sweets; Yet 'twas but Just thou should'st it undergo, Because that you such Shirking Tricks did show; And brought thee unto Condign Punishment, If't please Tour Highness, what was your intent? Poor VVomen to deceive, and get their Coyn, It is no better then for to Purloyn; And make the VVorld believe thou wert some Spark VVho had such Honour from thy Servant Mark, Like Oats, thy hopes are now in pieces crash'd, The Brains of thy Ambition out are dash'd. Whipping, instead of Cringing unto thee, Thou may'st expect will now thy Portion be. Thy Name for ever will be on Record, Thou must not be a Duke, nor yet a Lord; A Newgate-Bird thou may'st accounted be, Highly deserving of the PILLORY. And since so Arch and Cunning thou art grown, To play such Pranks as ne'r before was known; 'Tis pitty thou should'st 'want of thy Desert, Tho' now thy Title is not worth a Fart. And so Duke Dangerfield I bid adieu, A thousand Lashes I bequeath to you; And hope you may to others warning be, Never to practice such base Villany. Your Suffering, you cannot well deny, Is the Reward of your Audaucity; To this your Reason cannot chuse but yield, And now look to your Hits, Duke Dangerfield. FINIS. London, Printed by J. M. in the Year MDCLXXXV:
