D2625 12656288 65380
Heavenly Pastime, Or, Pleasant Observations on all the most remarkable Passages through∣out the Holy Bible, Of the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT. Newly ALLEGORIZ'D, In several Delightful DIALOGUES, POEMS, SIMILITUDES, and DIVINE FANCIES. By IOHN DVNTON, Author of The Sickmans Passing-Bell. LONDON, Printed for IOHN DVNTON, at the Black Raven, at the Corner of Princes-street, near the Royal Exchange, 1685.
The Epistle to the READER. Candid Reader, THy courteous and ready reception of those three well known and delightful Trea∣tises entituled The House of Weeping, &c. Dyeing Pastors last Legacy, &c. And Pil∣grims Guide, with the Addition of the Sick-mans Passing-Bell, in a pleasant Alle∣gory, &c. (All of them in a few Months coming to several impressions) hath encourag∣ed me now a fourth time to present thee with another very useful Piece, bearing my Father Dunton's Name, Entituled HEAVEN∣LY PASTIME, &c. Which is on pur∣pose digested into Dialogues, Poems, Simi∣litudes, and Divine Fancies; as being most easy and taking to the meanest capacity, and which to an ingenious fancy cannot but be wel∣come, here being the pith and marrow of ma∣ny Voluminous Authors of that Bulk and bigness, that many People have not time to read them, more have not Money to buy them, and therefore by that means seeing the tedious∣ness and chargeableness of attaining to know∣ledge break of their Journey at the beginning of their race, and despairing of attaining to the end, begin not to run at all.
To help then those who are desirous to learn and mind true knowledge this Reve∣rend Author hath taken the pains with the Bee, to extract Honey out of the Flowery Writings of several Authors, taking only that, which was most conduceable to his pur∣pose, and which he imagin'd might draw the Reader on with delight to his own profit. What his Endeavours have been herein, you will find in the peruseall thereof. All that I shall desire of thee (Gentle Reader) is to read seriously, judge candidly, and censure rightly, and I make no doubt but when thou hast done, thou wilt for the present thankfully accept of what is here offered, (till something more of this Authors can be trans∣scribed fair for the Press, which will now be very speedily done) and remain a Cordial wll-isher to thy most obliged Friend and thrice Hum∣ble Servant, IOHN DVNTON.
INTRODUCTION To this Book, by way of Question and Answer. Quest. WHat is the Chief end of Writing Books? Answ. For instruction and information; where∣as ile Books are no other than corrupted Tales in Ink and Paper; or indeed Vice sent abroad with a Liense, wherein two are guilty of evil, he that Writes them, and he that Reads thm; being in effect like the brutish sin of Adultery, wherein two are concerned in the same sin; and therefore his Resolution was good who said, That for bad Books he would write none, least he should thereby hurt others in the Reading of them; nor would he Read any of them, for fear the Author should answer for his sin, by being corupted by them. Quest. What Book of all others is the best? Answ. The Holy Scriptures, contained in the Old and New Testament, wherein the Mysteries of our Saviour are contained▪ being the Book of all books, and in comparison of whih no book is Com∣parable. Quest. Of how many Chapters doth this Bok consist? Answ. In the Old Testament or Bible, there are 777. In the New Testament 260. In the Books of Apocrypha 173. The total being 1210. And fo thenumber of Verses in the Old Testament, the ew∣ish Rabbins have computed them thus: In the Books of the Law, Verses 5845. In the Prophets, 9294. And in Haggai 8064. Total 23203. Quest. Are there no other Books mentioned in the Old Testament, but those which we have now at this day? Ans. Yes, there were the Books of Iddo and Gd the Seers; besides, Solomon wrote three thousand
Parables, and five thousand Songs, with a Book of the Nature of all Herbs, Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar to the Hysop upon the wall. Samuel also writ a Book of the Office and Institution of a King. There were also Chronicles of the Kings of Iudah and Israel, besides those we have in the Scripture, being, as is judged, written far larger; all which were supposed to be lost in the Jewish Captivity at Babylon. Q. What was St. Augustine's answer to one who de∣manded what Go did before he made the World? A. That he was ordaining a Hell for such kind of Enquirers. Whre the Sripture hath not a Mouth to speak, we ought not to have a Tongue to ask. Q. What was th greatest Love that ever was shor in the World? A. The love of God to poor Sinners, who gave his only begotten Son to dye for us; of which one thus writeth. God is my gif, himself he freely gave me, Gods gift am I, and none ut God shall have me. Q. Wht Bok next to the Holy Scripture would you chifly dsire, te rest being taken away? A. Thoore Beza being aked this question, an∣swered Pluarch, an excellnt Author for his Lives and Morals. Another said Seneca, whose divine entences in his Book are so squared by the Rules of Christianity; that St. Hirom concluded him amongst the Catalogue of Divine Writers. Another preferr∣ed the Thesaurus Historirum, being a Compendi∣um of most Histories and worthy Examples; and that Ornament of History, a worthy Person gives the preheminency to Sir Walter Rawleigh's History of the World, which he calls Primus in Historia.
Heavenly Pastime, Or, Pleasant Observations throughout the Old TESTAMENT. CHAPTER I. Giving an Accont of the Birth of the Vni∣verse. Gen. 1. In the beginning God makes Heaven, and Earth, To Sea, to Light, to Stars he gives a Birth, Fishes, Fowles, Beasts, and Worms he doth Cre, All which Gods pow'r and might do intimate. THough God was what he is, and in th perfect fruition of his Grandeurs, befor his omnipotent hand had drawn th Creatures out of their Nothing▪ yet i Nature required Hommages, his Majesty Servi∣tudes, his Glory Admirations, his Goodness Acknow∣ledgments, and his Beauty Hearts and Affection. It was needfull, though he were independent of all beings, immense in his extent, Eternal in his dura∣tion, and infinite in all his perfections, that  should cause himself to be seen and felt by Ean∣ons out of himself.
And here I represent unto my self how that Nature sigh'd ven without Tongue or voice,The sighs of Nature. before she had a being: Methinks I hear her silence, and that she speaketh ths to God before hr Creaton; Spak thn, O spak (Great God) stretch forth thy arm and cst thy looks out f thy self; issue forth of thy Luminous Darkss, which forms thee a day wihout Night, an a Night more resplendent then the day. Give soe little passage to those Ejaculations and Flames which fro ll Eternity are iclsd within thy Bosom, ad which frame thrin a Circle f Light and Love. The least of thy rradiations will dissipate the shadows, and open that abys, in which they are burie. In fine thou art a Go of Love, and this love would be Capive, if it had no Sllis, and Eja∣culations. It was not saisfied to rmain in thee by emi∣nence, and as it were in the source of beauty and good∣nss; but having made its sols wiin its sf by num∣berlss revolutions, it must d scend up external ob∣jects, to attain that effect and property, which is natu∣ral to Love. Well thn, Creatures, come sorth of the Mass in whih you lye cofused, even, Earth, Sea, Stars, Tree, Fihes, Furnaces of Fire, and Flames,The first Allrum of Nature. vast xtents of Air, Clouds, Abyes, Prcipices, listen to the voice and Command of Go: But in fine, this glorious and happy moment, which saw the birth of times and seasons being arrived. From that instant the World was chosen as the blanck Tabl, whron God resolved to draw the first stroaks of his gooness. First Heaven, Earth, Water, and Darkness ap∣peared in an instant as the Field on which all the ef∣fects of a most Amorous and sage Wisdom and Pro∣digality were to be displayed. It was before any other thing that this tenebrous Compound, this
confused Medley and this heap of Water and Earth, was the object of him who alone was able to chase away its shadows, and convert its dust into Gold and Cristall. This is the Throne on which the Ti∣tle of Soveraign Monarch and Lawgiver shall be seen ingraved; But what! This Theater is too ob∣sure to behold therein the Birth of the World; we must expect the Aurora and the rayes of the day. But by the way Kind Reader let me tell thee that: The World is a Book in Folio Printed all, With Gods great Works in Letters Capital, Each Creature i a Page, and each effect A Fair Character, voi of all defect: But as young Trewants trying in the Schools, Instead of Learning, learn to play the Fools, We gze but on the Babyes and the Cover, The gaudy Flowers, and Edges Gilded over; And never further for our Lesson lok; Within this Volumn of the Various Book: Where learned nature modest ones instructs, That by his Wisdom God the World conducts▪ CHAP. II. Giving an account of the Work of the si dayes; Of the Creation. NAture awake, it is time for the Wor to rise, the Night hath proceeded,The firs day of the Creation. and twelve hours are as it wre alread past since Heaen and Earth have been in obsity. Behold the break of day; and those de∣lightfull
Colours, which play upon the Waters, are the Companions of thāt light, which in Paestine hath already opened the Doors and Windows of the East, and is going to spread it self upon another He∣misphear. Nevertheless to finish this Carriere, to perfect this course, and to round the whole Globe twelve hours more are required; and then counting from Evening till Morning, and from Morning till Evening, you shall find all the Moments, which form the first day, a glorious day, a day illustrious for having first received the light, which gives glo∣ry and splendor to all dayes. The second day was not less glorious: For it was that in which God chose to raise up the Firmament,The se∣cond Day. like a Circle of Brass, or rather like a Globe of Gold and Azure, which might serve to divide the seven Orbes of the Planets from the Empereal Heaven. The next day God descended from Heaven upon Earth,The third Day. and it was on this day, he marked out bounds, and limits to Rivers, Streams, Seas and Torrets, so that the Waters retyring some on one side, and some on the other, just as they were shut up within their Banks, Clifts and Chanels, the Earth appeared, and imme∣diatly her sides were found pierced with Caverns, and her back loaden with Mountains and Rocks which rais'd her in a stately mann. Instantly her entrals were filled with Stones and Metals; and hilst those four great portions of the Earth which divide the World, and all the Islands of the Ocean and Seas were Levelled to serve for Empires and possessions of men, the hand of God as just as libe∣ral, did in the bosom of the Earth uphold the Ar∣ches of her Prisons and Dungeons, to the end that if the Paradice of Eden was a Garden of delights and pleasures, Hell on the contrary might be an abode of dread, horror and Misery. It was likewise
very convenient that as God had mixed Light wit Darkness, he should create Wild places and desart to render the Gardens, Fields and Meadows more delightful; and finally having the very same day given Plants, Herbs and Flowers for an Orna∣ment to the Earth, his wise Providence mingled Thorns with Roses, and the most wholesome  sprung out of the same soyl with the Mandra and Aconite. The fourth day, having bin as it were the Chariot of the Sun, Moon,Th Fourt Day. Stars, and Planets which shine in the Heavens, may in some manner be called the day of days, since it hath bin the Origin of the fires bright∣ness and flames, which are the Soul of the Day. Then were the frozen and condensed waters ga∣thered together with more light and heat to form the Body of the Planets: Next the Sun, Moon an Stars began their courses, periods and revolutions, and took the tracks and ways which were traced out to them from East to Wst. Let us turn them upon the Fift dy, wherein God created the Birds which fly in the Air,The Fift Day. and the Fishes which swim in the Water: One must hear represent unto his thoughts some fair Summers day, and imagine that he sits in the cool upon the shore of some Island, from thence he must lift up his eyes towards Heaven, and behōld over head thousands of little feathered bo∣dies, cleaving the Air with their wings, piercing the Clouds, and mingling with their flight the sweet Harmony of their warblings; He must after∣wards behold at his Fet a River full of Fishes arm∣ed with Scales, some of which ut thir way nee the surface of the water, and others through the midst of the waves; some swim alot against the stream and Current, others are carryed down at the plea∣sure of the winds, and by the favour of so sweet and rapid an Element.
Scarce had the Morning brought news of the arrival of the Sixt day,The sixt Day. but at the same instant the Earth opene her eyes unto her Su, and her ears unto the voice of her God. This dull heavy and insensible Mass not satisfied to have brought sorth Flowers Plants and Trees, yet farther displaid it self to produce all sorts of eats and Ani∣mls, behol the World in her Cradle, ad Nature in her Infancy, the unmoveable Earth round about her Center is sown with Flowers, tapistrd with Tur and Virdures, beautified with Woods and For∣rests; she is sately in her Mountains, pleasant in her Valleys, delightful in her Meadows; She is rich in hr Mtals, ertill in her Fruts, and plenti∣full by her Rivers and Seas which inviron her on all parts, and form her a thousan liquid transpaences. The Air incompasses her on all ides, an serves her r a veil to tempr th over-hud influences of the Moon, and the too arent Ry of the Sun. The Heavens like pedent Roofs and rowling Arhes are strewed with Flwers, Emerauls and Rubies. What doth remain aftr all these Prodigies of Power, and all these works of Love? O Power! O Love! I cannot condemn his fancy who sai tht Love produced Heaven out of a Chaos, and the World in six days out of a confused and undisgested Lump. Nt ut God culd have in a emrt made This Flowry Mnsion where Man-kind doth Trade▪ Spread Heav'ns blue Curtens and those Laps have Burnisht, Earth, Air, and Sea with Beasts, Birds, Fish ave .
CHAP. III. Wherein you have an account of the Cre∣ation of Adam. Gen. 2. Yet still there wants a Creature which may Over these Sensless Beasts have Rule and Sway: God tn makes Man with Face towards the Sky, He's the true likeness of the Deiti. GOD now deliberates upon the enterprise of a Noble Work, and the Counce is held in the Conclave of the most holy Triiie, the three Per∣sons are assembled; Power, Wisdom, and Love take thir seats near the Paradie of En. An it is concerning Man and hi Creation, and not concerning those proud and Rebellius Spirits, whose shameful revolt have justly expel'd them from the Heavnly Irusalem, that the ecree i past; it is on him God Refected, and it is he who must be substituted in the place of Angels. It is thi Act which makes the World behold Gods Mster-piece, the object of his Favours, and the most glorious term of his Power. O Sun stop here thy Course and  witness of his Birth who hth bin the cause and end of thine: It was as I conceive about high Noon,The time of Ma Creatio. when the Earth was resplendent with Light, that this Animated Sun was born. I was by the Light of Natures greatest Bonire that God vouhsafed to stoop so low as Earth to take Clay, out of which he formed the Body of the first Man. Now of all Cretures which God did mak, Man was the last tha living ath did tak.
Not that he was the least, or that God durst Not undertake so Noble a Work at first, Rather, because he should have made in vain, So great a Prince, without on whom to Reign, A wise Man never brings his biden Guests Into his Parlour till his Room be drest, Garnish'd with Lights, and Tables neatly spread, Be with full Dishes well nigh furnished. So our great God, who (bounteous ever) keeps Here open Court, and th' ever-bound lesse-deeps, Of sweetest Nectar Onus still distills, By twenty times ten thousand sundry Quills. All the admirable Creatures made beforn, Which Heaven, Earth and Ocean do Adorn Are but Essayes, compred in every part, To this Divinest Master-piece of Art, Therefore the supream Peerless Architect, When (of meer nothing) he did first erect Heav'n, Earth, Air and Seas, at once his thought His word and deed all in an instant wrought: But when e would his own selfs Type Create, Th' Honor of Nature, th' Earths Sole Potentate: As if he would a Council hold, he Citeth His Sacrd Power, his Prudence he inviteth, Summons his Love, his Justice he adjourns, Calleth his Goodnesse, and his Grace returns, To (as it were) consult about the Birth, And building of a second God of Earth▪ And each (a part) with liberal hand to bring, Some excellence unto so rare a thing. Or rather, he consuls with's only Son, (His own pourtrait) what proportion, What Gifts, what Grace, what Soul he should bestow, Vpon his Vice-Roy of this Realm below. When th' other things God fashin'd in their kind, The Sea t'aboun in Fishes he assign'd, The Earth in Flocs, but having man in had, His very self he seemed to Command.
He both at once both life and Body lent To other things, but when in Man he meant, In Mortal Limbs immortal life to place, He seem'd to pause, as in a weighty cause, And so at sundry moments finished, The Soul and Body of Earth's glorious head. And now Adam, and Eve too (who was yet to be formed out of one of Adams Ribs) must be the causes of our Good or Evil, and on their good or bad For∣tune ours must wholy depend. CHAP. IIII. Giving a Pleasant account of the Terrestial Paradice or Garden of Eden, in which Adam was first plac'd: together with th miraculous manner of Eves production with the supposed manner of Adams firs nuptiall addresses to her, and of their joy¦full Marriage. Gen. 2. In Edens Garden full of fruitfull Trees, Adam is placed, to tast all Fruits he sees; Except the Fruit of one Tree, which if he Do tast, the forfeit is that he must die, Scarce was Adam created but he found himself a Paradice; and he even from the Morning his birth, was placed under the most happy and d¦lightfull Clymate that Nature did afford. Goe then Adam, it is God who both calls and c¦ducts thee. Enter happily this Garden of Eden  Paradise into which he leads thee; put thy self
the shelter of this Tree: For it is the Tree of Know∣ledge and immortality, which he hath Planted for thee: Divert thy Eyes upon these Tulips, upon these Gilli-flowers, upon these Roses, upon these Purple Velvet flowers, and upon these Lillys; walk thou over the Daffidill, over the Thyme, over the Camomyle, and over this green Tapestry, which is so odoriferous; be not af∣frighted at the sight of thse Tygers, these Leopards, and of all these more furious Beasts: For God ath given thee power to Rule them, and there is no one in whom thy Innocence begets not respect. Take then the Rod in∣to thy hand, and Govern all these Flocks and Heards, im∣ose Laws on them, and Give them wha Names thou pleasest, Doubtless, when Adam Saw our Common Air, He did admire the mansion rich and fair Of his Successors, for Frosts keenly Cold The Shady Locks of Forrests, had not pol'd; Heav'n had not Thundred on our Heads as yet; Nor given the Earth her sad divorces Writ: But when he once had entred Paradise, The Remnant World he justly did despise: (Much like a Boor far in the Countrey Born, Who, never having seen but Kine and Corn:) Oxen, and Sheep, and homely Hamlts Thatcht; (Which found, he counts as Kingdoms, hardly matcht) When afterwards he happens to behold Our wealthy Lonon's wonders manifold: The silly peasant thinks himself to be, In a new World, and gazing greedily; One while he, Art-less, all the Arts admires; Then the fair Temples, and the Top-less Spires: Their firm Foundations, and the maed Pride Of all the sacred Ornaments be side. Anon he wonders at the differing Graces, Tongues, guests, Attires, the Fashions & the Faces; Of-usie-buzzing Swars, which still he meets,
Ebbing and Flowing over all the Streets: Then at the Signs, the Shops, the Weights, th Measures, The Handy-crafts, the Rumors, Trades, and Treasures. But of all Sights none seems him yet more strange, Then the rare beauteous, sttately rich Exchange. Another while he marvels at the Thames, Which seems to bear huge Mountains on her Streams: Then at the fair built Bridge, which he doth judge More like a Dreadfull City then a Bridge; And glancing then along the Northern shore, That princely Prospect doth Amaze him more.) For in this Garden Man delighted so, That (rapt) he wish't not if he awak't or no: If he beheld a True thing or a Fable; Or Earth, or Hea'n, all more hen admirabl. For such Excess his extasie was small, Not having Spirit enough to muse withall, He wisht him hundred-fold redoubled Senses, The more to tast so rare sweet Exclncies: Not knowing, whither Nos, or Ears, or Eyes, Smll, heard, or saw, more Savours, Sounds, or Dies. Immediatly after God resolved to give him a Companion,The pro∣duction of Eve. for it was not conve∣nient that Man should be all alone: For this end he closed Adam's Eye-lids, and charmed his senses by a Heavenly Sleep, which th Major part of the Greek Fathers, according to th Translation of the Septuagint, call an extatick and ravishing repose. This man then thus rapt in his Extasy felt not Gods hand, which gently and with∣out pain plucked out a Rib, whereof he formed the first Woman, who was immediatly brought unto Adam to be his Companion and his dear Moity.
Scarce had Adam cast his Eyes on her but he cryed out, Ah, these are Bones of my Bones, and this Fles was drawn out of my Flesh; just as if he had said, Come O my Love, the dearest portion of my self, you shall be from henceforth my Wife, and I will be your Husband. We will be but one Heart in two Bodies; And though e have two Souls we will have at least but one Mind and Will. Now after this profound and pleasing trance, No sooner Adams ravisht Eyes did glance, On the rare beauties of his New-come-half: But in his Heart he 'gan to leap and laugh, Kissing her kindly, calling her his Life, His Love, his Stay, his Rest, his Weal, his Wife, His other-self, his help (him to refresh) Bone of his Bone, Flesh of his very Flesh. Source of all joyes, sweet He-Shee coupled one.Adams Epithala∣mium, or Wedding Song. Thy Sacred Birth I never think upon, But (ravisht) admire how God did then, Make two of one, and one of two again. O Blessed Bone! O happy Marriage! Which dost the match 'twixt that and us presage: O chastest Friendship! Whose pure Flames impat, Two Souls in one, two Hearts into one Heart. Oh Holy knot in Eden instiuted, Not in this Earth ith Blood and wrongs polluted; This done the Lord commands the happy pair, With chast embraces to replenish fair, Th' unpeopled World; that, while the World endures, Here might succeed their living Portraictures. Wives and Husbands, learn then from hence a lesson which teacheth you the Laws of Conjugall Love,An ex∣cellent les∣son for Husbands and Wives. and what pow∣erfull Motives you have to live in Unity, and in a most perfect and holy Union. Let Man remember that he is the Mast∣er,
but not a Tyrant. Let Women also never for∣get their own extraction, and that they were not produced out of the Head as Queens, nor out of the Feet as Servants and Slaves; but out of the Side, and near the Heart, to the intent they may spend all the time of their Marriage in a most sweet Intelligence, and in a most inviolable society: To which Love ha∣ving given a beginning, nothing but Death alone is able, or at least ought, to Dissolve it. But now, the Nuptials of Adam and Eve being past, nothing remains but the Banquet. The Tables are al∣ready furnished, and they need but choose amongst all the Dises of the World, that which shall appear to them the most Delicious. They are Masters of all that Flys in the Air, of all that Swims in the Water, of all that Creeps or Walks on the Earth; Biefly of all Fruits that are in the Terrestiall Paradice they have the choice; and amongst all the Trees which God had Planted there, h only reserved the use of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, of which he Expresly and upon pain of Death forbids these two guests to gather any Fruit. In this Conjuncture of time the Moon began to assemble her shadows, and God finding all his Works perfect entred into his repose with the Seventh Day. Adam and Eve enjoy then at present, all that their Hearts can desire. They possess the Monarchy of the Universe for their Inheritance and Government: Their Empire extends over all out-bounds and limits, the Winds do not blow but at their pleasure, the Rivers and Streams do not Rowl along but at their Command; the Birds do not tune their Warblin Notes but to afford them delight. In a word, they are as it were the Gods of the Terrestiall Paradise, and partake in a manner of all the delights which can be tasted in Heaven. And now therefore we may suppose Eve thus to bespeke her Husband, or better self in the following manner. Wherein you have a brief account of what befell them after their Fall, viz.
1. Eves first addresses to Adam, and her Industry in making a Garment for her Husband. Sweet-heart, quoth she (and then she Kissed him) My Love, my Life, my Bliss my Ioy, my Gem, My Souls dear Soul, take in good part (I prithee) This pretty Present that I gladly give thee. Thanks my dear all (quoth Adam then) for this, And with three Kisses he requites her Kiss. Then on he puts his painted Garment new, And Peacock-like himself doth often view; Looks on his Shadow, and in proud amaze, Admires the hand that had the art to cause, So many several parts to meet in one, To fashion thus the quaint Mandilion. 2. Adam and Eves Winter Sutes. But, when the winters kener breath began To Cristalliz the baltick Ocean, Our Grand-sire, shrinking, gan, to shake and shiver, His Teeth to Chatter, and his Beard to quiver. Spying therefore a Flock of Muttons coming, (Whose Freze-clad bodies feel not Winters numing; He takes the fairest, and he nocks it down: Then by good hap, finding upn the Down A sharp great Fish-bone (which long time before, The Roaring flood had cast upon the shore.) He Cuts the Throat, fleyes it, and spreads the fell, Then dries it, pares it, and he scrapes it well, Then Cloathes his Wife therewith; and of such Hides Slops, Hats, and Doublets, for himself provides. 3. Their Lodging and first Building. A Vaulted Rock, a hollow Tree, a Cave, Were the first Buildings that them shelter gave; But, finding th' one to be too-moist a hold, Th' other too narrow, th' other over-cold,
Like Carpenters, within a Wood they choose, Sixteen fair Trees that never Leaves do loose; Whose equall front in quadran form prospected, As if of purpose Nature them erected, Their shady bows first bow they tenderly, Then enter braid, and bind them curiously; That one would think that had this Harbor seen, 'T had been true, Seeling painted-over green, 4. At length they get better Habitations. Afther this triall, better yet to sence, Their tender flesh from th' Airy violence; Vpon the top of their sit-forked Stems, They lay across bare Oken boughs for Beams, Then these again with Leavie boughs they load, So covering close their sorry Cold abode. And then they ply from the Eaves unto the Ground▪ With Mud-mixt Reed to wall their Mansion round, All save a hole to the East-ward situate, Where strait they clapt a Hurdle for a Gate; (Instead of Hinges banged on a With) Which with a slight both Shuts and Openeth. 5. Their first Invention of Fire. Yet Fire they lack: But lo, the Woods that whistle▪ Amidst the Groves, so oft the Lawrel justle, Against that Mulberry, that their angry Claps Do kindle Fire, that burns the Heath bour Cops. When Adam saw a rddy vapor rise, In glowring Streams; as turnd with fear he slies, It follows him, untill a naked Plain, The greedy fury of the flame restrain: Then back he turns, and coming somewhat nigher The kindled Shrubs, prceiving that the fire Dris his dark Cloathes, his Colour doth refresh, An un-benums his Sinws and his Flesh: By th' unburnt end, a good big brand he takes, And hying home a fire he quickly makes.
And still maintains it, till the Starry Twins, Celestial breath another Fire begins. But Winter being come again it grieved him, T' have lost so fondly what Relieved him; Trying a thousand wayes sit now no more, Th justling Trees his damage would restore. While (else where musing) one day he sate down Vpon a steep Rock craggy-forked crown, A foaming Beast come towards him he spies; Within whose Head stood burning Coals for Eyes: Then suddenly with boisterous Arms he throws A knobby Flint, that hummeth as he goes; Hence flies the Beast, th' ill-aimed flint shaft grownd∣ing Against the Rock, and on it oft rebounding, Shivers to Cinders, whence there issued Small sparks of fire no sooner born then dead. This happy chance made Adam leap for Glee; And quickly calling his cold Company: In his left hand a sining Flint he lcks, Which with another in his right he knocks. So up and down, that from the coldest stone, At every stroke small lively Sparkles Shone. Then with the dry Leaves of a withered Bay, The which together handsomely they lay▪ They ake the falling fire, which like a Sun Shines clear, and smok-less in the Leaf begun. 6. Eves Mouth at first serves in stead of a pair of Bellous. Eve, Kneeling down, with hand her head sustain∣ing, And on the low ground with her Elbow leaning, Blows with her Mouth; and with her gentle blowing,
Stirs up the heat, that from the dry Leaves glow∣ing; Kindles the Read, and then that hollow Kex First fires the small, and they the greater Sticks. CHAP. V. herein you have an account of the Disasters and Banishment of Adam and Eve out of Paradice, with a supposed Dialogue be∣tween Adam and Eve, and likewise between Eve and the Serpent. Gen. 3. The Woman's tempted by the Serpents whiles, To eat the Fruit, she strait the Man beguiles. A Cherub chaseth them with Sword and Fire, Out of fair Edens Garden in great Ire. ADam and Eve are happy, but how long will- this happiness endure? Doth Adam remem∣er that he is a Man, and a Man of Earth? Doth Eve well understand that her Sex is moe Light, ore frail, and less constant? Adam art thou Igno∣ant that nothing is more flattering, and more cun∣ing than a Woman, when her mind is excited by ome passion? Beware then Adam of this Woman; or my own part I imagine to have in a manner seen her ehind a Tree, and to my thinking I have heard her eak something unto a Serpnt. The Serpent if I mistake not first beginning to ialogue with her after the following manner, viz. erp. Not eat? Not tast? Not touch? Not cast an Eye?
Upon the Fruit of this fair Tree? And why? Why eatest thou not what Heaven ordained for Food? Or can'st tho think that bad which Heav'd call'd Go od? Why was it made if not to be enjoy'd? Neglect of Favours makes a Favour void: Blessings unus'd, pervert unto a Wast, As well as Surfeits: Woman do but tast: See how the Laden Boughs make silent suit To be enjoy'd: Look how the bending Fruit Meet thee half way; Observe but how they crouch To kiss thy Hand; Coy Woman, Do but touch: Mark what a pure Vermilion blush has di'd Their swelling cheeks, and how for shame they hide Their Palsie Heads to see themselves stand by Neglected: Woman, do but cas an Eye, What bounteous Heav'n ordained for use, refuse not; Come, pull and Eat: Y' abuse the thing ye use not. Eve, Wisest of Beast, our Great Creater did Reserve this Tree, and this alone forbid; The rest are freely ours, which doubtless are As pleasing to the Tast, to the Eye as fair: But touching this, his strict Commands are such: 'Tis Death to Tast, no less then Death to Touch. Serp. Pish, Death's a Fable: Did not Heav'n in∣spire Your equall Elements with Living Fire: Blown from the spring of Life? Is not that breath Immortall? Come, ye are as free from Death As he that made you. Can the flames Expire Which he has kindled? Can ye quench his Fire? Did not the Great Creatours voice proclaim What ere he made (from the blew Spangled frame, To the poor Leas that trembles) very good? Blest he not both the Feeder and the Food?
Tell, Tell me then, what danger can Accrue From such blest Fruit, to such half Gods as you Curb needless fears, and let no fond Conceit Abuse your freedom; Woman take and Eate. Eve. 'Tis true, we are immortal; Death is yet Vnborn, untill Rebellion make it debt, Indeed, I know the Fruit is good, untill Presumptuous disobedience make it ill. The Lips that open to this Fruit's a Portall, To let in Death and make immortall mortll. Serp. You cannot die. Come Woman, tast and fear not: Eve. Shall Eve transgress? I dare not, O I dare not. Serp. A fraid? Why draw'st thou back thy tim'rous Arme? Harm only fals on such as fear a Harm. Heav'n knows and fears the virtue of this Tree, 'Twill make ye perfect Gods as well as hee. Stech sorth thy Hand, and let thy fondness ne∣ver Fear Death: Do, Pull, and Eat, and Live for ever. Eve. 'Tis but an Apple, and it is as good To do, as to desire. Fruit's made for Food: le pull, and tast, and tmp my Adam too, To know the Secrets o this dainty. Serp. Do. EPIGRAM. Vnluckey Parliament! Wherein at lst, Both Houses are agree'd, and firmly pst; An Act of Death confirm'd by higher powers: O hd it had but such Success as ours. And now Eve being thus seduc't by the Serpent, we may suppose Adam Advancing up to her, bespeak∣ing her after the following manner, viz. Adam. From whence dost tho come▪ an why do∣est
thou leave him all alone, who is the heart of thy heart, and the soul of thy soul? Where can be the Members without the Head, & the Head without the Members? What, doest thou not know, that I am to be witess of all thy Actions, and that I must give an account unto God, for what thou shalt doe? what fruit is this, that thou hold'st in thy hand? Eve. Ah my Son, my Friend, my dear Husband, would you did but know what hath happened since I was absent from you? Not far from hence I met a Serpent of a Prodigious and extraordinary shape, he also spake to me, contrary to the use of Beasts. For my part I did believe that he was a Prodigy of Heaven, and an Angel which God sent me under the form of a Serpent. He shewed me the Tree of Life, and promised me, that if I would Eat of is's Fruit, I should become like unto God, and have a perfect knowledge of Good and Evil; I told him, that God had forbid it us upon pain of death; but he pro∣tested to me, that on the contrary this fruit hath the Iuice of Life and Immortality: For my part I have gather'd it. I have eaten of it, and I intreat you to tast as little of it as you please. O God! how eloquent is the malice of a Woman▪ and what powerfull charmes and perswasions hath she? Her Lips and Mouth disill at once both Hon∣ny and Poyson; her Tongue shoots forth Arrows of Death and Life; her very looks are so many Light∣nings, which she mingleth with the darts of her Passions. This is that which destroyed the Angel of the Terrestial Paradise, the Monarch of the World, and the Father of all Mankind. He chose rather to dis∣obey God, than contradict his Wife: For it was from his own Wife's hand he took this fatall Apple, which would choak his Posterity. O wretch▪ What hast thou done? Open a little thine Eyes, and blush r∣ther at the sight of this Crime, than at thy Nakedness? Adam what hast thou done; why doest thou hide thy ?
Adam where art thou? God calls thee, thou must Answer, thou must appear; in vain is it to seek out hades and groves, to oppose the Word who gives peech to the Dumb, and those Eyes whose least glances make the day to break in the darkest Dungeons and greatest obscurities. Adam, what answerest thou? Alas, hast thou no pitty on thy self, and all thy Children. In conlusion Adam layes the fault on his Wife, the Woman accuseth the Serpent, and instead of ac∣cusing themselves, to sweeten the indignation of the Judge, they make excuses to inkindle his Wrath, and to render themselves unworthy of Pardon. Ah! How far more prudently had both of them done, if with bended Knees on the ground, with tears in their Eyes, with sighs from their Hearts, and con∣ession from their Mouths, they had said unto God, Lord take pitty on us, and upon all our poor Chil∣dren? But alas, they are wholy insensible, they annt acknowledge their offence, wherefore no Clemency, no Pardon. Go then Serpnt accursed of God, go creep upon he arth, and with shame trayl thy Body and thy Sales, byting the Earth with thy Teeth. It is thou hat hast unappily seuced the first of Woman-kind, nd therefore War shall be eternally inkindled be∣ween thee and the Woman. As for thee O Woan▪ who wert the Origine and urce of Evil, know that thy mseries shall dayly find plorable increses: Moover thou shalt conceive with in, and shalt not  forth th Fruit but amidst the hrows of a painful Labour. In fine, thou shall be un∣er the Command of Man: And he shall be not only hy Master,  someties thy Tyrant. As for th, O Man! Remove far from this Sa∣red aboad: Go seek thy Bread at the price of thy weat and Blood; go follow the Plow and Cart, to e the Companion of Beasts, and to cultivate the
Earth, which thy pride hath swollen up with Winds, and covered with Thorns, Brambles, and Bryers. Go whether thou pleasest: but know that thy life shall be but a large course of misfortunes, and a dis∣astrous list, where thou must continually wrastle with all Creatures, and be the fatall mark of all sorts of accidents and mis-haps, which in fne will give thee no repose till thou shalt return into the Bosom of the Earth. For dust thou art, and to Dust thou shalt return. Gen. 3. Poor banisht Adam plows with sweat and pain, The barren Earth, and there in soweth Grain: Eve fares as ill, her Children she doth bear In grievous pain, an nurses them in fear. Scarce were these destroying Thunder-bolts darted upon the head of Adam and Eve, and consequently on all Mankind, but an Angel invironed with Fire and Flames, seized on the gate of Paradise, and shut it for ever against these miserable and exiled Persons. Alas! why would not the Earth have rather swallowed them up? And why would not that beautiful Garden, which had been the Throne of their Innocence, become at least the Sepulcher of their Sin? But seeing it was not so, Ah! Poor Children of Adam, pittyful Reliques of an unfortunate Fa∣ther, let me addresse my self to you, behold then your Patrimony, the Rights of your Families, and what Adam and Eve have left you for Lega∣cies. Let no Man hereafter be astonisht to see you wandring about Countries like Pilgrims,Adams lega∣cies to all his Children. and going from door to door in Cities, with Tears in your Eyes, sighs in your Hearts, with dusty Hair, and Sun-burnt Faces; Let no Man e any more astonished to see you go bare-Headed, and bare-Footed, a Wallet on your
Sholders, and a Staff in your Hand: for these are the portions of Sin. Miserable Mortals, the Earth from henceforth shall be to you but a Dark Prison, Life but a Gally, and the World but a great Chain of Misfortunes. The Elements shall joyn in Arms against you. The Fire shall inkindle frightfull Comets over your Heads; The Air shall dart forth merciless Thunder-bolts upon your Houses; The Sea shall raise its Billows against your Towers, and the Earth shall be the Theater of Wars, the Meadow in which the Plague shall Mow, and the Field of Battail, where all the powers of the World, and Hell it self shall deliver you up to Tragick Combats. In fine your Bodies shall be Subject to all sorts of Mala∣ies▪ and your minds to all kinds of Passions. But Heark! Heark! Methinks now I hear alrea∣dy Evy grumbling and murmuring in the Heart of Cain. I hear methinks the cry of Abel. Let us ther∣fore observe a while what passeth. CHAP. VI. The Murther of Abel, and the Despair of Cain, together with a supposed Dialogue between Conscience, Tyrant Sin, Cain and Abel. Gen. 4. Cain and Abel after Sacrifice, God accepts Abels, Cain's be doth despise; Cain inraged his Brother Abel slayes, For which God Scourgeth Cain all his dayes. ABEL was from his Birth, of so sweet and fa∣cile, so plyant, and tractable a disposition, a
Aam and Eve were even inforced to bestow on him their most tender affections. Cain on the contrary▪ who was his Elder Brother, appeared to be of s fierce, and imperious a Nature, that at length t sweeten it, they resolved to oblige him to cultivat the Earth, that his spirit might learn how to softe the hardest of Elemens, and to temper the harshnes of his Courage. Abel at the same time employed himself in keep∣ing Sheep, and guiding his Fathers Floks amidst the Pastures: His mind in repose, and amidst the silenc of the Field, began to take his flight to Heaven. Upon which we may now suppose the cruel & monstrous TyrantSin setting forth on his first Travels into teWorld,Sin began his first Travels. Apolly∣on following him close at his hels▪ to see him do his business effectually, and to assist him in every enterprize; and so it fell out, just as he began his Journey, Cain and Abel were offering Sacrifices; and having intelligence of both their Dispositions, he made up to Cain's door, and there lay coching down, like a hurtful Beast, ready to devour; and secretly whispering in to his Ear, to spare the best of his substance to enrich himself; and also intimated to him, that all that he offered to the Lord was lost, and would never be rewarded; and Faith not being in Cain's House, he harkned to this cursed stranger, and did accordingly; yet he brought his Offering, least he should displease his Father Aam, who, it is thought, at that time, was high Priest, which Office, afterwards, fell to the First-born in the Family. But when Cain saw his Offering was not excepted, and his Brothers was, this Enemy being near, knocked at hs door. Cain. Who is there? Sin. Have you, Sir, any Room for a Tra∣eller. Cain. What are you?
Sin. A Friend, one that loves you dearly, and am troubled to ee how you are abused and basely dealt with, by your younger Brother. Can you bear the thoughts that he should be in the favour of his Maker, and be the only Darling of his Fa∣ther, and you slighted and contemned in this sort? Cain. By this, I cannot but think tho art indeed a Friend, and dost bear good will to me; pray come in: Ad he presently log'd him in the best Room he had: neither do I read of any opposition made a∣gainst him, by any in the He. He had no sooner receiv'd him, but immediately (by secret intigatio and Instructions from Apolly∣on, who was glad to see him entertain'd) he applyed himself to him after this manner: Sin. Let this Villain Abl, be the object of thy hatre: never speak friendly to him more in love; but let thy Wrath out against him to the uttermost: shall he be accepted; what's he; art not thou better thn him? He will ere long (though thy younger Brother) be come thy Lord and Master, and Rule ver thee; and thou shalt be made a meer Under∣ling. Cain. I am truly of your mind; my Father and Mothers Heart. I find alreay i taken fom me, and st upon this caing Supplater. I hate him as te a Toa, neither can I ndure to see him: Thu Cain was ll'd with Wrath, and his countenance ll; i. e. he shewed himself sll of Rage and Disontent. Sin. Most Noble Ci, Heir of the World; I have a Business of great Importance to imprt to thee. Cain. Sir, what is it? Sin. I am a Servant to a mighty Prince, whose Power and Kingdom, 'tis like thou hast not heard of it: And he hath a dear and cordial love for th,
and hath sent me to thee, with certain instructions, to put thee in a way to be rid of this your Canting Bro∣ther; and I will assure you, 'tis high time, for he is now at Prayer, and begins to grow more and more in favour, &c. Cain. I am Glad ro hear this News: But which way can the thing e done? Si. Sir, you will nevr be at Peace, nor have any Ground to conlude your Fahr will mak you his Heir▪ or indeed ever rgard you, untill he be rid out of the World: But if this be once done, all is your own. Cain. But how shall I do to get rid of him? Sin. Why, since there is none you can employ secretly, to do it; do you kill him; and then de∣lare e murder'd himself, being overcome with eanchlly, or blown up with Pride and self-on∣it upn his late ambitiou thghts, in aspiring after Rule and Government. Ill warrant you Sir, this will hide the Fact and you shall never be dis∣cover'd. Presently upon this motion, Conscience stept in; and spoke after this mnnr: Conscience. Sir, do not this evil Deed; he is your nly Brother and hi Blood will cry for Ven∣gance. Sin. What dost do my Cain; why dost tou mke a ? Cain. I am hinr'd by a timorous Fllow in my Hse, whom I know nt: some Body I think hath  hm hither, on purpose to be a Plague to me. Si. Reard him nt, I will undertake to stise him, d spoil his telling Tales. Go call thy Bro∣ther sth, and walk together in the ields. Be sure ary it lovingly to him, lest he mistrust thee: and I warrat you he will talk with you about Religion, and condemn your way of Worship: and though he be your younger Brother, yet will undertake to
teach thee: and if thou wilt be a Fool, and suffer it, do. Cain. I will try that, so far I am resolv'd to take thy Counsel. And immediatly, away he went and call'd his Brother forth; and they walked together in the Field. Cain. Brother, what a vast Fabrick is here? This World in which we are placed is full of great Won∣ders and excellent Rarieties; and all after our Father Adam is dead will be ours; all the Riches, I mean, and Glory thereof: and my Heart Brother, is won∣derfully pleas'd with the thoughts of it: I desire no greater Glory, nor Happiness; though I have heard my Father talk of a Future state beyond the Grave, that exceeds all things here below. Abel. Brother, this World, and all the Wonders we do behold, doth shew sorth the Glory and han∣dy Works of Iehovah our Blessed God and Creator; whose we are, and whom we should serve: for he is a jealous God; and executes Righteousness and Ju∣stice in the Earth: and is a Rewarder of all those who diligently seek him. Cain. You are a Fool; I do not believe there is any Reward for Justice and Righteousness, nor Vengeance for Vngodlness. Abel. Brother it grieves me to hear you speak af∣ter this manner, for I have had evidence of his Mer∣y, and favourable Acceptance already. I am afraid, truly, you are misled by some Enemy: The way you go in Brother is not good; Think upon the World to come. Cain. Wisdom is only with you: I see how you are swoln up with Pride; and what you aim at; leave off your talking of a World to come, for I believe none. Abel. Brother, you shew a very wicked, naughty, and unbelieving Heart; I am ashamed to hear your Discourse.
Some things of this Nature, 'tis rationally sup∣pos'd they might discourse of: And Cain being areh mov'd to Wrath thereby, took the Devils counsel, and rose up and murthered him, See Reverend Mr. Answorth upon this Matter: Thus this Tyrant and Monster prevail'd; and in a second attempt▪ over came the Fourth part of the World. But see how Sin and the Devil deceiv'd Cain: The Murther was soon discovered; for lo▪ on a sudden, a mighty Cry was heard; Vengeance! Vengeance! God, who is the searcher out of Blood, cryes, Where is. Abel thy Borther? Nothing can be hid from his Eye. Murther shall not go unpunished: The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cryes to me from the Ground. Guilt follows his Sin with the dreadful Wrath of God; And now thou art cursed from the Face of the Earth, &c. At this stroak the Heart of Cain becomes a little sen∣sible, and the hardness of his Soul, although too late, begins to soften. Alas Lord! (said he) my Iniquity is greater than thy Mercies, and my Sin is too enormous to hop for Par∣don. I confess it, and from this very moment I depart from hence like a banished Man to wander day by day without peace or relaxation. Besides, my Brothers Ghost persues and torments me, with too much severity: Even thy self, O my God, and my Iudge, chasest me away far from thy Countenance, and far from the plea∣sing glances which issue from thine Eyes. Ah then let the Sun and Moon cease to enlighten the World, and let me for ever wander amidst the Murtherous shades of Abel, and let my life pine away in obscurity: Other∣wise I fear (saith he) that at the first sight and encoun∣ter, some one may kill, and treat me according to my deserts. No no, Cain, saith God, nothing of what thou earest shall happen to thee; and if any one be so rash to attempt on thee, I will make him feel the
excess of my Wrath▪ For this effect God imprinted a sensible mark upon his forehead, which served him for a safe-guard against all the Assaults of his Ene∣mies. This done, the poor wretch went away all alone, pale, trembling,The dis∣quiets and the banish∣ment of Cain. pur∣sued by the stings of his Soul: And af∣ter some wanrings arrived in the Lnd of Ede, lyi Eastward. It was under this Clmte, and near unto Mount Li∣banus, that this fugitive at last made his retreat: There it was, where he built a City, and had by his Wife a very numerous posterity. And now Mankind with Fruitfull Race began, A little Corner of the World to Man. CHAP. VII. Wherein you have an Account, both of the Building of Noahs Ark, and of his man∣ner of entring into it: Together with a Description both of the Deluge and Drown∣ing of the old World, and of Noahs de∣scent out of the Ark, and his Sacrifices on the Hills of Armenia. Gen. 6. God for Mans sins intends the World to drownd, With Men, and Beast, and all that's in it found: But he in the Ark saves Noah, and his Seed, With pairs of all kinds which on Earth did breed. THe Decree is now given, and I see nothin that is able to with-hold an arm wholely irri∣tatd.
God repents himself for having created Man, and bestowed on him all his labour, and affection; he repents himself, and his Heart riseth at the sight and thought of this Object: In fine, being no longer able to restrain his Wrath and indignation, I swear b my self, saith he, that I will dstroy Man, and ef∣ace hi name and memory over the face of the Vniverse. I will not spare evn Bests and Birds: To the end, that what hath been a wiess, complice, or even a slave of his crime; shall also be the Companion of the pain and punishment which is ordained him. This said and done: Of so many men, who then lived upon the Earth, and of so many Families, that only of Noh deserved favour, and was freed from Shipwrack. God then calls this Holy Man, an great Ptriark, o advertise, and communiate his whole deign un∣to him. Frind, aith God, the World is in its agony, and my ustice shall put an end to this Work, whih my Love began. All my patience and delays he on∣ly served to make way for evil; and my clmency is converted into rigour; after all, my goodess is tired, and I am resolv'd to open all the Torrets of my Wrath; that the World being no longer ut a great Abyss, and a vast Sepulher, may be drowned in it sel, and that there may nver be more mn∣ion of it. Go then Noah, and build an Ark of Timbr and Planks: Make small apartments in it, and pitch it oth within and without. Let it be hre hdre Cu∣bits in length, and fifty in breat, and thirty in ight: Make thn a Winow a Cuit hgh, nd in the se contrie a dor to go in and out; dispose also Chmbrs therein, and be carfull, that the whle be ivided ino three Stis, t the nd the Body of is lre stuture may be the more commodios, and etter proportioned. Afterwards I will make my accord ad pct with thee: And thou shalt presently enter in with thy Wife, Chil∣dren,
and Cattle. Besides thou shalt conduct into this Sanctuary all sorts of Beasts and Birds, with this di∣stinction, that amongst the clean thou shalt choose seven of every spcies; and of the unclean, two only: Pair∣ing alwyes the Male and Femal, that they may repair the Earth and Air by their Copulations. This good Man performed exactly all that God had commanded him; he is already in the Ark, and he buieth himself in disposing and nourishing all these different Species of Beasts, and Birds. Seven dayes were spent about these preparations▪ and in the miraculous inclosure of this new House: At the ed whereof the Heavens opened on all side; and the Sun, Moon, and Stars, seem'd to be chang'd into Sources and Chanels, the Air and Clouds be∣came a Sea, and all the lements joyned together to make of the whoe Worl an Ocean without hoars, without bottom, without Hven, and without limit, Gen. 7. The higest Hills by Waters are o're spread, Moutains, Trees, Towers▪ in Floods lye buried, Men, Women, Bests, and Birds are quite dstroy'd, Wters possess'd all that the Land ejoy'd. Man while, where are you the unhappy Inhabitnt of the City of Enos? Poor Heirs of Cain, Children of Men, effminate Spirits, waton Souls, where are you? The Heavens fll on your Heads, the Air stifles you, the Water swallws you up, and the Earth vanish∣eth away. Fathrs, Mothrs, Children, Husbas and Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Kindred, Friends whre are you? I behold, I behold your Towers bu∣red udr the Waves: I hear your cryes, your sighs, and yor voices notwithstnding the Tepest; in fin yor floting Boies and your dying Souls ackowledg ut too lte the excess of your Sins. Ah sin, sin, these are thy spoyls, and this is the
tempest thou hast raised; sin do'st thou discern the state into which thou hast reduc'd the World, the Air, the Earth, and the Heavens? O God! Must all the Elements weep forty dayes, and s many Nights: And in fine must all Nature be in Mourning, or rather in Tryumph? Since eve∣ry where she erects Trophies, and Mountains of Water to swallow up the most shameful, and most insolent of all Vices. During this Triumph, and mourning, Noah stears his Vessel, his Family, and Troops, upon the Bil∣lows. This holy man enjoyes a Calm, and say securely over these Storms and Billows. He behols the Day in the midst of Night; and the Tempet, which sinks the whole World even as low as Hell, lifteth him up even as high as the Heavens. Range then O Noah, range upon the Waters f the Deluge, and expect the day and moment▪ wen God shall land thee in the Haven. And thou O Ark that carryest the World, and its Spoyls, behold how the Sea makes a halt at thy approah, and keeps back its suspended Waves as it were out of compl∣ency, and an orderly respect. Holy Hous of God; Fortunate Sanctuary of all Mankind! Float on with∣out Oars or Sayles, float on, for it is the Spirit of God, and the hand of the justest of men which di∣rects and Guides thee. In effect, scarce were the Forty days expired, when in an instant the Heavens dried up their sources; the air appearded most serrene▪ and the great drops of Rain were turned into Pearls and Dew as it were to give notice of the return of the Sun and Morning. At length, after seven Months contest and conflict, this wandring Island, which carried Noah and his Family, landed upon the Mountains of Armenia expecting till the tenth Month, when the other Hils shew'd their heads & tops: Forty dayes after which, this most Holy and wise Pilot, who had almost spent a whole year in the
pleasing obsurities of his prison, still victorious and triumphat, resolv'd at last to opn its window to give flight and pssage to a Grow, which indeed went forth but never returned, There needed then a purer and more faithfull Messenger: Noah chose a Dove amongst all the Birds, that she might discover whe∣ther the waters were quite retird. But this inno∣cent Creature, and aiable Spye, finding no resting place clean enough, reurned presntly into the Ark and advertis'd Noah that the waters of the Deluge were not wholly dereased. It was this news that obliged Noah to expect yet the space of Seaven dayes, after which he took the Dove again and in∣stantly gave her leave to take her Liberty and Flight. Noah in expectation, stands one while himself, n other some one of his Children, at the Window to see whether this Angel of peace would return or no. Behold good news, the Dove is returned; I have a glimse of her with the Olive-branch she carries in her Beak. Noah what say'st thou? Make hast I pree-thee▪ Receive this little Lega, and take from his mouth the earnest of peace; And if thou hast a mind t have more certain assurances, the term of seven daye will put a period to all thy desires. And as soon as the seaven dayes were expired, No∣ah cast out again the Dove to the mercy of the Wa∣ters, of the Air and Earth, where having at las sound footing, she resolv'd to abide. Gen. 8. The Heavenly Flood-Gates are sht, and the Wid Dries up the Waters, the Dove, Land doth find; The Ark's aground, Noah doth come  Sore; God promiseth to drownd the World no more.
Noah seeing what had passed uncover'd the roof of his Ark, and presently perceived the Earth, the Islands, the Haven, the Fields, and the dryedup wayes. He heard God also commanding him to depart out of the Ark with all his Company, that he might re-people the universe. And here I leave it unto the curious to imagin what pleasure Noah had at the opening of his Cage: when he saw Ea∣gles, Vultures, Austridges, and all Birds take their flight; following the track which was to carry them unto their own Climate; God knows also how the Sheep fled far from the Wole, the Lyon from the Cok, the Hare rom the Dog, which nevertheless by secret and devine charms, held in the Ark a Cor∣respondence without Noyse, War, or Enmity. In sine, during this Iayle delivery, and these separa∣tions, Noah was carefull not to do like Seafaring men, who during the Storm and Tempest, invoke all the Saints of Paradise, and make a thousand vows unto them, which nevertheless they perform not in the Haven, and calm, but by an infinity of Blasphemies, and by the continuati∣on of their Impieties. Scarce was this eminent Man (chosen by God for the conservation of the World) descended out of the Ark, but he instantly built an Altar, on which he of∣fered Holocausts and victimes in honor of him who had so sweetly, and by such marvellous wayes, con∣ducted him to the shore and harbour. It is then peradventure for this cause God pro∣miseth unto men and Noah, that the Earth shall be no more accursed for their sake: He assures them that his revenging hand shall never take the Rod so universally to scourge all sinners: that from hence∣forth Winter and Summer, Cold and Heat, Day and Night, shall have their courses, periods, motions, and vicissitudes, with order, and by regular inter∣vals.
In all the compass of our floating Inns, Are not so many Planks, and Boards, and Pins: As Wonders, Strange, and Miracles that ground, Mans wrangling reason, and his wills confound. And God no less his mighty power display'd, When he restor'd, then when the World he made. CHAP. VIII. Giveing an account of the Rain-Bow in the Heavens: Wieh God promised should ap∣pear after the Flood, as a sign that he would drownd the World no more. GOD resolving to confirm the Oath▪ and Covenant he had made with Noah, was so good and gratious as to imprint the Seal of his con∣tract in the Clouds, to the end the malice of men might never be able to efface it, and that on the contrary he might be oblig'd never to make war against them, when he should see between him and the World, those illustrious characters of Love▪ and those magnificent Articles of truce, pardon, and peace. Moreover this sign, which appeared in the Heavens, was but a Bow without Arrows; it was a resplendent Arch, and a Circle beset with Dia∣monds, Emeraulds, and Rubies; it was a chain of Gold, Silver, and Pearls; it was a Scarf interwoven with the most lively splendors and the most sensible lights of the Sun and Day. It was the portraict of Peace which appeared under feign'd and imaginary colours, or to express in a word all that can be thought, and said when we cast our Eyes on this wonder of the Air; it was the Diadem which St.
Iohn discover'd on the Head of Almighty God: and which therefore was to be for all eternity the Crown of a God, who can never change, but will everlastingly conserve this Garland and Diadem of peace. From henceforth fear no second Flood, that shall Cover the whole face of the Earthly Ball. CHAP. IX. Giveing an account of Noahs being over taen with Wine. Gen. 9. Naked and Drunk a sleep Cam, Noah saw, He mocks and jeers him against natures Law; Sem and Japheth cover his nakedness, Cam he doth curse, Sem and Japheth doth bless. IT is true; that Men were never more at Pece, the Earth never more pure, and Heaven never powred down so many savours as it shed upon the Earth and the Children of Noah. Nevertheless in the mid'st of Pleasure, Peace, Concord, Love, Joy, and all sorts of Benedictions, this poor Man, whom all the Waters of the World, and of the Deluge, could not vanquish, was drown'd at last in a Glass of Wine. O God! What scandall, what shame, what dis∣quiet, and what disorder in the Family of Noah? This good old Man, fell cold and stiff on the ground, and it is not known whether he be dead or alive. His Children run presently to help him, but as if the sne of the Wine, which their Father-had
taken too inconsiderately, had dazel'd and blinded the youngest of them; instead of casting ashes, and Water on the Flaming Coals, which consum'd his poor Father, he made a Bone-fire of Mirth, and scorn about his Nakedness: And with an unparal∣leld impudence discover'd to the Eyes of all his Bre∣thren, what Nature hath concealed. His Brothers nevertheless were more respectfull, and prudent than himself: For immediatly Piety cast veyls over their Eyes, and Love, though Blind, found out Ar∣tifices to cover an Object which was neither decent nor Lawfull to behold. It was in recompence of these chast duties, that Noh being returne out of that Abyss, into whih Wie had precipitated him, open'd the Eyes of his Boy, and Soul, and ater∣wards perceiving the unnatural impudence of Cham, he darted forth the Thunder of his malediction against his Son Canaan, beseeching likewise God to bless, and fill Sem, Iaphet, and all their Progeny, with his Graces. It was from their Posterity all the Generations of the World are descended; and they were the Persons who laid the foundation of Sodom, Ninivie, Salem, and Gomorrha; as also of so many other Famous Cities, from whence afterwards Arts, epublicks, Policies, Governments, and all the Empires of the Universe took their Rise. Noah being willing to beguile the rage, of bitter griefs that vext his feeble age; To see with Mud so many Roofes o're grown, And him left almst in the World alone; One day a little from his strictness shrunk, nd making Merry, drinking over Drunk: A silly thinking in that Honey-al, To drown his woes he drowns his wits and all. His Head grows giddy, and his Foot inents.A descrip∣tion of a Drun∣ken Man. A mighty fme his troubled brain tormens,
His idle poattle from the purpose quite, Is abrupt Suttering all confusd' and light, His Wine stuft Stomach wrung with Wine he feels, His trembling Tent all topsey turvey wheeles; At last not able on his Legs to stand; More like a foul Swine then a sober Man; Opprest with Sleep, he wallows on the Ground, His shameless snorting Trunk so deeply dround In self Oblivion that he did not hide, Those parts that Caesar covered when he dy'd. CHAP. X. Giveing a full account of the Building of the Tower of Babel. Gen. 11. To Build up Babel, Adams Race decree, As high as Heaven what passeth there to see; God gives them Diverse Tongues their thoughts to cross; One calls for Morter, and one bringeth Mosse. SO it happened not long after this that the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth feeling the Justice of their own Consciences, and they not calling upon God, they feared the comming of another Deluge, so they re∣solv'd to build a Tower, and raise the top of it even as high as the Clouds. The chief Under∣taker of this famous Structure was the Gyant m∣rod, Grandchild to that Reprobate Cham, who dis∣covered his Fathers shame. This Architect was of a proud Nature, and of a Capricious humour, be∣lieving that his enterprises, and his designs, were to be executed without the least opposition.
In effect, never was any work undertaken, and advanced with more Expedition, nor with more Ar∣dor, Zeal, and Submission. But the Grand design∣er of the World, the Architect of the Universe, and the generall Producer of all things, who takes de∣light to confound the Wisdom of the Wie, and to overthrow the Plots, and Enterpries of the most Powerfull, beholding these Fortifications rais'd neer mid-way, and being able no longer to endure this Audacity, and these presumptuous Attempts, re∣solv'd at last to overturn all these Fort, and to cast a generall confusion of Tongues amongst the Car∣penters, and Masons. This made a Tower of Ba∣bel, that is to say of Disorder, War, and Confusion. This Stately Building, this lofty Cittadell, this im∣pregnable Fort, was but a Labyrinth of deaf and dumb people, who spake without hearing one ano∣ther, & cry'd out when it was not in any mans pow∣er  help them. Bring me quoth one a Trowl, quickly, quick; One brings him up a Hammer: Hew this Brick Another bids, and then they cleave a Tree; Mak fast this Rope, and then they let it flee; One calls for Planks, another Mortar lacks, They bring, the first a Stone, the last an Ax; One would have Spiks▪ and him a Spade they give; Aothr asks a Saw, and gets a Sive: Ths crosl-rst thy prae and point in vain, What ne hah mae, ather Mars again. Nih Brlss all with tir confused yawling, In  lbour now begins appawling. In Brif, thse lrs sein the Storm arriv'd. Of Gods jst Wrath, all wek  Heart depriv'd, Forske their purpose, and like Frantick Fools, Scatter thir stuff, and tumble down their Tools. Behold the Enterprises and Designs of the World▪
Behold the Structure of the Gyants of the Earth, and the Sanctuary of their Pride. Vanity of this World! Glory of a few dayes! Phantasms of the Earth! seeming beauties! Men, what doe you think? and why I beseech you, so ma∣ny Houses, so many Castles, Cities and Villages? cast your Eyes on the Tower of Babel, and dread at least the fate of the like disastr. Finally then make your Wills, Ingrave your Epitaphs, seek out six or seaven Foot of Earth, and from henceforth think on∣ly on erecting your Tombs. Go, consult your Ancestors, your Fathers, and Masters; cast your selves at their Feet, enter into their Sepulchers, search into the bottom of their Monuments, and be not affrighted to behold so many ravell'd Crowns, so many broken Scepters, and so much Purple ser∣ving only to cover Worms. CHAP. XI. Giveing a full account of Abrahams depar∣ture out of his Territores, and his entrig into the Fields of Moreth, where he erect∣ed an Altar, and where God appeared to him a second time. Gen. 12. Abraham to obey the Lods Command, Forsaks his naive Soyl, for Canaans Land, His Parents leaves lik wise, and takes away With him, Wife, Servants, and Lot without stay. NOw it was, by the Favour and Splendor of conquering Lights,The calling of Abraham. and Victorious voices, that Abraham
was chosen amongst Men, as the Person who would be the most obedient, most faithfull, and most con∣formable to the will of God. And now it was as we may suppose by means of an Angel cloathed with an humane Body, that Abraham heard distinctly the Voice of God, which said unto him, Abraham, It is time to leave thy Countrey, and Kindred, and to abandon thy Fathers House. Follow me then, and repair unto a Land, and under a Clymate, which I will shew thee; every where I will be thy Star, thy Pole, and my Eye shall serve as a Guide, and Torch to conduct thee to thy Haven and Landing-place. Well then Abraham, get thee out of thine own County, leave all thy Friends, and break those many tyes, which Bloo hath woven in thy Veins and Heart. The Milk thou hast suck'd is from hence forth no other than pson, the Nourishment  hast received from ty Parents doth but sustain thy Body, and stifle thy Soul: In sine the Light an Brightness of Heaven cannot be seen amist the Shades and Smoak of thy Countrey. But what! must poor Abraham leave himself? O my God! why dost thou oblige him to forsake is beloved Chaldea, and why woulst thou have him separate himself from his near Kindre and dearest Friends. He wants nothing at home, and it may come to pass, that every thing will sayl him amongst Strangers. Alas! sai Abraham, must I needs orgoe Thse happy Fiels where Euphraes doh slow: Here I have spen the st par of my Age: Hre I possss a plenteous : Here have I ot me many Frinds and Fame, An by my Des attind a glorious Name: And must I hnce, an leve tis certain State, To Roam unertain ( a Runagate)
O're fearfull Hills, and thorough forreign torrents, That rush down mountains with their roaring currents To seek a countrey (God knows where and whither, Whose unknown Name hath yet scarce sounded hither. With Staff in Hand, and Wallet on our Back: From Town to Town, to beg for all we lack? T' have (briefly) nothing properly our own In all the World; no, not our Grave-place known. Is't possible, I should endure to see The Sighs and Tears my Friends will shed for me: O! can I thus my native Soil forsake? O! with what Words shall I my Farewell take? Farewell Chaldaea, dear delights adue: Friends, Brothers, Sisters, Farewell all of, But now these were motives too weak to break the Desires, and designs of a Soul which God court∣eth. It is a delicious thing to leave the streams for their source, and to forsake our selves and Friends, to give our selves unto our Maker. Abraham understood all these veryties from the very morning of his voation; and at the first over∣ture of the savours which God imparted to him, he took a Staff in his Hand, and became a Pilgrm in the World, suiciently discovering, that the life of Man is but a Pilgrimage, and that a Man shall first, or last, reach to the Port. And now methik the Sun doth not rise, but to present unto him a thousand Portraictures of those whom he hath left behind. The Moon, and the Stars, shew him by Night, and in his sleep, nothing but the Images of those whom he hath abandoned, and he awakes a Thousand times with sighs from his Heart, and tears in his Eyes, to embrace the shadows, and Phantasmes of his dearest Friends. And now this poor man is not gone a Musket-shot from the City, and scarce hath lost the sight of his steeple, but he presently resumes his former wayes,
and returns with an intent to build his  rather his Tomb, on his Chimney's March then Abraham: Carry with  Sara, who makes up the moity of  till God shall please to give thee  be the Son and be thou a Father to Farwell then for ever dear Land of  you Lot, Abraham, and Sara go joy . They are already gon, and I see  out of the Territories of Sichem to  directly unt  plains of Moret ere God a secon time appered to Abrahm, and there also he gave him both , and possession of the Land of Ca∣naan for himself and his posterity. God in Mans shape appear'd to Abraham, As he sought shelter from the Suns hot Flame. Abraham feeds God with what good heer he could, That Sara should bring forth a Child, God told. Is not this a most admirable draught of Gods sage prodigality and illustrious Magnificence, who in ex∣change of a foot of ground gives intire Worlds? He will have the Heart, and for the Heart he gives himself, and in him the Creator of Souls, and the Soul of all Hearts. Alas! what is a corner of the Earth compar∣ed with the Land of promise? What is a Countrey and City in respect of the Firmament? And where shall we find Brethren, Kindred, or Friends, without preten∣sion, interest, or any suspition of deceipt, as are found in Heaven? It remains then for all thos, who he hath taken by the hand, as he did Abraham, and led them over the Banks of Iordan, and through the shades of Hermon, o build there an Altar on which they might offer Sarifices of Love, and Acknowledgments, as Abr∣am did.
CHAP. XII.  account of the Voyages of  Sara into the Land of Egypt. Gen. 12. on, and 'tho the Age And  Terah slow'd his Pilgrimage; The rest of his he  in sine, To Canaan (since called .) ABRAHAM now leaving his own Countrey, instantly cast up his eyes, and well resolv'd to follow God every where, who served him for a Master, a Conductor, a Sanctuary and Countrey. He left then the plains and valies, to ascend the Moun∣tains, as still desireous alwaies to make new progres∣ses, and to advance without any intermission. It is he then whom I see spreading his Pavillions on the top of a Mountain, and erecting an Altar to invoke the name, and assistance of God his Con∣ductor. Listen a while, and hear from his Mouth the thoughts of his Soul! Great God! I have forsaken all for thee,A farewell to the World. and at the first command I recei∣ved, I obeyed the voice of thy most ami∣able providence; at length bhol me here out of my Countrey, fr from my own Possssins, and severed from my  Friends: I am igorant, where I am; but  only ow that I am with the. It sufficeth me, O my God, all my desires are pleased, and my Soul is ful∣ly sified. Farewell all my Kdred, farewell my Friens, frewell my Counrey. O my God! me tnk at evry stp I make, I Conquer a Kingdom, all m
Guests are Kindred, the little Hills are my Dungeons he Felds my Ciis, and all tt the day discovers to  of Earth, of Rivers, of Air, and of Seas, is my Countrey, my House, an my ple of Entertainment. And now without further dlay I leave the east to vance unto the South. Now I no wayes doubt, but our Pilgrim in his urneys, towards the South eels also more resplen∣nt ardors, and more infired lightnings, which  him with more violent, and more lively  and designs. Mean while a general amine came over all the and of Canaan▪ in so much aour hppy Traveller is forc'd to take a farther jorney, and to descend to Egypt. This Man Wholy inlightn'd by God, and who  in the Bosome of his faithfull moity, the , and most holy flames of his Love, beheld a far  the smoak of a most dangerous fire, and fearing  his dear Sara should be there either by mishap  force surprised, he thought it h to say unto her  the manner following: Abraham. Dear Wife, we are hre on the Confines of ypt: But yet I am afraid, least these Souls a thousand:  more lck than their Bodies,  not sme blemish o: . Tell them then I pray the, th thou ar,  Sister, and hat I  hy Brother▪ o th  may pe by this  Stratagem. All these forasts were not grounded on a vain , and some erroneous Judgment; for scarce re these  Doves of Chaldea, these two Turtles,  these two chast Lover tred into Egpt; but  the Pruces of Pharoh, who  the  impurities, carried away the chast Sara,  brough her to Court; whih was a Saraglio of . But however curage! corage Abraham,  no wayes doubt but the fidelity which thy Sara  ow'd unto thee will be proportionable to that
thou rendrest unto God. Lay aside therefore now all thy fears, and thou also Sara do the like, for thy Heart is a Sanctuary of Peace, and a Temple of Love, of which God alone, and Abraham keep the Keys. And now let us return to Pharaoh, who was really constrain'd to stifle his unlawfull loves in the Ocean of his miseries, and who at last restor'd to Abraham the flower, which had been cruelly wrested from him. CHAP. XIII. Giveing an Account of the agreement of A∣braham and Lot, upon the controversy be∣tween their Sheepherds. THo Holy Abraham seemed to have some just cause to commence a sute, and to wage war against Lot for the preservation of his rights, and authority, which might receive some prejudice by the strife, which arose between his Servants, and those of Lot, their design being to become Masters, contrary to Justice and reason. Which Abraham see∣ing, to prevent all the disorders which might ensue on this first design, he saith unto Lot. Abraham. Nephew I pree-thee remember, that therto I have not treated thee as an Vncle, but rather as a Brother; what a scandal would it be, if we should begin to live together either like Strangers, or else as Enemies? I had rather lose all the goods of the World▪ than that of thy Friendship: But I see clearly that these Sheepherds and mercenary Friends, are the Person who endeavour to engage our passions with their inte∣rests: it would then be more prudnly done to sever
our Flocks, than to disunite our minds, and therefore dear Nephew take what you please. of thou goest to the right hand, I will take the left: and if the left, I will pass to the right. Oh let ther be no difference between thee and me, for we are brethren. There wealth so grows that wantoniz'd withall, There envious Sheepherds broach a cruel brawll. But lest this mischief by the Groomes begun. Between their Masters might. Vnkindly run The Grave-mild Gran-sire of the faithfull there, And Ammons Father to cut off the fear, Of farther Strife, and to Establish rather Their Minds then Bodies in a League togather; Divided duly with a deep foresight, Their Flocks and Heards in number infinite: Then pleas'd and parted, both go live apart, The Vnckle kept the Mountain for his part: For's Nephew Chose the Fat and Flowry Plain, And even to Sodom stretcht his Tent and Train; And dwelling there became a Citizen, Among those monsterous nature Forceing men. My God! These are generous, and hero∣ick thoughts; to hear them,A pleasant description of the Gol∣den Age. I conceive my self to be in those golden Ages when men car∣ry'd their hearts on their Lips, Crowns of Olive-branches on their heads, hornes of plenty in their hands, their eyes in each part of their Body, and the Chains of a holy friendship as bracelets and collers of Gold; Finally where the goods of the Earth were troden under foot as common to all men. And this caused that plenty of all things was carry'd every where upon a Triumphant Chariot, casting Gold and Silver to all that would but take the pains to gather it. God himself Governed the Reigns of this fortunate Cha∣riot, and as if he had a purpose to make every man a Monarch of the Vniverse, he said the very same to them
as to Abraham, when the love of Concord and Peace had sever'd him from Lot. CHAP. XIII. Giveing an account of the Victoies of Abr∣ham, and the assurances which God gave him of many favours, and of a Posterity  numerous as the Snds on the Sea, and the Plants and Stars of the Firman. Gen. 14. Abraham rescues Lot with Men and Spoyls, rom diverse Kings whom he in Battle foils. Melchisedek rings Abra'm Bread and Wine, And Abraham payes him Tenths of Corn and Wine. BUt now who would have believed, that Abra∣ams humour, and courage▪ ad been of a valour∣ous temper, when he was only seen to take Lot by the Hand, and say unto him▪ that all his goods belong∣ed unto him, and that to avoi War he gave the World for a Field of Peace, an for an assured tsti∣mony, that he prefr'd a quiet Life before all pre∣tensions whatsoevr. Nevertheless when news was brought him, that the King of Sennay, the King of the Elmites, the ing of Ponts, and he that was commonly calle the King of Nations, were become Masters of the Field, and of the Sodomites Countrey, (who were his conserat▪) and that even after the taking o Sodom, poor Lot, who fell into their Hands, wa lead by their command into a sad captivity; at th very same instant this paceable Traveller, instea
of a Staff, took Arms into his Hands, and having selected three hundred and eighteen of his bravest Servants, he went forraging the Country, and so couragiously pursued his Enemies, that afterward being come to the confines of Iudea near the Foun∣tains of Iordan, and finding them still wholy puffed up with the success of their Victories, and loaden with their booty, he set upon them with so great courage, and dexterity, as at last he put them to a shamefull rout, and gave thm so general a defeat, that he brought back both Lot, and all his Goods, with the remainder of the spoyls of all the Assyrians, who were all either dead or put to flight. After this defeat Melchisedeck, who was King of Salem, and also high Priest of the most high, of∣fered Bread, and Wine, as a thansgiving for the Victories he had gained: Afterwards he gave his benediction to Abraham, who also presented him with the tenths of his spoyls and of is whole booty. The King of the Soomites too fayled not to ren∣der his duties unto this Conquror. After this God made Abraham come out of his Pa∣villion, and then not satisfied with having promised him a Posterity numerous as the Sands of the Sea, he shewed him the Heavens, with promise that the number of his Children should equal the Planets and Stars of the Firmament. Adding to him afterwards, that suddainly he should have a Son by his dear Sara, who should be the Heir of his possssions, and the Ornament of his Family. Notwithstanding all these Assurances and pro∣mises Sara who felt her self Barre permitted her Husband what the Law and Custome of that time allowed; and much more, for this chast Wife hum∣bly intreated, that Agar though a Servant, might share with her in his Bed and affections: But Agar was no sooner become a Mother, but she would be at the same time also a Mistress.
So Agar having been disgracefully driven out of Abraham's and Sara's House, when her wandring heart had leasure to entertain more humble and mild thoughts; God who hath fatherly tendernesses for those who place their whole strength and Con∣solation in Meekness and Humility, immediately sent an Angel to her, who promised her a favoura∣ble return; and besides, gave her assurances that shortly she should have a Son, who should be called Ishmael: In effect, she conceived, and was deliver∣ed, as the Angel had said, Abraham being no less than fourscore and six years old or near upon. But what! was it not sufficient to have even run for the spae of Ninty and ine years, and been in a Continual journey during the whole course of his life? Was it not time to make a halt, when he saw himself near the shore, and that his life was arri∣ved almost in the Haven? It imports not (saith God unto him) it is I that speak, and thou must obey: On then Abraham, pass farther, I will be a Spectator of thy Voyages, and of the Progresses thou shalt make in the way of per∣fection. Presently after, as if this frtunate and glorious Name had been the Seal of the Contract, and of the Allyance which God made with Abraham, he would render it more sensible. and add to these Cyphers of Love an Impression of Grie, and a Charactor of Blood. Then was Circumcision com∣manded not only for Abraham,Commandement for Circumcision but for all his Children▪ and Servants, and in general for all those that should be numbred amongst his Generations; provided nevertheless they were Males; for Women were exempted from the Law: Concerning the time prefixed for tho ac∣complishment of this precept, it was not to pass the term of Eight dayes; and the proposed end
was no other than mens accord and peace with God. CHAP. XV. Giveing an Account of the Charity of Abra∣ham towards Pilgrims, and the Tenderness of God towards him. GOD gives himself entirely to Abraham, and Abraham hath nothing which he gives not for his sake. He made this evidently appear, when being in the Valley of Mambre at the opening of his Tents, about high Noon, he saw three Pilgrims tann'd with the Ardors of the Sun, and tyred at least in appear∣ance with the pains and toyl of their journey: for immediately this magnificent, cordiall, and devout Man, who bore God and men in his heart, prevent∣ed these travellors, and his Soul which allwayes dis∣covered truth amidst shadows, ador'd the Majesty of one God hidden under the habit of these three Pilgrims. Afterwards he offered them his Table and House and not satisfied with these profers, he treated them in words and deeds, and then to render his duties more perfect he mixed them with so much sweetness, so much cordiality, and so much rever∣ence, that afterwards he would needs wash their feet, honouring them not only as guests, but also as Masters of his House. This Heavenly practise is in a word, as Solomon said, to cast ones Bread upon the torrent of Waves to receive it in aeternity. In ffect, these three guests whom Abraham re∣eived into his tents with so much affection, zeal,
and reverence, made a Paradise under one Pavillion; these were also Angels of Heaven, having only the shape and countenance of Men; from whence I ga∣ther, that under Ragged Garments, and a skin torn with Ulcers, and eaten up with Cankers, God and his Angels often conceal themselves; but to proceed when the crimes and execrations of Soom and Go∣orha presigly cae  upon Gods Justice, and when the blckest vapor of these horrid  ascened even as high as Heaven, this most alure Judge, who makes  detive decrees withou dn∣dence or ounsell demeaned himslf as if he durt ot doe it withot the advice of Araham. Ah wht! saith he, cn I conl my dsigns an thoughts from my dear Abraham, who is to b th Pil∣lar, of the Worl, and the Father of so mny Naios? No certainly, but I mst discharge part of my displea∣sure into his bsme, th he may shar with me in my dsigns as well as in my conttmnts. Harken then Abraham, dost thou well unerstand,  God, what psseth? For my part I hear a con∣fused . which daily sounds louder and louder; it is surely the Voice of my Justice which requires vengeance aginst the habitants of Sodom and Go∣morrha, which have rered their Cities an Abyss of horrors and abominations. Dost thou not hear these impure Mouths, these poyus Tongues, these bewitched Hearts, these fleshy Sous, these Soul-less Boies, an these ungodly Men without Faith, without Law, and without Honour? Abraham, But what my God! hast thou not Eyes whic pirce from the highest Heaven, even into the cen∣ter of Hell? And is not the least of thy glnces abl to disspate all the shadows of the Night. Why dost tho ten say ou wilt descend into Sodom, and se in per∣sn what pssth before thine Eyes. But now whe Araham himself at last behld the Lighted Torche which were to be the Instruments of this sad Incer∣dium,
the Sanctity and freeness of his Heart per∣mitted him to say. Ah! What great God! Could it possibly happen that thy indignation should be Blind, and that thy Thunder∣bolts should equally fall upon the Iust and Sinners? God of Goodness canst thou behold the innocent in the midst of punishments, without some touch of Compas∣sion? Alas Lord! Wilt thou not pardon this Criminall City, if in cse but fifty innocent Persons be found in it; is not this a Motive powerfull enough to invite thee unto Commiseration? Ah! Let it be never then said, that thy just providence, which extends it self over all the Empires of the World, hath stifled Vice and Vertue under the same Ashes. Is not this an innocent freedom, and capable of moving even the Bowels of Gods mercy? Indeed God promised him to deliver all those that were invelaped in that rime, in case there were sund not fify, but ten only worthy of pardon. But it seems the iniquity of Men is so much the more enormous, as the goodness of God is immense and admirable. And who would believe that Ver∣tue and Piety are in such sort banished from the Earth as some good Men may not be found in it? It is then for this cause God advanced towards Sodom, to chatise their Vices, and to extinguish the lust of their Women with a Deluge of Fire.
CHAP. XVI. Giveing an Account of the firing of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the deliverance of Lot. Gen. 19. In wrath approaching God shews mercy here, Sole righteous Lot must leave his Counry dear: Warn'd by two Angels which the Almighty sent, Thereby escapes Sodoms sad punishment. AND here behold the Portraict of Gods Ju∣stie, her Scepter hath not been seen hitherto in the Land of Sodom and Gomorha, but upon the Wings of a Stork, that is to say, by Clemency and Meekness. But too long have the horrors of Sodom irritated and provoked God: The night already approacheth, and there remains no day but to be∣hold two Angels in the habit of Pilgrims, who seek out Lot even at the Gates of Sodom; observe how welcome they are, and certainly, they have met with an Heart who perfectly understands the rights of Hospitality; observe what hast he makes to them, how he casts himself at their Feet, how he conjures them to spend at least one night in his House: In fine, after some refusals and Comple∣ments, he inforceth them by his charitable impor∣tunities to shelter themselves in his Lodging; they enter into it, and nothing but Feasts and congratu∣lations are seen in this House. But they were no sooner risen from the Table, and preparing to take some repose, when immediatly Sodomites came from al parts like inraged Wolves howling and trembling as if they had already felt the Agony of Death, and
the Flames which were ready to devour them. Mean while Lot is very much afflicted; for these Cyclops of Hell are come out of a Furnace of obscu∣rities with Hammers and Iron Bars in their Hand to break his Gate in a thousand pieces, to destroy Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants. Mean while the night slips away, and from the break of day, as if the Sun should have served to inkindle the Pyle of Sodom, two Angels delegated for the preservation of Lot, taking him by the Hand with his Wife and two Daughters, constrained them to depart together out of the City, advertizing them that to preserve their lives, and to enjoy the benefit they had received, they must seek out a re∣fuge upon some high Mountain, without turning their Heads or Eyes towards the unhappy Sodom, least some Whirlwind of Flames should chance to surprise and devour them. Behold then Lot much astonished: Nevertheless he conjures these amiable Spirits to afford him a retreat in a little Town not far from thence; the Angels granted all he desired, and the Village as∣sign'd him for a Sanctuary was also freed from the Flames for his sake. But as there is nothing weaker and more wavering than a Womans mind, Lot had not power enough to hinder her Head, which was filled only with Wind, from moving at the sight of the first Lightnings which preceeded this Storm; so in testimony of her inconstan∣cy she was transformed into a Pillar of Salt, as if Go intended by this exemplary punishment to leave unto over light Souls a Tragick monument of inconstancy, and a dreadfull effect of Temerity. Mean while the eavens are no longer but a live∣ly source of Flames and Fires: The Sun, Moon and Stars are so many Chanels through which God powres down upon Sodom and Gomorrha all the Thunderbolts of his wrath. The Clouds are the
Torrents of Thunder which makes a hideous noise which tears the Skyes and carries away all without pitty; nothing is seen in the Air but Flaming ob∣scurities and ardent shadows heaped upon one an∣other, which form a Hears-cloath to cover the shamefull Reliques of these loathsome Coals. The Earth on the other side is an inlivened gulph of burning Coals, which vomit forth so many Fire∣brands and Torches, as at length one would be∣lieve that the Air, the Skyes, the Clouds, and the Earth were no other than a Hell. Nothing is heard there but Clamors, Sobs, Rages, Blasphemies and roarings out. What a spectacle is it to see Men and Women with Bodies all on fire running through the Streets, their Hair flaming, their Eyes sparkling, their Mouths burning, and their Hearts filled with Sul∣phur? What a Monstrous Spectacle is it to behold an Infant in his Mothers bosom, and in his Nurses Arms like a lump of Sulphur which is consumed with the flash of a Torch? Who hath ever heard that the World was watred with a rain of Sulphur, with a Deluge of Fire, and with an Inundation of burning Coals and Flames? What Thunder, what spoyl, what desolation of Wood-piles, of Houses, and Fur∣naces? Beds, Tables, Cubbords, Gold, Iron, Mar∣bles, and Diamonds turned into Fire-brands? Alas! where are the Havens? Where is the Air? Where is the Sea and Earth, when the whole World is on Fire? Ah poor Lot! What is become of thy Wife, and where are thy Kindred, and what may thy Daughters think beholding the smoak of that Fire which devours the Bodies of their unfortunate Hus∣bands. Me thinks I see him with his Daughters in the foulds of a Mountain, where he endeavours to shel∣ter himself from these frightfull inundations, which burn and desolate all his Country. But with what
grief will Abrahams chast Heart be touch'd when he knows that the Daughters of Lot are consumed with an other Fire, and they inkindle such black Flames, as even hinder them from knowing their own Fa∣ther, or at least from treating him with that respect which Nature and piety required? Gen. 19. God Sodom and Gomorra burneth quite, Lot and his Wife do ave themselves by flight. Yet Lot doth burn with a Flame far more wild, For he gets his own Daughters both with Child. None but Abraham remains constant in his sincerity; he is still in the same place where God spake to him with so much tenderness and privacy. Faithfull Friend of God, Father of all Nations, support of men, Vice-King of the Earth, Abraham, canst thou behold this dreadfull fire without Sighs and Tears? Weep then Abraham, weep to quench these Flames; but rather inkindle some pile to swallow up these Monsters which infect the World by the con∣tagious shasts of their incestuous brutalities. CHAP. XVII. Giveing an account of the Birth of Isaack, and of the Banishment of Agar & Ishmael. Gen. 21. Poor Agar's banish'd from Old Sara's Face, With Ishmael, the wildest of his Race; Through unknown Paths they Range, till by a Spring Sitting, Gods Angel to them Ioy doth bring. IN fine, Heaven hath heard the vows and prayers of Abraham: Isaack is born, and Sara is so much
ravished at the sight of this happy prodigy that she can hardly believe what she sees. What a wonder is it to see this Child of Tears and Desires become an object of a ravishing Joy. Sara art thou afraid that the life of thy Son will bring thee death, and that the excess of a joy so little expected, will even melt thy heart? For my part I allready ap∣prehend lest the pastime of Isaack and Ishmael prove the occasion of a quarel, and that at last either the Mother or Child must be chased away: In effect, Sara could not endure the sight of Agar and Ishmael, she intreats Abraham to put both of them out of his House. But Abraham who hath the tenderness of a Father for Ishmael, cannot condescend to her desires. It seems to this good Man that the severing of Isaack and Ishmael would even cut his heart in two. There is a necessity Nevertheless of obeying the request of Sara, for God commands Abraham in this occasion to execute all his injunctions, with promise that notwith¦standing all contrary appearances Isaack and Ishmael shall be the first Seeds of a most ample and happy posterity. What pitty was it to see this poor Handmaid enter with her Son into a solitary and uninhabited Desart, and leave a plentifull House, where she had ever lived as a Mistriss? What pitty was it to see Agar and Ishmael in the de∣sarts of Bersheba with hunger and thirst, and in a gener∣all want of all the conveniencies of Nature, will not men believe them to be as it were dead in the World, and a∣live in a Tomb? What hope is there amongst Stones and Rocks? What society in the midst of Woods, where no∣thing is heard but cryes, and roarings of Monsters? What succour amidst Wild places, and out of the Road of men? What light under the shades of Pits and Caverns, where the Sun dares not approach? What means of Livelihood, where all Animals are dead? Where nothing but fright∣full Dens are seen, but aride sandes, and some old Trunk
of a Tree, without Branches, Leaves; or Fruits? What then will Agar doe, she hath no more Wa∣ter nor Bread? And mean while her life, her Love and hear dear Ishmael can no longer endure the tor∣ments of hunger and thirst; he is already constrain∣ed to stay at the foot of a Tree, and there to cast forth loud cryes; Distressed Mother, what will you do? What a happiness would it be for you to die first that you might not die twice? Sara what have you done? Abraham where are you? Ah God! What grief is it unto a Mother to see between her Arms the Tomb of her Son? Ismael hath now lost his speech, he is without hope, and Agar abandons him as no longer able to live, seeing her heart half dead before her Eyes. Farewell Ismael, farewell poor Orphan, farewell all the affections and hopes of Agar. And when any Man shall chance to pass by this solitary place, let him ingrave upon this Trunk, that here Agar and her Son found their exile, their Death, and at lengt their Monument. Gen. 21. Why Weep'st thou Hagar, 'tis not lack of Love To thee, or thine; Jhova from above, Hath so Commanded, Agar be content! That's Destiny, which thou demest Punishment. Agar what do you say? Is this the hope you repose in God? And are these the promises he made unto A∣braham? Ah! do you not know that Heaven hath Eyes alwayes open to Innocency, and the least of Ishmaels sighs is able to draw God into this Desart? In effect, when Agar was removed a flight shot, from Ishmael, as she sent forth her Cryes after the Moanings of her Son, an Angel called her by her Name, and said unto her, Goe Agar, and return to thy Son, take him by the
hand, and reanimate this little dying Body. O God! who will not admire thy sage Providence, and the miraculous conduct of thy Designs. A Dialogue between Abraham and Sara, &c. The Argument. Sarah's rebuk'd for Laughter and repents, Admiring with her Lord the great Events Of Heavenly Blessings, and resolves to be No more in Love with Incredulitie. Abraham. Now now tis with my Sarah as our glorious Guest presaged, how then my Love, my Life, my Sole delight, how cou'd it be that you durst doubt the great decree of Heaven, and with a smile, as at a tale Incredible, reflect upon omnipotence. Sara. My Lord, I own I could not then believe what now I find true as the Eternal Oracle that speak it▪ and therefore blush with much confusion, that I gave no more belief to so much Veritie. Abra. Even so you ought, and with unfeigned Tears bewaile the unadvized Laughter, you deny'd and prostrate on the Ground, implore his pardon for so great a crime. Sar. That I have done long since, and learn'd to know I am but Dust, not worthy to dispute his will who mae me and the World of Nought, and with his Word is able to reduce all things to their Original. Abra. 'Tis well resolved, nor ever must we dare displease that Majesty under whose feet bright bla∣zing Thunders burn. The God whose presence melts the Mountains, and whose Looks dries up the deep, who holds the winds in the hollow of his hand, and makes Creation tremble at his Word. Sar. If not for fear, through Love we ought with low Submission to revere that tremendious Majesty who has done such wonders for us.
Ara. Wonders indeed, and past our numbring for who can count the Endless Blessings he with plen∣teous hands has showr'd upon our heads, since first we lest Vrr of the Chaldees; nay with what fa∣vours does he Load us still. Sar. 'Tis true my Lord, his bounty has compleatly stored us with what ever we could wish to gain us high Esteem amongst the Nations of the East; so dreaded and renowned has his signal blessings rendered you that at your sight the Supl Knees of Pagans bend, and sep∣rd Moarcks court your Smile, making your Friendship te  hps of their Ambition. Ara. Nay more, he by his power inlines the roughest Naions to such Mildness for our sakes, that even Abimlech the cruelest of Men, haveing snatch∣ed you from my Arms, return'd your unstained beau∣ties without War, repenting the rash deed and begg∣ing my devotion. Sar. Happy, even wonderous hppy are all they that put their rus in him, who takes such care of those that love his Name; therefore O that Men wou'd praise the Lord. Abra. 'Tis just they should return him with un∣feigne Lips, tribute of Praise, and ever more be thankfull for the many mercys they receive, nor will we or our Children be wanting in this Duty. Sar. Indeed we ought not, for a thankfull heart is  the mighty King requires for all he gives to Mortll Mn. Abra. 'Tis that indeed beyond all ceremonies that can please him most, but see the Glorious Sun de∣clyns, and Night with her Sable Mantle waits at the portals of the Eastern skie to cloath the World in Darkness; Therefore let us to our Tent, and there er'e Slumber close our Eyes, pay our vows to him that is our Soveraign protector. Sar. My Lord, I am all obedience, for so it still be∣comes a Wife to be to him whom Heaven appoints her head.
The Application. Thus reader may you see a happy pair, Whom Heav'ns high favours in abundance share, Laying all doubts aside that so they may, Their great Creators will in all obey, Which should induce us so to imitate Their ways, that we may reach their blessed state. A Dialogue between Lots two Daugh∣ters. The Argument. Lots Daughters burn with lust and lay a Plott, To take incesteous Wine inspired Lot, The Plott takes right, and from each pregnant Womb, A Brother and a Son at  dos come. First Daughter. How is the famous Sodom sunk with cattaracts of Fire? How dreadfully the flame∣ing Storm on fearfull Wings decended, and how narrowly we escaped the sad Destruction? Second Daughter. 'Tis true we escaped by Mira∣cle, the Firey Clouds began to drop Ciconian Sulphur e're we reacht the Gate, nor could we escape to Zoar e're Sodom and Gomorrha lay in Ashes. 1. Daughter. It grieves me much for those of our relations that we left behind, but for our Mo∣ther more whose curiosity to see her Habitation blazing turn'd her to a Monument to stand the gaz of all that pass the plains. 2. Daughter. Our Father now is all the comfort we have left, and now are we again become exiles, and must still wander in strange Lands without any fix'd abideing place. 1. Daughter. 'Tis true, yet me thinks had we entered into Nuptial bands, and in our pregnant
Wombs contained the dear pledges of Conjujal Love, it would have been the greatest comfort we can think. 2. Daughter. You can not more desire that happy∣ness than I, O methinks I long to see a little smiling Boy upon my Knee! The very thoughts of such a bless∣ing transports me. 1. Daughter. There is but one way seeing we are in a strange Land and Husbandless. 2d Daughter. And what is that? O let me hear it! My Heart leaps at the sound of such a Sentence. 1. Daughter. You know our Father to drive strange cares from his aged Heart, addicts himself to Wine, and we out of pretence of kindness may urge him to take excess, and in the night when hor∣rid shades o're casts the World, one of us may steal into his Arms, and with warm beauty charm him into youthfull Vigor. 2. Daughter. But he's our Father and can that be Lawful. Know you not 'twas sin that sunk the flame∣ing Cities and disobedience that reaft us of our Mo∣ther. 1. Daughter. But that this is sin I am not well assured, however there is a necessity of raising up posterity, or else our names will be forgotten. 2. Daughter. If I thought Heavens anger would ot burn against us, I could joyfully comply with what ou say. 1. Daughter. Trust it for once, and see our Father with weary steps returning from the Field, no better night then what insues to put our design in practise, the first nigt is mine the second shall be yours, nor will he when his Heart is merry and his sences stupefied remember that my Mother i lost, but as we slide into his Arms think he embra∣ces her. 2. Daughter. Well you shall rule me, and as you direct I'll steer my course in this lov'd longed for and so important business.
1. Daughter. Then let us hast to meet him, and bid him well-come-home. 2. Daughter. Go and I'll follow with as much delight as when I traced the Strts of Sodom, and grew proud to hear my beauty praised by every breath above the Daughters of the Land. Conclusion. Lot in a Drunken Mood is twice defil'd, A Father gets his Daughters both with Child. Their charming words and burning kisses move. A fire in Age, and chage it with strange love. So in our dayes too often it is seen. Preposterous Loves have most bewitching been. CHAP. XVIII. The manner of Abrahams Sacrificing his Son Isaack, together with the remarkable Try∣all, both of his Constancy and Fidelitie, with a supposed Dialogue between God and Abraham, and Abraham and Isaack. Gen. 22. God Abraham commands to slay his Son, (To try his heart) for an Oblivion: He's ready to strike, but Gods Angel spake: Hold thy hand Abrah'm, spare thou Young Isaack. THe Faith of Abraham is excellently well dis∣coursed of by an eminent Minister of Christs, now with God, saith he. Abraham feared God, but was not afraid of God; his Faith was all tried, but not at all tired but he re∣joyced
as a strong man to run his Race; which is the more to be admired, if we consider what seeming reasonable Objections and fair Excuses Abraham might have made, when God tempted Abraham, and said, God. Abraham my Servant, my Friend: where art thou? Come forth, attend to execute my Com∣ands. Abraham. Behold, here I am, speak Lord, for thy vant heareth; I am wholly at thy Command and Ser∣vice, do with me and mine what seemeth thee good; if thou bid me go, and if thou bid me come I will come; whatsoevr thou bidst me do I will do it. God. Go then, saith God, take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaack, whom thou lovest, and get thee to the Lnd of Moriah, and offer him there as a Burnt-Offering upon one of the Mountains which I tll thee of. Araham. To this he did not, but might have pleaded▪ Why Lord, thou art Blssed in thy self, and nedest not any thing; thou dsirst not Sacrifice, se would I gie it thee; and thou elightest not in Burnt-Offerings: 'Tis true Lord, thy Sacrifices are a broken an a contrie Spirit, and that I will willingly offer; o not despise bu accept thereof. God. But saith God, Offer thy Son. Abham. Lrd  thou wilt have an Offering, all my rds and Flcks re at thy Serice: Behld (as long  ths Aruah sid to Davi) here ar Oxen for rnt Srifices, an  Instruments▪ and other struments for Woo: all thse things will I give unto  King, and the Lo m G accep it. Go. N sth God. I wl tke no Bullock out  thine Huse, nor -ats out of thy Flock;  very Beat of the Forrst is mine, and the Cat∣le o a thousand His▪  all the Fowls of  Mountains and the Wil Bests of the Fields are : If  were an hungry I would not tell thee for  World is mine, an the ulness thereof: Will I
eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? No Abraham, no, but offer thy Son. Abraham. Lord, it's true, thou art above these things, and he that offers thee Praise, honours thee; and therefore thou callest upon us to offer unto God Thanksgiving, and to pay our Vows to the most high; and Lord I am willing to pay my Vows in the great Congregation; accept of my thanks, and I will tha thee the more; receive these Vows as part of the  and I will vow and pay thee more. God. No, saith God, nothing but thy Son, offer Abraham, offer thy Son. Abraham. Lord if thou wilt have the Flesh of Man to be Sacrificed, and his Blood to be powred out, then take one of  Servants: Do not call my sins to re∣membrance and slay my Son; Good Lord spare my Son. God. No, saith God, offer up thy Son. Abraham. Lord if thou wilt have a Son▪ take Is∣mael; spare mine Isaac, Lord spare mine Isaac. God. No, saith God, take thy Son, even Isaac. Abraham. Lord he is my only Son; he hath not a Brother, nor are there any more in Sarah's Womb: Lord I beg only this, spare mine only Son. God. No, saith God, take thine only Son. Abraham. Why Lord, I have had him but a little while; if thou wilt take him, yet good Lord let mine Isaac and I rejoyce together yet a while. God. No, saith God, take him now. Abraham. But ah Lord I love him, and so to take Isaac, is to take my Life, which is bound up in th Life of the Lad; and if thou take him away, thou wilt bring down my Gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave. God. Well, said God, I know thou lovest him, but must not you love me better: Offer up this Son, this only Son Isaack whom thou lovest. Abraham. But Lord, though thou art righteous, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy Iudg∣mts▪ what wil the wicked say, wen they shall hear
hat thou delightest in Blood, and that thy Servants must offer their Children to the Lord; who will serve thee at his rate? God. Well, but, saith God, is not all the Earth mine own, and may not I do with mine own what I please; I that give may take: and therefore mind not you what the World will say, but what I say; and I say offer thy Son. Abraham. But Lord hast thou not commanded me to do o Murther, and must I now embrue my Hands in Blood nd in mine own Blood too: Oh happ me, might my Blood o for his: Oh! Isaack, Isaack, my Son Isaack; my on, my Son, would to Go I might die for thee: Oh! saack, my Son, my Son. Lord how can this stand with he Law that thou hast given me? God. Abraham, saith▪ God, such things are not first st, and then willed by me; but willed by me, and erefore just. Araham, Do not you know that I an repeal or make exceptions? 'Tis I that say it▪ hrefore do it: Who is this that darkneth counsel y words without knowledge? Gird up now thy oins like a Man; site him, kill him? Have not I ommanded thee? be couragious, and a Son of va∣our: Go offer thy Son. Abraham. But goo Lord, thou hast made this ex∣ption when thou dist shew Man what was good and asing in thine Eyes; thou woulst not ha he shoul ive his first-born for his Transgression, or the fruit of is Body for the sin of his Soul▪ but to do justly, an to ve Mercy, and to walk humbl with his God: To bey (thou sast it) is better than Sacrifice, and to earken than the sat of Lambs. God. Well then, saith God, hearken an oey: is is to do Justice, this is (oh wonder) to shew Mer∣, this is to walk humbly with thy God. A braham. Seeing I have taken upon me to speak unto  Lord, I will yet say: Lord he is the Son of the Pro∣ise, in whom thou hast said, that all the Nations of
the Earth shall be blessed: Now Lord if he die, an die a Child without Children; where is then the blessedness thou speakest of: what will become of the Blessing? God. Well Abraham, saith God▪ perform what  command, and I will perform what I promise: what will Abraham, who was once not weak in Faith, an considered not his own Body, nor Sara's, when twic dead, who staggered not through unbelief at m Promise, but was strong in Faith, and gave me Glory; wo was fully perswaded that what I promise I was able to perform, an was not disappointed o his Hope, though against Hope: Will this Abraha now call me in question? Hast thou known my Namepunc; and wilt thou not trust in me? Am not I the Lor which change not? Have I said it is, and shall it no come to pass? Is there any thing too hard for God▪ Am not I able even of Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham? Cannot I say to dry Bones Live, tho hast received him from the Dead in a Figure; an were Isaack in the Grave, could not I, who am the Resurrection from the Dead, say, Isaack come forth arise and walk, that thy Father may receive th with double joy; saying, Isaack my Son, who wa dead, yea, who was twice dead, is now alive? Therefore Abraham offer thy Son. Abraham. My dear Lord, seeing I who am but Du and Ashes, have taken upon me to speak unto thee, O let not my Lord be angry if I speak once more: If I ma not prevail (oh that I might prevail) to save Isaack live; yet let me intreat th that I may not be the Pries let not mine hand be upon him: Can I see the death  the Child? Good Lord let som other do it: Surely  cannot lif up my Hand, or if I do, shall I not wish  may wither, or be turned into a stone? Will not thes Eyes run down with Rivers of Tears? Ah Lord! I ca speak no more; my hart will break, my hand will shk send by whom thou wilt send, but let not me, Oh let  m go.
God. Yes Abraham, thou, take him thou, and go thou, and offer him thou, none but thou. Abraham. Ah Lord! Yet once more, but this once more and I have done. I am old and full of dayes, past Travail; spare me a little, let me not go so far as the Land of Moria; let it (if it must be done) be done at home. God. No Abraham, Take now thy Son, thine on∣y Son Isaack, whom thou lovest, get thee into the Land of Moria, and offer him there, no where but there. He is then all alone upon the way with his Son nd his two Servants, and he advanceth directly to Mount Moria as to the appointed place. My dear Reader, I leave unto thy imagination what paed for the space of three dayes this journey sted; repreent unto thy self, I beseech thee, hat thou art with him, whom thou dost love above ll men, thou seest him, thou speakest to him, thou rinkest to him, and sleepest with him, how will it e if at thy departure thou must see him die? And f thou thy self must present him the Poyson which  to stifle him? Husbands and Wives, Fathers and Mthers, Brothers, Kindred, A ociats, Friends, what Torments? What despairs? What punish∣ents? When you stand at the Beds Feet, where ou shall behold your dearest affections, and your ost pleasing delights in the Agony of Death, what combats,Duel of Grief and Love. and what Duels f Love, and Grief? What strength and esolutions to receive the last wors and ghs of a dying Mouth, to whih a thou∣nd and a thousand chast kisses have been given, d whose least breath was able to wipe awy all orts of sorrows? What Prodigy of constancy to ose with your Hands two Eyes which served as  in the saddest obscurities of Life, which is but o much intermingled with mourning and plea∣sure?
In fine, how can we see with out dying, an other self at the point of death? Nevertheless, this was but th image of a dying life,Martyrdom for three dayes. which Abraha led for the space of three dayes; on would swear that God had underta∣ken to make him dye ten thousand times upon thi sad way; every glance of Isaack was a mortal Javelin, which pierced his Heart, and yet he must hav him three times four an wenty hours before hi Eyes▪ there was a necessity of eating, drinking▪ and speaking with him: were not these entertain∣ments, and Feast of Death? He was constraine during the night to lay on his Breast, and in his Bosom, that Head he was to cut off with his ow Hands: was not this a murthering sleep and a crue repose? In sine, he must render all the duties of  Father to so amiable a Son, before he was to be hi Executioner, and he must needs hear almost ever moment the voice of Isaack calling him Father, wh went to mrther him. My God! What Preludes of death? What prepartion to a Martyrdom, what Dialogue of Passions? Wh affections, what dissimulations, what sorrows, wh pleasures, what hopes, and what despairs? A Fate a Son, a Priest, a Victim, Wood, Fire, a Swor Iaacks Eyes and Heart are fixed on his Father, a Abraham lost not the sight of Isaack but to behold b God. At every step this poor old Man sends a sigh  Heaven to evaporate grief, which being shut up redobls the mor. Surely my Heart even bleeds upon the ba thought of this pittifull object. Alas! How cou Abaham look on the criminal Sword which was  give the strok? Where did he carry this nstrment of Gods Justie? Me thinks I hear Isaack▪ every step saying, My Father: and Abrah aswering Son, take courage, let us go my de Child, we draw near to Moria.
O God! what vision and what approaches? Mountain of Moria hast thou no compassion, will not thy Tops, thy Rocks, and thy Stones mollifie ri∣gours, at the fight of o tragick an act, and which eems so unnaturall? Mountain of Moria become thou a plain rather than put this poor old Man, and this young Child to the trouble of ascending thy Top, where they are going to erect an Altar, and hew a Tomb. But what! Nature cannot be sensible when her God deprives her of feeling, and Moria must not have greater tendernees than the Heart of Abra∣ham. Let Abraham then perform resolutely the Office of God the Father, and lt not Isaack be ashamed with his own Blood, to mark out the way unto Ie∣sus, (of whom he was an Image and Figure) Let Abraham take his Sword to strike off Isaacks Head, and let Isaack take the Wood on his Shoulders which was provided to consume him. A Dialogue between Abraham and Isaack. The Argument. Abraham long strugling with himself at lst, His bound dear Isaack on the Altar plac'd, Acquaints him with Gods pleasure, nor denies The Lad to be a willi Sacrifice; But the drea stroak is by an Angel stai'd, When in his stead▪ a Rain's an Offering made. Abraham. In Isaack must my Seed be called, and yet here must he die; strange thoughts perplex me, yet I must oey the will of him that gave me Being, and with re∣lenless hand destroy the Son of my desire; but God will have it so, and 'tis not or rail man to dispute his great Commands.
Isaack. What means my Father by thus talking to himself! O how his Countenance dos often change▪ What cause can cause this mighty strugling in the Breast of Abraham, Father, dear Father speak, say whats the reason of this suddain Alteration: Where is the Sacrifice? You told me God would provide himself, is it through disappointment that you grieve? Nay Sir, why turn you from me, as displeased with him, you often call'd your joy, with him you use to dandle on your Lap, and seem well pleased, de∣lighting in his Innocent discourse, smiling at the prit∣ty pastime, and informing him that Kings and Prin∣ces should arise in his posrity. Abra. O me! What shall I do, Heav'ns high com∣mand on one hand urges and on the other Nature pleads, telling me Isaack is my Son, my unoffending Child, m Ages Sole delight, in whom alone I promised my self such store of true felicitie. Isaack. Nay Father, Father, speak to me, and tell me what 'tis gieves you thus: What makes these Winter Clouds sit on your Brow? Why that Mp of Sorrow in your Face? Abra. O my Child, it is a dreadfull cause, thou the Sole comfort of my Age, must here be made a Sacrifice, my dear, dear, much loved Isaack, must become the sport of Crackling Flames, and have his Ashes scattered in the Wn. Isaack. How must I die? O me! what have I done: Tell me, tell me, dear Father, have I con∣spired your Death, betrayed you to your Enemies, or with vile Slander spotted your Immortal Fame. Will you not speak? Why do's my Father thus se∣verely turn away his Eyes, and with a fatall Knife threaten the Life of his poor helpless Son. O tell me, tell me but my Crime, that I may die con∣tented! Abra. Alas! there is no Crime in thee my Son: 'Tis Gods command that urges what I here intend, the Great
mmense Creator of the World, desires thee as a sweet melling Savour to his Nostrils, that he free thee from he miseries to come, and take thee to himself. Isaack. And is it Gods decree that I must bleed? Then welcome Death. O Father fear not then to ake my Life contentedly, I'll Bleed to be with him hat gave me being. Abra. O wretched Father, that I am, I now must do a deed at which the World will blush, and all those remble who see no farther than rail Natures Eyes ermit; but as for me, the Eye of Faith gives me a prospect of much Glory in't, and that Gods promise, that in Isaack shall my Seed be called, will never fail; for though my Son expire now by my Hand, yet God can aise him soon to Life again, and Recollect his scatter'd dust, though driven into eery Wind. Isaack. Why does great Abraham pause thus? Strike, Strike, my Father; see my willing Throat's prepared to meet the stroak; Heavens Anger will kindle at this cold delay, and Burn like a Consuming ire. Abra. O Man me Faith! whilst thus with averted Eyes, I strike the fatall stroak, that penetrates my heart; mean while that wretched Isaack Bleeds, and wounds my Soul more deep than this dstructive Steel cn pierce. Yet God the mighty God of Abraham, must, must, be statisfied in Isaacks death; and thus I prove my Faith. Ah! why faulters my trembling hand? What whirlwind's this that thus disturbs the Air? What Cloud▪ involving dazling brightness is it that descends? What power in∣visible restrains me from prforming that which Heavens all glorious King Commands. Angel. Abraham, Abraham. Abra. How's this? A voice in Thunder too: O dreadfull! what amazment seizes me, and yet I'll An∣swer it? Lord, here am I, thy Trembling Servant speaks. Angel. Abraham, Abraham, lay not thy Hand upon
the Lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy only Son from him. Abra. O Wonderfull! O Goodness all Divine! God, mighty, infinite, Omnipotent, and ever with sincerst hearts to be Adored. How, How, shall I express my self in praising as I ought; a Majesty Tremendious, that still beams his Loving Kindness on unworthy me. See, see my Son, thy Life is safe, Heaven will not let thee die. Isaack. Heaven's will be done; If the Allmighty, the All-glorious King command my reath without a murmur, I'll resign what his Bounty lent me to Im∣prove for him. Abra. 'Tis well resolved my Son, but see a Sacrifice prepared; who in thy stead shall Bleed? A Sacrifice our God has for himself provided; so in the dayes to come, the Blessed Messia bleeding for lost Man, shall purge his Sins and once more render frail Mortality the favorit of Heaven. The Conclusion. The Ram is by Glad Abraham slain, and made A Sacrifice, that pleases well his God; Which done, with Isaack he returns to tell, Vnthinking Sarah all that had befell; And has his Faith imputed Righteousness, Call'd Friend of God, the chif in Faithfullness. Now Abraham is already at the foot of the Mountain, he commands his Servants away, he takes his only Isaack, he loads him with the Instru∣ments of his punishment. Let us go my dear Child, let us go my Son, let us go my Isaack, my Joy, my Hope and my Love. Father whither do we go, answered Isaack? Alas what is your desire? I indeed see the Fire and the
Sword which you carry, as also the Wood on my Shoulders, but where is the Victim, which must be offered as an Holocaust? My Son trouble not your self; for God will provide one. So Abraham still persists in his fidelity to God, he makes ready the Altar, he sets the Wood in order, he kindles the Fire, he draws his Sword out of the Scab∣bard, he takes Isaack into his Arms, he placeth him near the pile, he tyes his Hands, and puts the cover over his forehead; in sine, this innocent Lamb being on both his Knees, his Body half naked, and his Head bowed a little forward sighing sweetly without making the least complaint, or demanding any more why, ex∣pected the stroak of Death, when his Father (as it is very probable) began to acquaint him with the secret of his happy lot. Isaack my most dear Son, thou didst ask me at the foot of the Mountain, where was the Victim of our Sa∣crifice. I answered thee, that God woul provide one; his Paternal Goodness hath done it, and his will i that thou must be the Victim, and I the Priest: it is very true, that thou art the object of my sweetest hopes, and that I should look on thee as the support of my ouse; but it is in God we must place our only hope; it is he that serves for a Basis and Piller to all fortunes, and it is his sage Providence, which holds in its hands good and evil, favours and disgraces, Life and Death. Dye then cheerfully my dear Child, and rest assured that I would willingly put my self in thy place, if God had so ordained. I adore his will, and I am too happy to serve as an instrument unto his commands? As for thee my poor Son, I had very constant proofs of thy sweet disposition, and if I had not often tryed how obe∣dient and pliable thou art unto Gods will and mine, I should endeavour more efficaciously to perswade thee; but it would be fruitless, and it is from Gods goodness and thy constancy I hope for the Grace of being inabled to offer and immolate thee with my own Hands.
What can Isaack say to this? It is enough for him to assent and be silent; I yet frame in my ima∣gination, that he besought his Father to give him his Sword, that he might kiss it as the rod of the wise Providence of Heaven. I believe also he bow∣ed down his Head a little more forward to testifie that his thoughts accorded with his Heart, and that his most real affections were ready to be immolated unto God and his Father. In the mean while Abraham takes his Sword again into his Hand, and having bathed it with his tears, he lifts up his arm to discharge his blow upon the Neck of his Son. But what will be the issue, will not all the Angels of Heaven who look upon this Sacrifice put some Victim, in Isaacks place? Divine Spirits, I call on you for Abraham and Isaack. In conclusion, as Abraham had already lifted up his Arm, and was ready to dart the Thunder-bolt God had put into his Hand, the Voice of an An∣gel cryes out, Abraham, Abraham, I command thee from God not to touch the Child, and to pass no far∣ther. Ah Lord, never was Love like thine; And thy Love O God to me Surpasseth that of Abraham to thee. The word is out, poor Abraham must be gone, Must take his Isaack, take his only Son: The Son of his affections; him from whom, From whose blest Loins so many Kings must come: Even him must Abraham slay; Abraham must rise▪ And offer Isaac a Burnt-Sacrifice. God scorns the offals of our saint desires; He gives the best, and he the best requires. Abraham forbears to question, thinks not good, To reason or converse with Flesh and Blood. Begs not young Isaack's Life, nor goes about
T'object the Law of Murther, makes no doubt. He rises, rises early, leads his Son, Hastes where this Holy slaughter must be done: When God bids go, that very Breath's a Warrant; We must not linger, for haste crowns the Errant: His Servants must no further, they must stay; Private Devotions claim a private way. They must abide with th' Asses, whilst th' aged Sir In one Hand takes the Knife, in th' other Fire. The sacred Wood of offering must be pil'd On the young shoulders of the innocent Child. Oh here mine Eyes must spend a Tear to see Thee bear the Wood, great God, that since bore thee: Mistrustless Isaack, seeing the Wood, the Fire, The sacrificing Knife, begins to inquire: But where's the Sacred Lamb that must be slain? Resolved Abraham, least the Flesh should gain Too much on Nature; sayes, Not thou my Son Art he: But th' Almighty will provide us one. Where God commands, 'tis not enough to effect, But we must baulk the occasion of neglect. The Faithful Abraham now erects an Altar, Orders the Wood; what Tongue can chuse but faltes To tell the rest? He lays his Hand upon His innocent Isaack, binds his only Son: He lays him down, raiseth his Priestly Knife; Vp rears his Arm to take his Isaack's Life. True Faith is active, coves to proceed, From thought to action, and from will to deed. Before the strengthened stroke had time to fall, A sudden voice from Heaven cryes hold, recall Thy threatning Arm, and sheath thy Holy Knife, Thy Faith hath answered for thy Isaack's Life. Touch not the Child, thy Faith is throughly shown, That has not spared thine own, thine only Son. How easie is our God, and Labour, who Counts it as done, what we have will to do.
CHAP. XIX. Giveing an Account of the Death of Sara. THe most smiling prosperities often swim amidst Tears; the clearest and most serene dayes are followed sometimes by the most obscurest & dusky Nights: Bodies for Companions have their own sha∣dows, Roses are mixed with Thorns, and even the Life of Man never ends but in Death. To see Abra∣ham, Sara, and Isaack, after their deliverance, and the tryals God had of their fidelity, would not one have believed them almost immortall and exempted from all the miseries of Life? And yet scarce were they returned to their own home, but Abraham and Isaack met with a new occasion of grief for the Death of Sara. But so it is, the strictest unions must break, the sincerest friendships must have an end, and even Mrriages themselves of which God was the sacred knot, must at length make a Tragick Divorce upon a Bed which is the most common Theater of the blind furies of Death. We ought to confess nevertheless that it is a spect∣acle able to excite the constancy of a good Courage, when we shall behold this unmercifull Murdress which snacheth away Daughters out of their Mo∣thers Bosoms, and Sons in the sight of their Fathers, and Wifes between the Arms of their Husbands. In such a case, if Nature had not some tenderness, she would be unnaturall, and we must have Hearts of Marble not to be touched with some sense of grief and pitty: Abraham had then just cause to testifie by his tears, the regret he had for his dear Sara's Death; and surely since he lost so rare a blessing, well might he disconsolately bewayl it.
This mourning was not yet blameable, and he was very carefull not to doe like those, who bury all their affections in the preparation of a Funerall pomp, and who have but a shadowed meen, or else not being able sufficiently to disguise their looks, strive to hide under the Veils and shadows of a Bed or dark Chamber, the shame of their insensibility. Abraham shed more tears from his Heart, than by his Eyes, and in rendring all duties to Nature and his Wife, he most amply satisfied God, and his own piety: while he was a Pilgrim and stranger in the Land of Canaan, Sara being Dead in the City of He∣bron, he went directly into the place where his Wifes Body reposed. There he offered up his Prayers unto God, and kiss'd a thousand times those amiable reliques, wa∣tering them from time to time with his tears. He presently intreated Ephron to sell him a double Cave which was close by the vale of Mambre to in∣terr Sara in that place. Ephron is willing to grant what he asketh; but be∣ing at last as it were inforced to take a sum of Money for the purchace of his Land, Abraham became Ma∣ster of the Field and Groat in which he laid the Bo∣dy of his dear moity. It is in this monument where the most generous Woman of her time reposeth; and under this Rock of Diamond will be found a Diamantine Heart in the Body of Sara, who was a perfect pattern of Constancy and Fidelity.
CHAP. XX. Giveing an account of the Mariage of Isaack with Rebecca, and the Death of Abra∣ham. Gen. 24. The fair and chast Rebecca comes to draw, At a Well-Water, where a Man she saw, Who gifts to her in Isaacks Name presents, Which she accepts, and to Wed him consents. THis poor Man Abraham was in the Hands of God and Providence, as a feather in the Air, which serves for sport unto the Winds, and as a Planet in the Heavens, which never rests, or as a Wheel in the Water, which is alwayes turning and in a continual motion: God led him out of Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Canaan and Egypt; from thence he causeth him to return unto the Cananites, where he stays for some time in the City of Sichem, sometime in that of Hebron, afterwards in erara, and then in Bersheba, and again in Hebron, as if he could not live but in Travelling, during whose Voyages Heaven is pleased to afford him a thousand Combats, and as many occasions of Victory. In fine, after the deliverance of his Son, and the death of his Wife, he feeling himself wholy broken with old age, and upon the point of following the happy lot of Sara, resolved to seek a Wife for Isaack, and for that end he calls one of the most Faithfull Servants of his House called Eliezer, and having commanded him to lay his Hand under his Thigh, he conjured him by the name of God to seek a match for his Son in the Land of Haram.
Which being done, this wise Embassador chosen amongst the Domesticks of Abraham, began his jour∣ney to execute the designs and Commission of his Master, and departing from Bersheba he went di∣rectly to Mesopotamia carrying with him ten large Camels loaden with the rarest and most magnifi∣cent presents which were in Abrahams House. Behold him then in the City of Nachor meditat∣ing with himself upon all the readiest and most fa∣cile means to expedite what had been given him in charge. What will he do? First he departs out of the City and repairing where Women in their turns were wont to draw Water, he there rest his Camels, expecting untill Heaven should offer the opportunity he desired. During this expectation he offered up his prayers unto God, saying▪ Lord God of Abraham, cast I beseech thee some propitious and favourable looks upon the designs of my Master. This Faithfull Servant will not feed untill, He do his trust reposing Masters will. There's many now that will not Eat before They speed their Masters Work, they'l drink the more. Great God take pitty of Abrahm thy Faithfull Ser∣vant, it is by his appointmen I am in these territo∣ries, I expect here but the hour when the Maid shall come to draw Water out of this Fountain; i then, My God, thou dost give me this advice, I resolve no entreat the first which shall approach it▪ to afford me some Water to drink, if she grant me this favour, by this sign I shall presently believe▪ that it is doubtless she, whom thy holy Providence hath appointed for Isaacks Spouse. Scarce had Eliezer ended his Coloquie, when a Mal called Rebecca appeared, fair and chast as the Day▪
who carried under her Arm an Earthen Pitcher to take up Water, Eliezer presented himself, humbly beseeching her to afford him some drink, to which Rebecca pre∣sently assented performing all that Curtesie and Charitie required. The holy Scripture observes, that Eliezer very seriously contemplated all the actions of Rebecca, as being a Myrrour, in which he was to discern the marks of Gods conduct concerning Abraham and Isaack. In fine, this prudent Man chose a fit time to pre∣sent unto Rebecca some Ear-rings and Bracelets. Af∣terwards he informed himself of the conveniencies which were in the House of his Maids Parents who spake unto him. Being then well instructed con∣cerning the alliances of Rebecca, and what was in her House, seeing also that all corresponded with his desires, he threw himself on the ground to render thanks unto his God, and to adore his ineffable goodness towards Abraham. Mean while Rebecca hastens to her Parents to bring them the first news of what had passed, where∣of her Brother whose name was Laban, having taken notice, he went presently unto the Well from whence Rebecca came. Finding Eliezer, he most affectionatly intreated him to visit his Fathers House, and having conduct∣ed him thither, he immediately gave Hay and Straw to his Camels, afterwards he washed his Feet, as also the Feet of those who came with him. Then Eliezer took occasion to publish the Commission which had been given him, and the artifices he had used to bring them to a Head, and to understand whether it were the will of God that Rebecca should be Isaacks Wife. Eliezer could not doubt it, and Rebecca but too much testified by her silence that her desires con∣sented thereunto. Bathuel and Laban were also of
this opinion, and therefore they were to dispose themselves to the commands of God. The promise then of Marriage being given on both sides; Eliezer made presents to Rebecca and her Bre∣thren; after this there was nothing but Feasts and adieus to the Kindred of this new promise; briefly some Dayes must be spent in rendring those duties which Honour and Nature required. At last Rebecca took leave of her Mother and Bre∣thren, she with Eliezer and his Servants got up upon Camels, and they advanced with the best diligence they could to arrive at Arahams House. Isaack, who was allwayes in expetation, first recei∣ved the news of Rebecca's arrival. I leave to your thoughts what Ioy, what Kisses, and what Embraces. However it were, Rebecca is brought into the same a∣partment which Sara had wile she lived, and immedi∣ately the Marriage of Isaack with Rebecca was accom∣plished according to the Ordinances of Heaven, and the desires of Abraham, who after this Marriage took a Wife called Ketura, by whom he had six Children, who served to carry their Fathers Name and Blood through numerous Generations. But here by the way we may suppose Isaack to Sa∣lute Rebecca upon her first Arrival, after the follow∣ing manner, viz. A Dialogue between Isaack and Rebec∣ca upon their first meeting. Isaack. Welcome, welcome to my happy Arms▪ so made by this Embrace, my joy, my life, my love, my better part, how Gracious is the God of Abraham, in sending Isaack such a treasure. Rebecca. Alas my Lord! you make me blush to see you transported at this rate, for one not worthy of Great Abrahams Son; some Queen with Kingdoms to her dow had been more suitable than I.
Isa. Not all the Queens the Eastern Countries yield, cou'd have been half so welcome to my Arms as my dear joy, my much loved and much admired Rebecca. O thou Phaenix of the World, let not so mean a thought enter thy Breast, as to conceive thine Isaack can estem the Glittering honours black Am∣bition brings, or all the Glories that attend on pom∣peous Majesty, comparable to the warm joys of Love, that fire his Heart when his Rebecca smiles. Reb. Alas! Alas! I blush to death, if you pro∣ceed at this rate, all I can afford you, indeed is Love, and that shall ne're be wanting; my Arms shall still be open to receive you, and my Brest sare your Cares, to do your will next his that made us, shall be the height of my Endeavours, never dareing to dispute what you my Lord Command. Isa. This Humility makes thee more lovely in my Eye than beauteous Morn, or Earth when deck∣ed with her ImbroideredLivery, Innameld with ten-thousand different Fragrancys. Reb. O you value me at too high a rate, and I must make it the future business of my self to deserve such an Esteem. Isa. Esteem, Why words can ne're express the boundless love my Soul conceives, thy Name was pleasant and transporting to my Ravished Ear, e're I beheld thy pleasant Face, adorned with so much daz∣ling brightness that I scarce conceive my self on Earth: So soft, so kind, so charming, and so beau∣teous a Treasure, Sceptered Monarchs would be proud to gain, and count themselves in the possessi∣ons happyer than to command the Knees of supple Nations, when their wastfull Sword had brought the World into subjection. Reb. O you overvalue me at such a rate, that you'l make me more indebted to your tender Love, than all the Service of my life can pay. Isa. My Tongue cannot express thy worth, nor
tell the Limmits of my Love; No more then, but lets to our Bridal Chamber, that my Actions may supply my Tongues defect, and there transported on thy dear Bosome in soft Murmurs, breath my passi∣on forth till thy bless'd Womb grows pregnant with the Issue of our Loves, and thou become the soft kind Mother of a hundred Princes. Reb. My Lord I'm all obedience, what your will's my Law, as now intirely yours to be disposed of at your pleasure. Isa. Then thus we go a Heaven united pair, To Reap the joys that past expressions are; From our chast Loves, let all a pattern take, Which must the Sons of Men thrice happy make; And be a means to lift their Soul above The World, where all is Joy and sacred Love. But to proceed amongst all the Children of Abra∣ham, Isaack is the Master of the House, and Heir to all the possessions of Abraham. I leave men to think as they please in what Ocean of delights Abrahams Heart did Swim, seeing all the Graces wherewith God had filled him, I am asto∣nished why he dyed not a thousand times for Joy at the sight of Isaack and his dear Wife, who had no affections but for God, for him, and for the gener∣all good of his family. But Abraham must render unto Nature the ordinary tribute due unto her.Abrahams Death. This happy old Man, this Father of all the faithfull, this King of Nations, this incompareable Pa∣triark▪ having lived like a Pilgrim upon Earth was obli∣ged at lst to arrive at the Haven, and to die in the Arms of Isaack and Ishmael, who buried him in the sae place where his Wife was intered. When Natures health in Abraham was spent, Death doth distraine his Life for Adams rent.
His Sons do leave their Fathers Corps in Grave, Vnder an Oak where stands a double Cave. CHAP. XXI. Giveing an account of the Birth of Jacob and Esau. AT the earnest request of Isaack Heaven was obliged to grant that at last, which a long time before God had promised him; and in conclu∣sion therefore, behold Rebecca great with Child and ready to lye down. But as the pleasures of the World are not durable, so she quickly feels the ap∣proaches of her labour; They are no other than pains and throws, and her Womb seemed to be a thick Cloud of Thunders, and a Field of Battle, in which two little Children begin an intestine War against each other, which cannot end but by the Destruction of the Mother, or the death of her Children. However it were, she consulted God; and God answered her, that she bore too Nations in her Womb, and that two People should issue forth of her Bowels, one of which should Triumph over the other, and the Elder be slave unto the Younger; And Iacob though the Younger, supplanted Esau who was his Elder Brother. For this reason Iacob received his name; for as his Elder Brother was stiled Esau because his whole Body was covered with rough Hair; so Iacob was called Iacob, because at the issuing sorth of his Mo∣thers Womb he hld Esau by the soal of his Foot, to testify that he would supplant him? Is not this an early beginning to War with each
other, since in their Mothers Womb they began the intestine Duel? But what ever happens, Iacob shall be vanquisher; for Heaven is on his side, and the supplanting of Esau shall rather proceed from the Hand of God than that of Iacob. But alas! What strife? What Victory? What riumphs? When the Crowns we gain are but Roses staind with Blood, and Lawrels which wither in a moment, and transform themselves into eter∣all Thorns. It is not for this prize Iacob sought in his Mothers Womb, but he assaults and supplants Esau for the purchase of Immortal Crowns. CHAP. XXII. Giveing an account of the Education of Esau and Jacob, and the shamefull sale he made of hs Birth-right. Gen. 25. The twin-born Brothers are of different minds, Jacob loves Cattel, Esau pleasure fins In hunting, whence returning home be doth Sell his Birth-right to Jacob for Red-roath. WE need not be over much versed in Phy∣siogomy, to fotll what Esau would prove; for in hi Birth he gave so many evident gns, as we cannot be ignorant of his future incli∣nations. His Body Hairy like a Bear, could not be animated but by the Soul of a Beast. Iacob on the contrary had only the qualities of a Dove, and his Heart had less Gall than a Lamb. He
went scarce ever out of the House, and shewed so much simplicity, sweetness, and moderation, as but to see him a Man was constrained to love him. Notwithstanding Isaack had more violent inclina∣tions towards his Eldest Son: And this Love was only grounded upon Esau's constant custome in bringing him every Day some piece of Venison. However it were, the Liberty Isaack gave to Esau of running all the day long through Woods and For∣rests, was the occasion which brought him to his first misfortune: For this poor Chaser comming one day weary and Hungry from hunting, and meeting with Iacob who had cused some Pulse to be sod, he intrea∣ted him to give him a share of it; to which Iacob willingly agreeded, upon Condition he would yield up to him his right of Primogeniture. Alas!  dye for very huer answred Esau, what will this Right avail thee after my death? if it be so replyed Iacob, take an Oath that thou wilt give it me; Well, in truth then I swear it (saith Esau) and I acknowledge thee in quality of my Elder Brother: whereupon this poor wretch took immediately Bread and Pulse from his Brohers Hand, little valueing the loss he had made of the first advantage wherewith God and Nature had voured him.
CHAP. XXIII. Giveing an Account of the Dexterity of Re∣becca to procure for Jacob the blessing of Isaack. Gen. 27. Isaack Dim-sighted, Jacob takes to be Esau, deceiv'd through his minds jealousie; Jacob the Blessing gets, Esau returnes And markes the Cheat for which he Grieves and Mourns. ISaack waxing old amidst many misfortunes, insen∣sibly felt the approaches of Death, and as if his yes abhor'd to serve as witnesses to the disasters of his old age, they covered themselves with the Darkness of a lamentable Blindness. Amongst these Accident his Eyes being shut a∣gainst all the Claritie of Life, his Soul went pene∣trating the shade and Night of the Tomb. He calls Esau, and sayes to him with a pittifull Tone, Alas my Son! I am upon the Brink of my Grave, and yet I know not when I shall discend into it. This good man feeling his life to extinguish as a Lamp whose Oyl begins to fail, alled Esau, and com∣manded him to take his Quiver▪ his Bow and Arrows, and to go a hunting that  might bring him some∣thing to eat, with this promise, that at his return he would give him his beediction before his Death. Esau immediatly performing what his Father com∣manded him, Rebecca who heard Isaacks whole dis∣course, made use of her time very seasonably to do what the Spirit of God directed her. Ah! how ingenious is vertu! and how dexterous
is Love when it follows the will of God! who would believe that a Woman durst undertake what Rebec∣ca did? Her Artifies then were innocent, and her intentions very just and holy, when she disguised Ia∣cob to deceive Isaack and frustrate Esau of the bles∣sing he expected. Goe then my Son (saith she) and make choice amongst our Flocks of the two fatest Kids you shall find, I will so dress them, that I will make them sere for your Fa∣thers repast, to the end having fed on them, he may bless you before his death. But what replyed Iacob? Mother you know that my Body is not Hairy like my Brothers; I am fearfull then lest my Father touch me, and believe I intend to mock him, lay on me his malediction. But Iacob would never have been so adventurous as to undertake an action which might irritate the gooness of Isaack, if Rebecca had not relieved him in his fear, and if she had not made appear to him that her Wiles were very just, and her design most innocent. Ah! sith she, my Son, leave unto me this fear: I will preserve thee from this danger thou apprehendest, and if any ill chance to happen, I wish it may fall on me; do then boldly what I shall say unto thee. She presently apparelled him in Esau's Garments, covered his Neck and Hands with Skins which had some resemblance of his Brothers, and gave him such Bread and Meat as she knew would be pleasing to Isaacks tast. Iacob presents them unto his Father, who hear∣ing his voyce asked if he were Esau; he answered that he was his Eldest Son, and that having exactly performed all his commands, he besought him to eat of the Venison he had prepared for him▪ But what? Said Isaack to him▪ how couldst thou take and provide it in so short a time? Iacob answers, it is God who hath so dispos'd it, and made it as it
were fall into my Hands. If it be so, approach my on, and give me thy Hands that I may toch them, and feel whether thou art my Son Esu or not. Ia∣cob obeyed, and after Isaak had touched him, he saith unto him, surely this is the voice of Iacob I hear, but if I be not deceived these are the Hands and Hair of Esau I feel: Notwithstanding this doubt Isaack gave his benediction to Iacob and mad good cheer of all he had presented to him. Imagine whether Rebecca stood not watching to observe all that passed. I represent unto my self that she incourag'd Iacob with Gestures and Signs which made up a good part of this action: The time must needs seem long unto her out of the fear she might have lest Esau should come in and disturb the ourse of Divine providence, and the conduct of her prudent designs. Gen. 27. At Esau's coming Jacob is dismay'd, And to get Favour, Gifts before him lay'd: Instead of Blows, he Jacob Kisseth oft; Instead of Wrestling gives Embraces soft. Approach my Son saith Isaack, and bestow a Kiss  thy poor Father: Presently Iacob leaps on his eck, embraces him, huggs him, and layes his eyes, is lips, and mouth on him; and then Isaack thus lee him, viz. Be thou blessed then for all Eternity, my most dear , let God bstow on thee the Dew of Heaven, the  of the Earth, Wheat and Wine in abundance: Let  Nations be subject to thee, and let all the Tribe odore . Be thou Lord over thy Brethren, let them bo  Knees before thee: Let those that give thee their. nediction be Blessed; and if any one Curse thee let  be also Cursed.
CHAP. XXIII. Giveing an Account of Gods design in preferr∣ing Jacob. AND now unhappy Esau! where are the priviledges of thy Birth, where is the right of th Primogeniture, and the Blessing thou doest expect Who art thou? In vain is it for thee to say thou  Esau, and the Eldest Son of Isaack, Iacob hath supplanted thee, and when thou didest hunt he foun at home what thou soughtest abroad. Iacob sayin that he was Esau and the Eldest Son, knew we enough that in effect and according to the right  Nature, he was Iacob and the Younger Brothe Nevertheless Isaack stood in admiration even to rapture, and at first he could hardly imagin, that Icob had deceived him: but at last in the extasie his astonishment, God shewed him as St. Austin blieved, his manner of conduct in Iacobs proceedin He saw the just intentions of this unmalitious decver: And at length he discerned that the Benedicon he had given him was valid. Iacob is then the Elder Brother, and from hen forth his Brethren shall be his Servants. It is in  for Esau to ear his Heart with a thousand sighs,  to no purpose for him to lament and roar lik Lion. His sorrows and roarings may well excite  pitty in his Fathrs Soul. But this poor old Mn  no other thing to give him but some drops of Dew, and at best but some humid and clammy pours which atten the Earth.
CHAP. XXIV. Giveing an Account of Jacobs Ladder. Gen. 23. Jacob Flies, from his Brothers , away, And sees a Vision as he Sleeping lay; It is a Ladder on which Angels alk From Heav'n to Earth, whence God to him doth Talk. ISaack though blind clearly discerned what his wife pretended; and then feeling some touches of this wise hand which managed the whole business, he ommanded Iacobs presence, to give him his Bless∣g, and to express unto him his trouble to see him eprt out of his house before his death: But never∣heless since time presed him for his arriage, it as most convenient to take the way Mesopotamia to btain one of Labans Daghters for his Wife. Go then my dear Chil, said this good old Man, , and let the God of Abraham be thy Guide, during  whole Voyage▪ For my part, I beseech him to aug∣ent on thee the benedictions I have most willingly gi∣n thee. Above all I bg of him to multiply thy off∣ring, and to put thee in possssion of the Countrey where ou shalt be as a Sranger or Pilgrim. Farewell thn my mst dear Son, farwell all my Ioy, nd all the Love of my House; which said, he Kissth , he Embraces him, he  him with his Tears. everthelss Rebecca to who all Moments were longer  Days, endevoured speedily to draw him thence,  she might put him in th Equipage of a Traveller,  give him her farewell, last Esau should disturb the parture and the design of this Voyage. It was indeed
a tryall of constancy for this poor Mother, when she must leave this Son, but at last she bad him adieu, and brought him on his way after she had spoken to him some few words which issued less from her Mouth, than from her Heart. I wonder how the Father, Mother, and Son did not die upon this sad Separation. In fine, the wise Providence of God expects Ia∣cob at his resting place, and intends by the favour o the Night visibly to discover the manner of his con∣duct, and the Model of his Government. Iacob is gone then from Barsheba, and travels  alone under the protection of Heaven, and with th confidence that God would never abandon him. But what! Behold Night already sounding the retreat, and shutting up all passages to our Pilgrim,  beheld the Sun stealing from his Eyes, and the Mo giving no light but to discover to him on the Plai of Bethel a bed of Earth, and some stones to ser him for a Bolster. Poor Iacob! What Bed? Wh Bolster? What Night? And what Inn? Repose then Iacob, and spend all the Night in scurity, since God hath been pleased to Assign yo this Lodging. O happy Retreat! O pleasing Night! O delici Bed! O divine Repose? Iacob is faln a sleep, but God, who allways wateth, shewed him a Prodigious Ladder which touc the Earth with one end and the Heavens with the , Angels by turns descended and ascended  Ladder▪ and on the top God himself appeared as were supported by it. But behold indeed a strange Spectacle upo Theator of Sanctity. I am not astonished if  Iacob had taken his rest he awaked at this  bearing God in his Mouth and Heart▪ He calls Hven to witness, and protets that Bethel is the  of God where the most glorious rayes of his
are seen. Ah saith he, how venerable is this place, and how full of a holy terror, it is the Gate of Hea∣ven! And if Iacob could live a hundred-thousand years, he would have no other God, than he that appeared to him. In fine, under the protection of the Divine Pro∣vidence, Iacob pursues his design, and this was the promise made him during his Vision. Yes Iacob, saith God, I am the Lord of thy Progenitors, Abra∣ham and Isaack▪ and I will bestow the Land where hou reposst, on thy self and all thy Chilren: I will multiply them as grains of Sand which are upon he Earth· and their Progeny shall extend as far s the four Corners of the Universe. I my self will  thy Guardian during all thy Voyages, and will ring thee back to thine own House. CHAP. XXV. Giveing an account of the constancy of Jacob in the Quest of Rachel. Gen. 29. Jacob to Haran comes, a Stone there rowles From off a Well, to Water Rachels fowldes. Laban receives him kindly, whom he serves, And for his pains, his Daughters both deserves. ACOB being now wak'd out of this mysterious sleep and Divine rapture, in which God had ept him for the space of a whole Night on the ains of Bethel, he took his way towards the East, here a while after near unto a Well, he met with ocks of Sheep and Sheep-herds, of whom he en∣ired whether they were not acquainted with La∣ban,
and whether they knew not his House. Behold, at the same time a Rachel approaching, the second Daughter of Laban, who kept her Fathers Sheep, and led them to drink where Iacob stay'd. And here we may suppose Iacob thus to bespeak his fair Rachel, upon his first approches to her, viz. A Dialogue between Jacob and Rachel. Iacob. Fair beauteous Maid, the lovelyest of your Sex: How long shall I admire, and not enjoy so great a Treasure. Rachel. Alas! you see 'tis not in my power to yiell my self to your Arms, the custome of our Country de∣nies it. Iacob. Yt 'twas for you, for you my Love,  labour'd, long  Winters Stormy Blast, an Summers phig Heat, whilst all your Father tender Fks with care were tended and secured from dager by my vigilence. Rachel. 'Tis true and for your service my Sister i fallen to your share and you in her made happy. Iacob. 'Tis so, she is mine, but your deluding Father gave  to my Bed, when I expected t pass the night in transports with my beauteous Ra∣chel, for whose sake I now have undertaken  years service yet to come. Rachel. Alas must I stay seven year longer, tha cruel Father, why was I not given at first according you ha contracted. Iacob. Grieve not my beauteous fair since  your Fathers will, but give me leave to lo you at that rate, the love of you transcending the pleasures Earth afoards, will render servit delightfull, and make short the years of my insant labour. Rachel. And is your love than more to me than to Sister, it cannot surely be.
Iacob. Infinitely more by how much more thy virtues and thy beauties do excell. Rachel. Yet perhaps when I am yours, your mind will alter, and I shall be neglcted. Iacob. Never, never, thou best of Earthly blessing to you my love shall stand immoved as Mountains, firm as Rocks, and boundless as the Oean. Rachel. Could I believe such constancy in Man, I shld esteem the Sex at a high rate. Iacob. Witness all you shining Lamps of Heaven, tht nightly dance your mistick round, through the  Arhes of the Firmamet; that my passions shll ne're diminish, but you next the Ditie that I adore shall be Admired and Loved. Rachel. No more, I am confirmed, and what I urged  but to try the costancy of Heaven, befriend Ja∣cob: Isaack's Son shll be the darling of my thoughts, one else shll ever sit upon my heart. Iacob. Blessed Resolve, O now I'm happy above he World! more Rich than Laan, and in lofty ex∣ay transported beyond Expreion. Now my dayes will seem but few, and Labour will be pleasure, ince I am assured of Rachels Love. But see your Fa∣her comes, I must hence to Fil, least the spread∣ng flocks shoul wander. Take, take this dear, ear Kis as a firm pledg of my unalterable Love: An for thi time farewell my only Joy. Rachel. All joy and my bst wishes wait upon the Mn on whom my Happiness depeds. The Conclusion. Thus Jacob flying from Stern Esau's Face, Finds Comfort, prospering in every place: God guards his Chosen from the storms of Fate, And Raises those, bad men Conspire to Hate: He gives him Wives and Children, Flocks and Herds,
And saves him from bold Esau's Threatning Swords: Through all Calamities he's safely brought, To'h Heavenly Canaan that he long had sought. I know not whether the Day were far advanced: but in some part of its course where the Sun may be seen, I am well assur'd that the Eyes of Rachl did cast sorth a thousand Love Darts and lights into the Soul of Iacob. Rchel was a Aurora which marcheth before the Sun, and instantly these two Planets did that whih the Sun and Moon could not effect since their Creaion. Iacob kied Rahel, and knowing that she was his Csi, he began setly to cry out, and presently hi Eyes shd some , which ex∣pressed the excess of his contntmt. Rachl would have done the same if her yes ha been lnger fix∣ed on Iob: but she ran from thenc to avertise her Father, that not far from the House she had hap∣pily met with one of her Cosen-german, the Son of Isaack and Reecca. Which Laan hearing, went to meet and bring him to his Loging, as also to know the cause of his coming. Iacob freely de∣clared to him what hd passed; to which Laban an∣swered he was very welome, and that he reeived him as his dar Nphew, and as a part of himself▪ But for the rst, although he had a desire to enter∣tain him as his own Brother, yet he must resolve to serve and merit some wayes by his labours. Iacob had no mercenary Spirit, nor Body trained up to labour; Nevertheless of a Master he must be∣come a Servant, and learn by Serving others, more prudently to Command hereafter: He made a con∣tract then with his Uncle, and obliged himself to serve him for the space of seven years, at the end of which Laban promised to Merry him unto Rachel, the youngest but the fairest of his Daughters. The ldest which was called Lea, had a Face of Wa
which melted through herEyes, and rendred her de∣formed & Blare-Eyed: but the youngest had so many beauties and attractives, as the least of her glances had power enough to render her Mistress of Iacobs affections. It was for her sake and for the Love he bore her, that he became a Servant. Jacobs Love was not of the nature of those petty De∣vils which possess lascivious Souls, it was neither de∣ceitfull nor violent, neither indiscreet nor arogant, nei∣ther irregular nor impious, neither variable nor impu∣dent, neither capricious nor sporting, neither phantastick nor stupid, neither remiss nor unworthy of a vertuous Man: but sincere, moderate, prudent, humble, stayed, constant, respectfull, simple, condescending, equall, provident, couragious, and such as could be desired in a good Man. Iacobs Courtships were most just and holy; he lived like an Angel incarnate amidst the flames and aror of a most pure and holy affection; he excited himself to patience nd labour by the sight and upon the hopes of Rachel; and he di like those who run∣ning at Rings, fix only their Eyes on the prize pro∣posed to them; he found also no weariness at the en of his course, and saw himself upon the point of enjoying his reward after seven yars Service, which scarce seemed unto him to have lasted so ma∣ny dayes. But what! as the Hopes we repose in Men very often deceive us, so after the Wedding Night, the day discovered unto Iacob the cheats of Laban, who instead of Rachel gave him Lea. Never was any man more astonished than Iacob, who expected no∣thing less than such a Metamorphosis. He fails not to complain unto Laban of this deceit, bt for answer they told him, that it was not the custom to marry the younger Daughter before the Elder; that if he would yet for one week accomplish this Marriage with Lea, Rachel should be given
him for his second Wife, provided that he would again oblige him to serve for the space of seven years. Behold a lively Image in the person of Laban, of the deceipts and falsoods of the World, which gives Straws for Gol, Brirs for Roses, Counterfeits for true Dia∣monds, Chains for Liveryes, Bondage for Rewards, and at lst, fables, errors and lyes, which cause us to spend our lives in a detestable blindness. Ah! Iacob, Iacob, serve then not only seven dayes, but even seven years more entire, to obtain Rachel. Iacob, it suffith to love her: For in lov∣ing, every thing is animated; every thing lives, every thing prospers, and every thing passeth away most sweetly under the Laws of love▪ and since it is not for a Man, but for a Go, nor for a mortal beauty, but for an immrtl happiness you capti∣vate your self. It was no trouble unto Iacob to receive this yoak, seeing himself the posseo of his dear Rachel; he resumed the Trade he had so happily begun, and he believed that the shackles of his second service, would not be less supportable than the former. Behold him happy to see himself in a Bondage, where he was a Servant to Laban, and the Master of Rachel. All his misfortune was only because he contemned Lea which prceeded from the excessive love he bore unto Rachel. But God taking pitty of Lea rendre her consider∣able by her Fruitfulness, and by the Birth of four Sons, the first of which was called Ruen, the second Sion, the third Levi, and the fourth Iudas, which were the four principal causes of Rachels envying Lea. Rachel will dye, she sith, if no Children be gven her. What man I beseech you can bestow a savour which God hath reserved to himself? Was  then a means to make Iacob dye, seeing that
Wife asked that which lay not in his power to give her? It was requisit nevertheless that the goodness of God should aleviate the grief of this sad Mother; giving unto her handmaid two Sons, one of which was called Dan and the other Nepthalim. God immediately after shewed the same favour to the Handmaid of Lea who brought forth Gd and Asher. After which Lea her self conceived of Issachar, then of Zebulon, and at last of a Daughter called Dinah. It was by the means of these Generations God began to accomplish the Promise he had made to Abraham, Isaack, and Iacob; And it was out of these first springs issued a thousand and a thousand streams of this blood of Patriarcks, which was to overflow the fairest Lands of the Universe. At that time Ia∣cob saw the time approaching during which he had tyed himself to serve his Father-in-Law Laban. Ra∣chel nevertheless was troubled at her Barrenness: But at length God heard her prayers, and made her the Mother of a Son, whose birth effaced all the marks of her shame and dishonour. This Ioseph, this miraculous Infant, was the delight of his Pa∣rents, the glory of Rachel▪ the love of Iacob, the wish and desire of both, the support of his Family, the King of all his Brethren, the Saviour of his People, an the master-piece of the graces and favours of God. A Dialogue between Balaam, his Ass, and the Angel. Balaam puss't up with Pride, dos take his way To Moabs King; The Ass that's wont to bray; With Humane voice afright im till he see An Armed Angel urging Heav'ns decree, Who lts him pass, that Jacob blst may be▪
Balaam. How am I Honour'd? In what high E∣steem is Balaam held? That Moabs Princes thus at∣tend his Morning wake, and Kings become his sup∣plicants? Did they know what little power I have to serve them, surely they would not be Solicitous at such a rate. Alas! Alas! my Curses in this case are fruitless. Iacobs God, at whose dread Name I Tremble; frustrates all my purposes, and by his power dispoyles me of those jugling Arts wherewith I blined the delude Eyes of Godless Nations: Yet must I go and visit Balack▪ or the King will storm at my delay. Ha! Why stars my Ass? Why crods she to the Wall, the Coat is clear: No dreadfull Apparition sure does represent it self to her Amaz∣ed Eyes. How's this? The more with Stripes I load her, the more she doth Recoile: My Heart misgives. Terror sizes every part. Ha! now she's fallen, and I'm crushe: But with redoubled Stripes I'll thus revge my self. Ass. Wickd and Sin blided Man, what means this cruelty to me? Wh hve I done to thee, that thou hast Smtten me thse three times? Balaam. Ha! Aazment seizes me! What is't  hr▪ or amur deladd with te cho of sme soud rboing m the Neiouring His▪ or what stang▪ poer can th inspie a Brute with humane Voice, to sou Ault? And yt it seems no lss: Wat ave I one o the, that thou hast  me thse three tis? Where not they the words▪ Yes, yes, they were: But yt sav, I'll try agai if any urthr oud rmais: hy have! Stricke thee  tu? Ws thre no a reason for i  tou st : and O that thre were Swod In my ! or no woul I Kill the. Ass. Am  thine Ass, upon which thou  Ridde ever sice I was thie, to this day: And  ever wont to do so unto thee? Balaam. Ha! Yet again: O spendious and Amaing;
what can this speaking prodigie in Nature signifie? or to what end tends it? Sure Angry Hea∣ven forbids my further pasage, and commands my swift return, least dire destrction meet with me in the way. Was I ever wont to do so unto thee, were nt they the last words? Ay, they were: Why no thou diest not, but 'tis now too soon: Yet sure ther's something further ment by those misterious senten∣ces. O miserable me! my Eyes are open now, and 'tis too to plain: The Ass was wiser thn the Prophet. A bright Heavenly Warriour with a flaming Sword, wide wavering threatens me with present death. Wretch that I am! What shall I doe? But falling prostrate, strait implore his mercy. Angel. Balaam, wherefore ast thou smitten thy Ass these three tims? Behol I went out to withstand thee, because thy way is preverse before me, and the Ass saw me and turn'd from me these three times. Vnless she hd turne, surely now also I had Killed thee, and sa∣ved her alive. Balam. O mighty Lord spre me! poor wretched me! Who with a strange Cofusion must confess, that through ignorance I have rovoked thy Anger, and ths ind; for I knw not th thou stoodest in the wy against me. Now therefore if it displease thee, I will get me back again. Angel. No, 'tis the Allmighty God of Jacobs will, you sou'd poceed, but only the words that I shall speak unto thee, that shalt thou speak; bewar thou degress not, lest swift vengeance overake thee. Balam. How sudinly the glorious Apparition's vanih'd; now I know that Israel is bless'd; nor can my words prevail against them, nor must I Curse the chosen of the Lord, but bless them; Even so transcendant happy are all those that put their trust in him. But my Companions call, I must away, though my visit will be little pleasing to the King.
The Conclusion. The Madbrain'd Prophet goes to Balack, where He Sacrifices does with speed prepare, And blesses Jacob, which does much displease The King who gives him straite his Writ to Ease; And sends him packing to his place again, Where soon he's by the Sword of Israel slain. A Dialogue between Joseph and his Mistress. The Argument. The shameless Wife of Potiphar, whose Eyes Were full of Lawless love, no sooner spies The beautis of old Jacobs captive Son; But big with lust, she tres if he'l be won, To Act a thing that must displase his God: But finding him avers, and that he stood At distance with the sin, her love at last Turns into rage, and he's in Prison cast. Mistriss alone. What a strange Passion do I feel how my heart beats, and how my blushes come and go? O me! I am all saver so fierce my Blood boyls in my Veins, this passion must be alay'd, yet how nothing but the beauteous Hebrews Love can satisfie my desire: Wherefore then do I refrain to let him see how much I doat upon him? He's my Slave and will not sure deny me such a favour; yet methinks had he intended to be kind, he might e're this have read the language of my Eyes, perceived my eager gazings on his lo∣vely face, observed m blushes, and the many gen∣tle grasps I've given him, these not regarded makes m ear he will not yield me Love for Love, and
then O me I am miserable! But see as I could wish he comes, and now the House is still, now, now I'll tell him all my mind, and stifle this tormenting Flame no longer. Wellcome my Hebrew to your Mistriss presence, how does my lovely Ioseph do, come wave this cringing distance an be free. Joseph enters. What means the consort of my Lord, by so much kindness to her Slave. Mrs. No, no, 'tis I'm the slave, come sit, sit down my Love, 'tis I'm the Captive fettered in the Chaines, the snares of your bwiching Eyes. Jo. Ha! What is't I hear? A sovnd that makes my Hert to tremble, and confounds my every part, Mrs. O be be not so Coy, nor Frighted, but sit near my Love: Why starts the Object of my Sole de∣light? Why change his Looks? And wherefore looks my Love so wildly? Know's he not who it is that humbly sues for favour. Jo. Too wll I know, and thus wih low prostration on my Knees beg you'd urge this talk no further. Mrs. O rise! and wound me not by a denyal! How, urge no further: Sure could you perceive the passion that thus melt my Soul to tendrness, you'd not be thus averse, but pitty her whose Breast the fatal shafts of Love sent from your Eyes, burn with Incessant fury. Jo. Alas! my Master. Mrs. Your Master, what of him, he's far from home, his businss at the Court detains him from prying into the secrets of our Love. Jo. But Gods all-seeing Eyes which pierce through the Astrusest secrts, and from wich the darkst Coun∣cels are not hid behold us. Mrs. Pish, let not such vain fears keep back my Love, my much Loved Hebrew from mting my ager Joyes, and seeing transports in my Arms. Jo. Considr well, you are my Masters Wife, be∣hold my Master knows not what is with me in the
House, having committed all unto my Hand; there is no greater in the House than I, neither hath he kept any thing back from me; but you because you are his Wife. How then shall I do this great wick∣edness and Sin against God. Mrs. O stand not on this niceties, wave, wave such fond Excuses in Compassion to a Kind Indear∣ing Mistriss, who Burns, who Languishes, and must Expire, unless your kind complyance save her Life. Still, still, you shall be great, nay more then ever. Jo. I dare not Sin against my God, wer't in your power to bribe me with the Scepter of the Vniverse: Therefore lt me implore you'd name some other way that's lawfull to oblige you, and I'm all Obedient. Mrs. O 'tis not in thy power, in ought besides, to indear me to your intrest. Come, come my Joy, my Love, my Life, you shall, you shall I say. Jo. Horror and Mischief! I'll not stay, but winged with speed and resolution, leave the Tents of wicked∣ness. Mrs. O he's gone! he's gone! Stay, stay my Love, my Joy, my Life. O! Leave me not, I dye, I Languish if you take your presence from me; hard Hearted Man, and hast thou quite forsaken me? O Restless, Restless is my mind! What shall I do? Was ever Woman Slighted thus? Well Hebrew well, since I am thus rejected, and counted unworthy of your Love, I'll turn my Pasion into Mortal hate, and persecute thee with all the Malice ijured Love can form in Womans angry mind; his Garment he has left▪ I'll Charge him to have attmpted what I so intreted for, and loaded with Chains I'll have him in a Dungon layed, where Megr Famine soon shll wast his Beauty, and make him repent he was unkind to her who held him once as dear as hr own Life.
The Conclusion. Joseph, at Potiphars returns, accus'd Falsly, that he his Mistriss had Abus'd; Cast into Irons, yet finds favour there, From his Stern Ialor, God being every where At hand, to keep him from the Rage of Men, And soon's Exaulted to highstate again. A Father unto Pharoah he is made, And saves from Death old Jacob with his Bread: When fearfull Famine made the Nations Groan, So prosper those that fear the Lord alone. A Paraphrase upon the Plagues of Egypt. Israels delivery from Bondage. And Pharo's overthrow in the Red-Sea. The mighty God of Jacob loking now Vpon his sacred Covenant; his Vow He made unto the Patriarch: Hear's the Groans Of his oppressed Children, their sad Moans Sounded so loud, that he compassinate Pittying their wretched and deplored state. Snt Moses and Wise Aaon to the King, His Sons from Nilus Land with sped to bring, And that hi mighty power might more appear; He loads the Land with Plagues, with Death and Fear, Till by a stretched out hand he brought them thence, Passing the Seas whilst Waters mak a Fence On either side, and Heav'nly Beacons Light, Them over the dry dusty Sands by Night; But bardn'd Pharaoh's wrath at what was done;
Thus to his Warriours in a Rage began Hast, hast my Horses, and my Arms provide; Let all my Chariots March on either side. The Fugitives that fly us are shut in The Sea and Wilderness they are between; They soon shall know their God's to weak to save, When our devouring Swords will dig their Grave. Thus in Blasphmious boasting he prepar'd, And Arm'd with Fury followed on thm hard, Frighting the fearfull Rout, though Seas gave wy And Heav'n conspir'd proud Pharoah to dismay, For coming to the deep, and finding all The smitten Waters tur'd into a Wall; And Israel pssing in, he venture too, Though much Amaz'd for Jacobs getting through; The Storm began to rise, the Skies shoot flame, And Rushing winds from either qurter came: The Horses flounce and cast their Ridrs down, The Wheels fly off, off tumbls Pharoahs Crown. Swift Horror and Amazment every where Besets them, an in dreafull shaps apar Tenthousand Furys seem efore their Eys, And now is heard noting but wofull Cryes, For why the Roaring Billows ast amain To sill the late made Valy, wen in vain The Swiftst Horse-man sties aginst its might, In vain they Strugl, vainl urge their flight. The Coquering Waves their Strngth and Wit con∣found, Plebeans with a Moark thre are drowd, For whom, whil Egypt Grons, glad Isra'l Sings, And sends up praises to th Kig of Kings, Thir great D liverer, and Glorifie Him in his wonderous Power and Majesty.
A Dialogue between Samson and De∣lilah. The Argument. Samson the strong, the bold Philistines dread, By a lewd Woman is at last betrayd. Dlilah. O my Lord you once prosest you loved me dear as your Eyes! And that you would lay your Trophies at the feet of her you call'd so oft your joy and your delight▪ but now 'tis plain all was but flat∣try, meer dsimulating which makes it appear you love me not. Samson. Why weeps my only happiness? sure she can∣not doubt my love, since 'tis in her power to ask and have what ever her kind Soul can form. Delilah. Still, still desembling; O you men have al the Arts to make us fancy what is not, for if you loved me as you say, you would not see my tears thus unprevented, when 'tis in your power to dry the Eyes of her you have been pleased to call your love, your joy, your life, with a thousand such in∣dearing soft expressions, but your former kindness is forgot an now 'tis plain that you despise me. Samson. Despise thee! No I love thee, even to mad∣nss, would do any thing to hush thy cares, use all my force to be revenged on those tht injure thee, if any dare be so presumptious; Nay, lay my life down at your feet: But if I'm ignornt and know not whence this Storm of grief that Clouds thy beauteous face ari∣ses, how can I remove it. Delilah. You may soon guess whence, since 'tis caused by your unkindness, in not daring trust me with the secrets of your Heart, if you loved me as you say, you would not hide ought from me, as if afraid my Breast could not conceal it from the giddy Vulgar.
Samson. What is't my love wou'd know? speak and it shall be told, were it the inmost secret my large Breast contains. Delilah. You know this my meaning, I have of∣ten asked the question, and as often been deluded with pretended truths that proved feigned stories in the end; I would know from whence that migh∣ty courage springs that makes you dreadfull to man∣kind, and has so often proved fatal to the Phili∣stines. Samson. And wherefore would my love know this secret, whom God commands me to conceal, is't as you oft attempted to betray me to my Enemies. Delilah. O my dear Lord! how can such suspi∣tion sink into your mind, that she who doats upon her glorious her redoubted warriour, should act so base a pat. Samson. Was it not once or twice attempted, nor can you be ignorant by whom. Delilah. Pha, 'twas but in a way of merriment could you imagine I would have exposed you to the danger you conceived, 'twas all fancy through de∣sire to see your courage tryed that your renown might rise, and shine the brighter by my conduct. Samson. May I believe this and that nothing else is intended, if I might methinks I would not hide the se∣cret on which my life and well dos depend, from one who sits so high in my esteem. Delilah. By this tender kiss and the indearment of all past and future joys, I'll never reveal it if you deal but faithfull with her you are pleased to call your love, your Delilah, and your delight. Samson. Methinks I'm loath to tell the mighty se∣cret, and yet love charms it from me, though I tremble at the thought of trusting it in any Breast, but where it has so long been treasured. Delilah. Still, still, is it you doubt, your dear, dear Delilah, now, now, I see you hate me. Oh!
Samson. Nay, dry those tears, and take the secret though the sad relation prove my ruin. My hair, my hair, in that my strength is confined, that shorn, no more thy Samson can incounter Armies; But in strength is equal to the meanest Philistine. Delilah. And is this true my Lord. Nay, don't deceive her any more that loves you dear as life, or any thing that has a name. Samson. By all thats good, by the Tremendious Ma∣jesty that I adore, no falshood is in my words. Delilah. Now I believe thee, and am joyed to think that you have so much confidence in Woman, but come my love, let us retire that with warm kisses, and my soft embraces, I may make you re∣compence for such a favour. Samson. With willingness I fly into thy Arms, and in the midst rapture meet thy eager joys. The Conclusion. He goes and lull'd a sleep's deprived of that, The Nations had so often trembled at: Rob'd of his strength producing hair, his foes In fetters, his now weak grown limbs in close, Make him their sport till strength returns again, When midst a thousand dead himself is slain. A Dialogue between Jeptha and his Daughter. Daughter. Long live my Father, and now blessed be Heaven that ha made him Triumph over Iacobs Enemies, and trod upon the Necks of those that spoiled Israel. Father. Oh! wretched, wretched that I am, what have I done? And yet my vows are past recall. Daughter. What means the mighty the Victori∣ous Ieptha to be thus dismayed what trouble can
afflict the Conqueror, can Pagan Blood shed in so just a cause make him relent. Father. O no my Daughter, my dear comfort, and my Ages Sollace: But I hve pass'd my vows in lew of victory to offer to the mighty God, who has delivered Israel: what er'e I met first appertaining unto me and thou, unhappy thou more dearer to me than Life with ill timed Musick, art come first to meet thy wretched Father. Daughter. Great Sir be not dismay'd, but boldly keep your vows: What Glories greater then to live and dye a Virgin; all I ask is time to bewaile my Virginitie, and then dispose of me as you have vowed and longer trifle not with Heaven. Father. Thy Courage, O my dear dear Child Inspires my drooping Soul, though Tears burst from my Aged Eyes, which dry could view whole Nations Trage∣dies: take your freedom while you may, and then let Hea∣ven claim it's due; nor shll thy memory be less lasting  the World; not only famous shalt thou be in sacred Story, but yearly the Daughters of Israel shall bewaile thee on the Mountains. Daughter. O speak no more, least I offend the Great Creator of the Universe, with growing proud to be opprest with such a load of honour: Fare∣well my Father and my Lord, till two Months ex∣pire, and then I'll with obedience return to be at your dispose. Father. Tenthousand blssings waite upon my Dar∣ling Love till she return. The Conclusion. The dayes expir'd, the eautious Maid returns, And's offered up while grieved Israel mourns; Though not a Blooy Scrifice as some. Vainly believe, but spends her dayes to come, As a Recluse till Heaven is made her home.
Psal. 6.2. Have mercy Lord, upon me, for I am weak: O Lord, Heal me, for my Bones are vexed. Soul. Jesus. Soul. Ah! Son of David, help; Iesus. What sinfu Crie Implores the Son of David? Soul. It is I. Jesus. Who art thou? Soul. Oh! a deeply wounded Breast, That's heavie loaden and would sain have rest. Jesus. I have no Scraps, and Dogs must not be fed Like Houshold Children, with the Childrens Bread. Soul. True Lord, yet tolerate a hungry whelp To lick your Crumbs: O Son of David, help▪ Jesus. Poor Soul, what ail'st thou? Soul. O I  I sry, I cannot rest, I know not where to fly To find some ease; I turn'd my blubber'd Face From Man to Man; I roll from place to place T' avoid my tortures, to obtain relief, But still I am dog'd and haunted with my grief, My Mid-night torments call the sluggish Light And when the Mornings come, they woo the Night. Jesus. Sir cease thy Tears, and speak thy free desires. Soul. Quench, quench my flames, and swage these scorching Fires. Jesus. Cast thou believe, my Had can Cur thy Grief? Soul. Lord I believe; Lord help my unbelief. Jsus. Hol forth thy Arm, and let my Fingers tr Thy Pulse, where chiefly doth thy torment lye?
Soul. From Head to Foot, it reigns in every part, But play's the self-law'd tyrant in my Heart. Jesus. Canst thou Digest? canst Relish wholsome Food? How stands thy tast? Soul. To nothing that is good: All sinfull trash, and Earths unsav'ry stuff I can dig'st, and relish well enough. Jesus. Is not thy Blood as cool, as hot by turns? Soul. Cold to what's good, to what is bad i burns. Jesus. How old's thy Grief? Soul. I took't at the fall With eating Fruit. Jesus. T'is Epidemical: Thy Blood's infected, and the infection sprung From a bad Liver: 'tis a Feaver strong And full of Death, unless with present speed A vein be opened, thou must dye or Bleed. Soul. O I am faint and spent, that Lunce that shall Let forth my Blood, lets forth my life withall: My Soul wants Cordialls, and has greater need Of Blood, I (being spent so far) to bleed I faint allready, if I bleed, I dye. Jesus. Tis either thou must bleed, Sick Soul or I: My blood's a Cordiall. He that sucks my Veins, Shall cleanse his own, and conquer greater pains Then these: Chear up, this precious blood of mine Shall cure thy Grief; my Heart shall bleed thine: Believe and view me with a faithfull Eye, Thy Soul shall neither Languish, Bleed, nor Dye. Epigram. Canst thou be Sick▪ and such a Doctor by? Thou canst not live unless thy Doctor dye. Strange kind of Grief, that finds no Medicine go To swage her pains, but the Physicians Blood!
Psal. 143:2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Ser∣ant, for in thy sight shall no man living e justified. Iesus. Iustice. Sinner. esus. Bring forth the Prisoner, Iustice. Iust. Thy commands Are done, just Judge: See here the Prison'r stands. . What has the Prisoner done? Say, what is the cause Of this Commandment? Iust. He hath broken the Laws Of his too Gracious God; conspir'd the death Of that great Majesty that gave him breath. And heaps transgression, Lord▪ on trangression. . How kow'st thou this? Iust. Ev'n by his own confession, His sins are crying; and they cried aloud; They cried to Heav'n, they cried to Heaven for Blood. What say'st thou Sinner? Hast thou ought to plead, hat Sentence shall not pss? Hold up thy head, nd shew thy Brazen, and rebellious face. . Ah me! I dare not: I'm to vile and base o tread on the Earth, much more to lift ine Eyes to Heav'n, I need no other shrift han mine own Conscience; Lord I must confesse, m no more then dust, and no whit less hen my inictment stiles me; Ah! If thou arch too severe, with too severe a Brow, hat Flesh can stand; I have transgressed thy Laws, merits plead thy vengeance; not my cause. Lord shall I strike the blow. Jes. Hold Iustice stay.
Sinner speak on, what hast thou more to say? Sinner. Vile as I am, and of my selfabhor'd, I am thy handy-work, thy Creature Lord, Stampt with thy glorious Image, and at first, Most like to thee, though now a poor accurst Convicted Caitiff, and degen'rous Creature Here trembling at thy Bar. Just. Thy faul's the greater. Lord shall I strike the blow? Jes. Hold, Justice, stay Speak Sinner: Hast thou nothing more to say? Sinner. Nothing but mercy, mercy; Lord my state Is miserable poor and desperate; I quite renounce my self, the World flee From Lord to Iesus; from thy self, to thee, Just. Cease thy vain hopes, my angry God has vow'd, Abused mercy must have blood for blood: Shall I yet strike the blow? Jes. Stay, Justice, hold▪ My Bowels yearn, my fainting Blood grows cold, To view the trembling Wretch? Methinks, I spy My Fathers Image in the Pris'ners eye. Iust. I cannot hold: Jes. Then turn thy Thirsty Blad Into my sides, let there the wound be made. Chear up dear Soul; redeem thy life with mine, My Soul shall smart; my Heart shall bleed for thine Sinner. O groundless deeps! O love beyond degree Th' offended dyes, to set the offender free. Epigram. Mercy of mercies! he that was my drudge Is now my Advocae, is now my Iudge: He suffers, pleads, and sentences, alone: Three I adore, and yet adore but one.
Deutrenomy 32.29. O that Men were Wise, and that they understood this, that they would con∣sider their latter end. Flesh. Spirit. Flesh. What means my Sisters eye so oft to pass Through the long Entry of the optick Glass? Tell me, what secret virtue doth invite Thy wrinkled eye to such unknown delight? Spirit. It helps the sight, makes things remote appear In perfect view; it draws the Objct near. Flesh. What sense-delighting objects doth thou spye? What doth the Glass present before thine eye? Spirit. I see thy Foe, my reconciled Friend, Grim Death, even standing at the Glasses d; His left hand holds a branch of Palm, his right Holds forth a two-edg'd Sword. Fle. A proper sight, And is this all? doth thy prospective please Th'abused fancy with no shapes but these? Spirit. es, I behold the darkned Sun bereav' (f all his light, the battlmnts of Heav'n Shelring in flames; th Angel guarded Son Of Glory on his Tribunall-Throne; I see a Brimstone Sea of boyling fire, And finds, with knotted whips of flaming Wire, Torer'ng poor Souls, that kash their Teeth in vain, Ad knw their flame tormentd tongues for pain. Look, Sister, how the queasy-stomack'd Graves Vmit their dead, and how the Purple waves Scald their Consumeless Bodies, strongly Cursing All Wombs for Bearing, and all Paps for Nursing. Flesh. Can thy distempr'd fancy take delight In view of Tortures? these are shows t'affright:
Look in this Glass triangular; look here, Hear's that will ravish eyes. Spirit. What seest thou there. Flesh. The World in colours, colours that disdain The Cheeks of Proteus, or the Silken train Of Flora's Nymphs; such various sorts of hiew As sun-confronting Iris never knew, Here if thou please to beautifie a Town Thou mai'st; or with a hand turn'd upside down. Here mai'st thou scant or widen by the measure Of thine own will; make short or long at plea∣sure: Here may'st thou tire thy fancy, and advise With shows more apt to please more curious eyes. Spirit. Ah fool! that dot'st on vain, on present toyes And disrespect'st those true, those future Ioyes! How strongly are thy thoughts befool'd, alas, To dote on Goods that perish with thy Glass! Nay, vanish with the turning of a hand! Were they but painted colours, it might stand With painted reason that they might devote thee, But things that have no being to besot thee? For sight of future Torments is the way To baulk those ills which present joyes bewray. As thou hast fool'd thy self, so now come hither, Break that fond Glass, and let's be wise together. Epigram. What Soul, no further yet? what never commence Master in faith, still Batchelour of sense, It's insufficiency, or what has made thee Oressip thy lost degree? thy Lusts have stay'd thee.
Canticles. 7.11. Come, my Beloved, let us go forth in∣to the Field, and let us remain in the Villages. Christ. Soul. 1. Christ. Come, Come m dear, and let us oth retire, And whi the dainys of the fragrant Fields: Where warbling Phil'mel, and the shrill mouth quire Chn forth their raptures, where the Turtle builds Hr lovly Nst; and where the nw born Brier Breaths forth the sweetness that er April yilds. Come, Come, my lovely fair, and let us try These rurall delicates; where thou and I M mlt in privae flmes, and fear no stander by. 2 oul. My hearts eternal jy, in lieu of whom The arth's a blast and all the World's a bubble! ur City-man Sion is the fairet hom, But Countrey sweets are tag'd wih lesser tro∣ble, et's try them both, and chse the better; come A change in pleasure, makes the pleasure double. O thy Commands depends my go or tarry, I'll stir with Martha, or I'll stay with Mary, Our Hearts are firmly fit, although her plea∣sures vary. 3. rist. Our Countrey-man Sion (situat on high) With various object, still renews delight arched Roof's of unstain'd Ivory, Her Walls of Fiery-arkling Chrisolite, Pavement is of hardest Porphiry; Her spacious Windows are all Glazed with bright
And flaming Carbuncles no need require, Titans faint rayes, or Vulcans feeble fire; And every Gate's a Pearl, and every Pearl, entir. 4. Soul. Fool that I was, how were my thoughts de∣ceiv'd? How falsly was my fond conceit possest! I took it for an Hermitage but pau'd And daub'd with neighb'ring dirt, Thatcht at best Alas I never expected more! nor crav'd; A Tule p'd, but for a Turtles nest: Come, Come, my dear, and let no idle stay Neglect th' avantge of the head-strong day How pleasure grtes that Feels the Curb  delay. 5. Christ. Come then, my Ioy, let our divided paces Conduct us to our fairest trritory; O there w'll twine our Souls in sweet embraces, Soul. And in thy Arms I'll tell my passion stor Christ. O there I'll Crown hy head with all my grac Soul. And all these Graces shall reflect thy Glo Christ. O there I'll fd thee withCelstial Man I'll be thy . Soul. And I, hy Hanna. Christ. I'll sound my Trump of joy. Soul. And  resound Hosanna. Epigram. Mechanick Soul, thou must not only do With Martha, but with Mary ponder too: Happy's that House where these fair Sisters vary, But most, where Martha's reconciled to Mary.
Ecclesiastes 3.1 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the Hea∣ven. Time. Death. 1. Time. Behold the frailty of this slender snuff, Alas, it hath ot long to last: Without the hlp of either hief or puff▪ Her weakness knows the way to wast. Nature hath made her substance apt enough To spend it self, and spend to fast: It needs the help of none That is to prone, To lavish our untuch'd, and languish all alone. 2. Death. Time, hold thy peace, and shake thy slow pace Sand, Thy idle Minutes make no way, Thy Glass exceeds her hour, or else doth stand, I cannot hold, I cannot stay. Surcease thy Pleading, and enlarge my hand, I surfeit with too long delay. This brisk, this bold fac'd light Doth burn too bright; Darkness adorns my Throne, my day is dark as night. 3. Time. Great Prince of darkness, hold thy needless hand, Thy Captiv's fast and cannot flie: hat Arm can rescue? who can countermand? What pow'r can set thy Pris'ner free? if they could, what Close, what Forreign Land Can hide the Head that flees from thee?
But if her harmless light Offend thy sight, What need'st thou snatch at Noon, what will be thine at Night. 4. Death. I have not stay'd my patience, my quick trade Grows dull and makes too slow return: This long-liv'd dept is due, and should been paid, When first her flame began to burn: But I have stay'd too long, I have delay'd To store my sast, my raving urn. My ptent give me power Each day, each hour, To strike the pleasant Thatch, and shake the princely Tow'r. 5. Time. Thou count'st too fast: ty patient gives no power, Till Time shall please to say, Amen. Death.  thou appoint my shat? Time. Or thou my hour? Death. 'Tis I id, do. Time. 'Tis I bid, when: Alas thou can'st not make the poorst flower! To hng te drooping head till then: Thy shafts can neither kill, Nor strike, untill My power give them Wings, and pleasure Arm thy will. Epigrm. Expect, but fear not Death: Death cannot kill Till Time, (that first must Seal her patint Will) Would'st thou live long? keep time in high steem, Whom gone, if hou cast not recall, redeem.
A Dialogue between the Harlot and the Vnadvised Youth. The Argument. Words smooth as Oyl the Simple Youth betray, Whilst he to certain Ruine takes his way. Harlot. O! my Inchanting Youth, why stand'st thou Gazing thus? why at this distance, when the burning Glances of desireous beauty dart with so much Ardency and covet thy Embraces? Come be not Coy, nor Start, nor turn Aside; consider who 'tis Calls, who Courts thy Favour. Youth. What Voice is this I hear? What Female Form is it my Eyes behold? What Lovely shape is it that ths Approaches me? Harlot. Why, why this distance? Wherefore shrinks the Comely Youth? Why shuns he her that wou'd be proud to lay him in her Bosom, and with much Joy hug him in her warm Embraces. Youth. Alas! I know not why I'm thus invaded, herefore is it you persue me thus? What is't you see in me that shou'd prove so Alureing? Harlot. Come, come, these niceties they must e waved, I see you are an novice in the Arts of Love, and want to be instructed; this distance ill ecomes you, when a kind, a most obligeing lover wooes you, to be frolick and complacient. Youth. Could I but understand your meaning, I ould tell the better how to answer: But as yet I'm ig∣rant of your design, nor know I what it is you'd have e do. Harlot. All that I ask is that you would be kind,  Husband is absent, and his distance from his ha∣itation gives free scope to love. Peace-offerings I ave made, and by this kiss came out on purpose to
find to meet my lovely Youth, to lead him to my rich Imbroider'd Bed, persumed with Amber, and the Civit of Ethiopi, strew'd all with Ross, and o'respread with Gessamin; Aloes and Cynamon are scatter'd round about it, come than my joy lets loose no time, but whilst we may with hasty steps hie thither, and upon that soft recumbancy till morning take our fills of Love, where midst a thousand trans∣ports with kind kisses and low murmurs, I'll relate my passion. Youth. The words you speak methinks move rapture in me, yet I'm ignorant in the affairs of Love, and drea the combate, as not knowing how I must behave my self. Harlot. How dread, why will my joy forsake so soft a list? Will he be so fainthearted as to fly a yielding foe, who fainting with a passion tho to fierce to be withstood will melt into his Arms, whilst he may fely rie all those joys that lovers meet, and the Dame that love him more than life, be∣come his well pla'd Victim. Youth. Mthinks I'm more and more transported with the word stat remling  rough th wide Or∣gans of my Ears, and reach the  seas of life, yet something though I undrstand not wll what 'tis checks me: Nay, bids me forear and fly the offer you have made. Harlot. Alas▪ 'is Youthfull fear, just so was I possest befor I had entred loves delightfull com∣bate, long time I hoverd on its Flory Verges be∣fore I entered, but being in I suraited without con∣trowl upon the swets that nearly must in course re∣semble Heavenly joys, thn stile those conspiring fancies that wou'd ro yu of your bliss, and ca your self into my open arms. Youth. I am convinced ther's something more th words can well express in loves transporting happyness a ing so generally coveted by man, therefore laying
side all other thoughts, I resolutely throw my self ino your kind embraces to be at your dispose. Harlot. Spoke like a lover, and now will we fly with all the Wings of love to my retirement, where my joy shall find far more than he with rea∣son could expect: There, there my Snowy Arms shall twine about him like the clasping Ivy, whilst with a declyning head he pants upon my riseing Breasts and rifles all the sweets of love. The Conclusion. She has prevail'd the Youth, she has insnar'd In those dark Nets, she for his Soul prepar'd, Whilst he pursueing falls deluding joys, Amidst his revels, his own Soul destroys. So to the snare unthinking Birds still flye: So goes the Ox where he must surely dye. A Dialogue between Jonah and the Mariners. The Argument. Jonah supposing though in vain, to flye From Gods dread presence, his all-seeing Eye. Takes shiping; but the dreadfull Storms preven His disobedience, when a Whale is sent To take him in, when cast into the Sea, And cast him on the Coast of Niniveh. 1 Mariner. O what prodigeous storms arise in the dark Ai what tracks of fre appear, how loudly roar the fighting Winds, and what a hight mount up the brivy Waves, whilst black faced terror does dis∣use it self throughout the Ocean, no Sun nor Moon appears to cheer us with their light, no Star to guide us in our course. 2. Mariner. 'Tis true the danger's great that the wild Ocean teems with all; uncertain 'tis what Wind rough East or West we now must yield uto, the Clouds
and Skies express the South-winds rage, the murmuring Seas the North-winds fury, speak not safe nor Ship∣wrack, can we reach the port? 1. Mariner. See, see, the glareing lightning seems to set the Waves on Fire, whilst Heaven powrs down its cattaracts of Rain, no Fire but that in such a Storm could live, how are we born by Winds and Seas fell rage, up to the trembling Pole, and down again to Accharons deep cave. 2. Mariner. Tat clap of Thunder rent the Main∣mast, and has born it by the ord, the shrouds are rent, and now the leaking Vessel sucks the Waves apace, ll hlp is vain, unless the powr that rules the Winds and Seas, with speed call back his angry Messengers, and still th boistrous Flood. 1 Mariner. Yet let's use our utmost skill, no hand must now be unimploy'd to save our lives. Cast, cast the Carg forth, lighten the Vessel, and per∣haps she then may weather the rough Tempest; so, so my Lads, come over with it all. 2. Mariner. Now this is done the danger is never the ess, the Maisen is shivered, and the Rudders rent, the searchingWaves supplis the weight of what we have cast forth, no safety is expected from our lbour, for meiks I see grim death stand a dncing on the angry Billows and each yauning surge expose wide Graves to my amazd sight, no hope remains but what we can expect from prayer, then with prostration let each call upon his God, and seck for sfety, from the angry Deitie, perhaps he may relent and bi the Winds be still. Ha, see her's one regardless soring on the brink of ruin. Rose, rouse thou drowsy wretch and call upon thy God. Ionah. Whose that disturbs me with loud cla∣mour, is't not night the time that weary mortals should repose. 1. Mariner. 'Tis true, but know before many mo∣ments pss we are no more, death, horrid death is hasting  Lives, the Ship is sinking, all our skill to
Ionah. How! then is Death so near? Oh! now I hear the Storm, the fighting Winds, and ratling Thunder shivering the swolen Clouds, and feel the heaving Ocean toos the labouring Bark. 2. Mar. Yes, yes, too well we hear the like, but for whose cause is all this wrath of Skyes; sure Angry Heaven wou'd not destroy us unless some mighty Sin gave provocation. Come then and let us cast each Man his Lot, that we may find who has transgrest. 1. Mar. Agreed, agreed. Ha! on the Stranger it is fallen: tell, O tell what thou hast done, and who thou art? Jonah. I am a Hebrew that fled from the Face of him that mae the Vniverse, who lives for ever, and is only God in Heaven and Earth; who rouses or makes still the Seas at pleasure: 'Tis I, 'tis I that have occa∣siond all that threatens you; no way there is for safety, but by casting me into the Swelling Flood. 2. Mar. O wonderfull! But how shall we then Answer for your Blood? Let not the God whom you Aore impute to us, if in this our great necessitie we do a deed we shall hereafter blush to own; therefore we'll try. Jonah. In vain you strive to get a shore: nor is there safety but in what I have advised. 1. Mar. Then lay not Lord, the blood of Inno∣cence, the blood of him that ne're offened us, to our sad charge; if thus we give him to the Waves, seeing we have no other way to save our lives. 2. Mar. So now he's doust in the Rough Billows: Ha! a monstrous Whale has suck'd him in, an now the Winds are still, the Ocean leaves to Rage: the Clouds are chst away, bright day appears; and all our Leaks are stop'd by Miracle. 1. Mar. 'Tis true, though wonderous: This was sure some Homicide, or Altar Robber, that thus pro∣voke the Angry Powers: but see we have with safe∣ty reach'd the wish'd for port.
The Conclusion. Jonah cast Over-baord, soon finds a Tomb In a dread Fishes huge insatiate Womb; Who three dayes bearing him from Coast to Coast; Him on dry Land with horrid Roaring tost. When he to Nineveh do's hast and cry Against them for their great Iniquity; Who concious of their Guilt, bewaile their Sin, And blunt God's Anger er'e their woes begin. At which the Prophet being displeas'd, the Lord Shows him his folly, by a sensless ourd. A Dialogue between Nebuchadnezzar, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. The Argument. Long tempted though in vain, good Men at last Are by the Tyrant boud in Fetters fast; Doomd to a iery Trall for his sake Who Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all did make. Nebuchadnezzar. How's this, can what I hear be true? dare ye you preverse Captives still deny to fall on bended Knees and kiss the ground, when you approach the Shrive of great Diana? Know you not she is a Goddess by your King ador'd, and humbly sought unto in all Events of Peace and War? Shadrach. We know no God nor Goddess but the God of Jacob, whom with fear and Rverence we Serve, and to no other dare we, can we, will we bow. Neb. What Insolence is this, is this an Answer fitting to return a Monark? Know you not the great decree that is unalterably past, and that your Lives are in my Hands.? Meshach. All this w know, nor wou'd not, could we help it, disobey or disoblige the King; but in the thing be now requres, we dare not be complyat. The mighty God, in whose dread Presence now we stand, must be
Obeyed rather than Man; we must not Rob him of his Honour and give it to an other. Neb. And these are your Resolves, you will not Worship at the shrine of Gold I have set up? but dare preversly break the firm decree Established by the Princes. Abed-nego. Our great Resolves, O King are past, and here we stand, do with us as you please: Neb. Wretches, vile Slaves, whom I exaulted to heights of honour, in hopes you would comply with my Commands. How dare you trifle with a Mo∣narck at this rate, when Death and Horrour sit up∣on his frowns? I have been heitherto placeable mild, which makes you yet more obstinate: where∣fore know that now all mercies Banish'd from my Brest; in crackling flames you shall be broiled alive, the fury of the fiery Furnace shall plainly speak the Anger I conceive: and who's then that God that shall deliver you out of my strong hands. Shad. Your Anger, mighty Monarck, frights us not▪ nor are we carefull to reply: For if the mighty God whom we Adore, the God who made all things, and  whose will the World and all that move in it depend,  let us fall to Glorifie his Name; and in's Eternal Wis∣dom thinks it not convenient to rescue us from the devour∣ing flames; know not withstanding, we'll patiently ex∣pire for his dear sake, rather than prostrate our selves before base Idols, the vain work of mortal hands. Neb. Horror and Death! her's nsolence beyond degree: Heat, heat the burning Furnace with a Seavenfold Fire, and cast them instantly into the flames, that I may glut my well pleased Eyes to see them fry, and that their cryes may prove sweet Mu∣sick to my Ears; bind them in all their Gaitie to add more fuel to the Flames; and that the terror may b more gird every art with strongest Chains, tha they may be exposs'd the better to the circling Fires Meshach. We smile to see a Monarck storm
against those that are regardless of his Rage, and stand prepared to bear what er'e his fury can inflict; though we in ought have not transgrest against him. Neb. My Gards, why are you slow in executing my Commands? He dyes that disobeys a moment longe: So hence with e'm, whilst I and my Nobles follow to behold the Spectacle. The Conclusion. In flames the Servants of Jehovah's Cast, Their Chains fall off that lately bound them fast, Whilst the sharp Element do's loose it's heat, A whistling wind makes it a pleas'd retreat: The Execution that, that day was seen, Was on the Men that durst to cast them in: God saved his Chosen. And his Angels sent The Monarcks Page to frustrate and prevent Whom be Amaz'd beholds to walk in Fire, With those that were the subject of his Ire; Calling them forth, on them he finds no harm, The gentle  their Garments did not warm; Which strange stupndious great deliverance Converts his Rage to Love, and do's advance, Jehovah's worth for the Kings decree, Forbis loud to Praise to other Deitie. A Dialogue between Darius and Daniel. The Argument. Daniel through envy is against the mind Of great Darius in a Den confin'd, With hungry Lons who d him no harm, Gods Angel dos their furious fury charm. Darius. What horrid Dreams have terrified me  my brken slumbers? How has sweet sleep fled om my Eyes, and tedious tossings made a restless
night? Sure it was because the Prophet is in danger, from which a Monarck could not rescue him. But now the Morning Dawns, and I am at the fatal Den, into which malitious Men have cast him as a Prey to hungry Lyons: I'll see if that great God he serves, has hitherto preserved him from their rage. O Da∣niel, Daniel! Servant of the highest, speak, it is a King your Friend that longs to hear your voice, which would be Musick to his Ears. Say, say, has God, the God whm you have served been able to deliver you. Daniel. Great Monarck live for ever, thy Servant is in safety; the God of Jacob, at whose tremendious name I bend me to the dust, has snt his Angel, and has clos'd the rending Iaws of the stern Lyons, causeing them to faun on me without a power to hurt, since inte∣grity in me was found before him, nor in ought have I offended great Darius. Darius. O welcome sound! And is my darling safe? Blessed, blessed, for ever be thy God, whose power has kept the cruelest of Beasts, from bathing thir stern Jaws in Blood of innocence. With speed, with speed; draw, draw him thence, draw out the man my Soul so much delights in. O let me embrace my Daniel, my dear Prophet! Whom the malice of ill-minded so far exposed to danger. Daniel. Thus low I knel to meet the favo great Darius dos vouchsafe his Servant. Darius. O Rise! My Love, my Life, my Soul; and say, how look'd your stern assocaes, when you first took lodging in the Den. Daniel. At first great King they roard aloud in ex∣pectation of decending prey, as being allmost famisht, but having at a distance glar'd on me with firey Eyes they came and couch'd beneath my feet, faing and swindg∣ing round their Tails, so tame that all appearance of their natural fierceness vanish'd, suffering me with much delight to stroak them and make pastime with curl∣ing
Maines, nor was I ignorant whose power restraind their rage, but as I mused the Den at the top divided and a brightness shone throughout - the gloomy place, when as a man decended with refreshment for your Ser∣vant, brought by an Angel from a distant land: And the same way he came, return'd, on which repast have∣ing well fed, I layd me down to slumber till your Royal voice awaked me. Darius. Amazing, yea stupendiously amazing is what you relate, nor hence will Darius trust in any God but him, that has been able to deliver his much injured Servant, to him I will pay my vows, and Death shall be his Doom if subject to my Scepter, that dares once bend his knee to any other Deity: Nor shall the malitious and revengefull men that durst traduce my Daniel scape dire vengeance, and not only they, but all that appertains to them of their curst race, not one shall live, the Lyons shall have plenty of their Blood. Than come my Faith∣full Friend, come to the Pallace of thy Monarck, whilst I give command for the quick Execution of what' I decree. Daniel. Great Sir I'm all obedient, and with joyfull steps thus wait upon my King, who has vouchsaf'd to load his Servant, with so many favours and next him whom I adore will make it my delight to do his just com∣mands. The Conclusion. Daniel deliver'd and yet greater made, His foes the Murdrous Lyons soon invade, Breaking in pieces with resist less force, Their feble Bodies, and their Souls divorce. Whilst a decree is sent through all the Coast, That each fall down before the Lord of Host.
CHAP. XXVI. The Combats of Joseph for defence of his Chastity. THe Wife of Potiphar, to whom Ioseph was sold by the Ishmaelites, made it sufficiently appear, when she was so impudent, as to attempt the Chastity of her Servant; this Female Wolf had only Eyes to gaze on this Lamb, all his gestures and motions were artifices to intrap him; and she would have willingly preferred the inthrallment of Ioseph before the Command over her Husband▪ All her bonds of Marriage were but Chains which kept her in Captivity, and the most just, and most holy Laws imposed on her, a Yoke which rendred all the duties of fidelity, which Wives own unto their Husbands, insupportable to her. It is a strange thing that we can hardly trust our selves, and that the Tongue dare not speak a word, or at least if she speaks, it is but after she hath pon∣dered all her discourses. Wherefore the Eyes are the first solicitours of Evil, and then their silence hath an Eloquent voice, which is yet not heard, but by those that are Confederates. It is no wonder then, if Ioseph heard not this un∣chast language, when his Mistriss speak to him more from her Eyes than her Mouth. This impudent Creature cast a thousand glances on him: But the heart of Ioseph was a piece of Marble, which could not be pierced, all the Flames of this Egyptian Wo∣man fell into a dead Sea, and all her lightnings found nothing but water which instantly quenched them. We must pass then further, and see whether the Mouth peradventure will have more powerfull per∣swasions than the Eyes. This shameless Woman
so much inraged as to declare her design. Courage then Ioseph, it is a Woman who assaults and sollicites you! she is light, be you constant▪ she hath stratagems, be you prudent; she is bold, be you generous; she runs, fly away; she Flatters, dis∣dain her; she asks, refuse her. Ioseph what do you say? For my part, saith he, I neither can nor will consent unto a Womans Lascivi∣ous desires,Victorious Innocence. nor submit unto her will, pre∣ferring it before that of my Master; and I should not be what I am, if I forfeited the qulity of a fithfull Servant, and of a Person to whom the honour and re∣membrance of the favours I have received from him, is a thousand times more precious than Life. If I have been sold, it was only for my Innocency, and the chains of my Captivity could never force the constancy an He∣brew ought to have in the way of virtue. I am Jacobs Son, and my Actions shall never ely my Birth, I am a Servant, I ought to dye for fidelity: Yor Husband trusts me with all his Goods, and with all his Wealth, which the favour of the King, and his own meris have bstow∣ed on him; he reserved only to himself the soly Enjoy∣ing you: it is not for me then to rvish from him what is due by so many titles. Command me with Iustice, and I will serve you with sincerity; perform all that you ought, and I will omit no part of my duty to you. Keep your self within the Laws of Marrige, and leave me in the duties of my condition. I should be ungratefull if I abused the favours of my Master, I should be a thief if I stole away his fairest goods, and no death could be cruel enough to punish me, if I should attempt on that which is more dear to him than life. All you flames can find in me but a heart of water and yce, and all your eyes cannot inthrall the liberty of my min, and your ri∣gors will never molifie a soul on which God hath im∣printed his love and fear. Know then that I would ra∣ther choose to dye free from blame, than to live a complice in your disloyalty. I prefer my bondage if it be innocent,
before all unjust Powers; and what misfortune soever befall me, I shall be too happy▪ if I remain innocent. It was in the power of my Brethren to sell my Body, but they could not ingage my Soul; I may serve without prostituting my self, and my glory will ever be illustrious enough if I shall do no dishonourable act, and unworthy of my Extraction. In fine, I adore a God who hath most pure eyes, and should all Creatures be blind, it sa∣tisfies me, that he be the witness of my actions; I re∣verence all his decrees, and if all the Iudges of he World could authorise vice, it would comfort me to have a God alwayes armed to punish them. How can you wish me then to bring Adultery into your Family, and to change your bed, which ought to be the Altar of your glory,Angelicall Resolution. into an infamous Pile? No, no Madam, either leave honour to me with life, or take from me my life, & leave me my honour. Is not this to speak like an Angel, and to have the sentiments of those spirits who live in flames without being consumed, and amidst Lightnings without be∣ing dazled. But now such was the Devil of this E∣pyptian Woman,The Devil of Egypt. who so eagerly persu∣ed Ioseph, he was an insolent▪ importunate & furious companion. His rage notwithstanding had by fits some relaxation, he knew the art of dissembling, and to be silent for a time; his Element was solitude, and the night his refuge, he sighed alwayes after Ioseph, and nothing pleased him when he was absent. In fine, he seems to have the power, to possess this Soul if she be alone, and if all witnesses be drawn aside. Beware then Ioseph, what you doe; you are alone, you are young, you are beautifull, and Esteemed. Remember that the eyes of Women dart as many lightnings as glances; call to mind that their mouths shed honey and poison, and that their tongues cast more dangerous darts than Adders: Contemn then what ever this impudent Creature can say unto you.
She will peradventure say she is your Mistriss, and that you ought to obey her; And that if she affect you, you cannot hate her; and if she seek you, you have no reason to flye from her; she will conjure you to tell her, what in her displeaseth you. Since she omits nothing that may content you, and without injustice you cannot refuse her one single favour she expects from you; espe∣cially she being ready, on her part, to grant all that you can ask of her. There is no colour, she will not employ to represent unto you her passion; and her Eyes though silent, will swear to you, that they have often enough spoken to you, when her mouth durst not utter a word: that if it were possible, she would believe that she hath by her words manifested to you all the thoughts of her Soul, when they might have been kept secret: Besides, she will flatter you, saying, you have refused her that out of prudence, which now you ought to grant her through love and goodness. Moreover, if you fear any thing, she will assure you that she hath foreseen all that may expose you unto danger. In fine, she will intreat, that if she hath no fortunes in the World, which are not at your disposure, you would yet receive her respect and affections to render you mor absolute and independent, concluding by all these rea∣sons, that you must at last satisfie her, either by violence, or sweetnesse, and that she will have either honour or life, death or consent. Mean while let us see I beseech you, what strong endeavours are used to stay him. They flatter him, they praise him, they love him, they honour him, they conjure him, they threaten him, they make him promises. What will you have, and what more can be done to gain him, and poess his affections? Entreaties have hitherto received but refusalls, Alurements disdains, and threats constancy, and neglect. In fine, this furious Woman being no longer able to restrain her passion, an attempt must be made o
the life of him whose honour she could not wound▪ she leaps on his neck, as it were to strangle him, but presently Ioseph flies away, and leaving his garment in her hands, she had but the Feathers of this Bird which she thought to detain in her nests. Behold then all her designs defeated; Ioseph i escaped, he is in safety, and out of the reach of this ravenous She-wolf, which pursued him. This inraged Woman seeing then that Ioseph wa fled, and that he had only left her his Cloak, re∣solved at the instant to revenge this affront, and accuse him whom she knew to be too pure to excuse himself. This Dame cryed out first, and the fear she hath to be accused, is the occasion she takes those for Witnesses of her innocency, who could have pre∣vented her. After all, seeing her Husband at her Door, help saith she, to what am I reduced? A▪ who hath given me for a Servant an importunate Devil, who persecutes me beyond measure? Ah▪ my Husband, my Friend, what have you done? And what a perfidious man have you given me? Is it peradventure to try my Loyalty and Vertue? tell me, I pray, what is your intention? and whether you keep him in the quality of a Servant or Compa∣nion? For my part I esteem it as a great honour to be your Hand-maid, and yet I conceive not my self obliged to obey your meanest Servant. He hath been nevertheless so presumptuous in your absence to sport with me, and take the place you hold in my heart. No, I swear by the respect I owe you, that I would have strangled him if my strength had been answerable to my will; but he is escaped, and see∣ing I called for help, he left his garment in my hands. Immediatly this man giving too much credit to the discourse of his Wife, without inquiry, whe∣ther what she said was true or false, caused Ioseph
stayed, and commanded him to be put in Wh  Aegyptian Lady did invite Well favour'd Joseph to unchast delight, How well the motion and the place agreed! A beastly place, and 'twas a beastly Deed: A place well season'd for so foul a sin; Too sweet to serve so foul a Master in. Ioseph's Speech to his Brethren. Go fetch your Brother (saith th' Aegyptian Lord) If you intend our Garners shall afford Your craving wants their so desir'd supplies; If He come not, by Pharaoh's life y'are Spies: Ev'n as your suits expect to find our Grace. Bring Him, or dare not to behold my face: Some little food to serve you on the way, We here allow, but not to feed delay; When you present your Brother to our hand, Y shall have plenty and possess the Land, Away, and let your quick obedience give The earnest of your Faiths, do this and live: If not, your willfull wants must want supply, For ye are Spies, and ye shall surely die: Great God, the Aegyptian Lord resembles Thee The Brother's Jesus, and the Suiters Wee.
CHAP. XXVII. Giveing an Account of the wonderfull manner of Pharaoh's being swallowed up in the Red-Sea. AND now methinks I see Pharaoh with all his Egyptian forces ready to be swallowed up in the Billows of an unexorable Element, which will open its waves to make a dreadfull Sepulcher  his cruel and disastrous Tyrant, about whom  most holy sweetness and the most amiable patience f Heaven is wearied. Having then received news that the Israel ere incamped upon the side of a little Hill situated etween the Fort of Magdalin and the Red-Sea, and ery near Mount Beelsophon: He believed this wa e best way to surround them; and that in  ese Rocks, Dungeons and Seas, serve but for  rge▪ Grave to bury them, and to extinguish  the name and memory of this People, which  occasion'd to him so many misfortunes. He sa em at least in a condition to dye of Hunger and hirst, after he had ingaged them all in 'these bad ssages, or reuced them to the necessity of yield, and returning unto the same servitude out o ich they thought themselves delivered: But no∣ng being able to resist this wise hand which levels  most rugged pathes, makes straight all crooke ys, and Armes invisible Troops, and the  erfull squadrons, went on conducting this  Prince directly into the Abyss, where he  to precipitate the Israelites; and the I  in which he prepares to inclose these  was the sepulchre of his life, and the
Rock towards which his power and greatness ad∣vanced to be dashd in pieces. Por Worldly Men, unhappy Egyptians, you who bandy against Heaven, and make Warr against the Almighty, how wek are your designes, and how rash are your enterprises? Whither think you to go with so great a train, with such a convoy, with so much Baggage, and so much noise? whither think you to conduct all thee Instruments of horrour and threats? Are you not afraid that the lightnings of Heaven and the Billows of the Ocean, will conspire agains you? And that at length the same lot will befall yo as unto Pharaoh, who being accompanied with hi bravest Captains, and followed by all the Chariot of Egypt, went pursuing Moses and the Hebrew when these poor People no longer knowing on wh side to turn themselves, and with an Eye of pitt beholding their Conductor, began to say unto hi with weeping and trembling hearts. Ah Moses! Why have you brought us into this So∣tary place? Are there not Tombs enough in Egy without coming to seek them in this deart? Alas! whe are we? and did we not tell you, that it were much bter to live in the service of the Egyptians, than to  in these savage places destiute of all humne Scours? Courage my Friends, answred Moses, you must  nothing, for God hath determined to make his power pear in your favour, and all these Enmies which psue you, are even ready to perish bfore your Eyes;  when you hold your Arms across, and your Mouth is  vengeance will Thundr over their Heads, and  which hath a thousand armed hands will  in an instant. In effect,  soon as Moses had lifted up his  Mouth and hands towards Heaven, his voice  made so loud an Echo, as God himself , what moved him to such violent Clam
though he were not ignorant of it; But he did this to excite him the more, and more strongly to invite him to pass the sea. Thus then did Moses cry out speaking unto God, and his prayer, saith Josephus, was in this manner. O Lord, these Seas, and these Mountains are yours, and ready to obey the least of your Commands. They may  us then to pass; and it rests only in you, that we  our flight in the Air like Birds, and find a Sanctu∣ary in every place where you ordain. No, no, Moses, saith God, March in the head of your Troops, and when you approach neer the Sea, lift up your Rod, stretch forth your arm upon the billows, that  may cut them in two, and cause all your Company to  over without wetting their ft. Mean-while I will harden pharoah's heart, who following you, shall  as a subject unto my Glory, to raise unto it self  eternal trophy upon the  of this proud Element; which must submit unto my Laws and Commands. Hence- Lord, and that when I please, I can make , and their whole train become the  of an eternal reproach. At the same time the Angel of God which conduct∣ed the people of Israel  during the , and by a Christ in the day, wet to a place  between the two Armies, casting forth rayes slight, and a pleasing shallow upon the Israel∣, whilst it  the Egyptians with a tenebrous , and a thick darknes, which left them only  glimmering to follow their enemies, whom ne∣ertheless they could not discern.
In , as this  Light and Darkness  to the orders it hath received, the Spi∣t which animated this miraculous body, divided the  in two parts, and made a large passage through  Waves, to cause all these troops to march in safe∣, which were usher'd by a hot and violent wind which left not one drop of water upon the Sand. This was an admirable prospec, and a spectacle worthy the eyes and hnds of the Almighty God. And truly when did we eer see so many millions of men (without counting their baggage) pasing from midnight till morning between banks of Christ ll, and mountains of Water, where by means of the light and rayes of this iluminate Pillar, a man would have sworn that there had been a thousand little Suns? Let us look now upon Pharoah, who having rang∣ed his Tribes by compani, and in order, begins to lift up his hand toward the Sea, which at the same time made all these liquid bulwarks, and floating ar∣ches, it had suspended in the Air, to roul down, so that all the Egyptians, who had advanced too far, were swallowed up, with all their Chariots an bag∣gage. The great God of Moses, and of the Israe∣lites, having made use of this miraculous elevation of the Waves, to make for them a deep Abyss, and to erect a trophy for those who have but the Vict∣ims of their fury; it was also through the flames which formed the Pillar of fire, that the reveging looks of Justice gave them their last assignations, and that her hand overthrew their Chariots, a d dis∣mounted all theis Wheels, to make a lamentable shipwrack of all their pompous and magnificent pre∣paration which attended them. In sie, these blind people discern'd that God was againt them, and for the Israelites; but too late, for whe thy thought to escape by flight, they perceived that the elements, and totall nature had revolted against thm, and that they could have no longer any refuge or retreit, but under the waves of the Ocean.
In fine, Pharoah is drownd, this great Dragon is dead, his rage is satiated; he hath hard the voice of Thuner, and Thunder hath broken the wheeles of his Chario; He is no more, or at last is groaning and dis∣pairingin a Pool of Sulphar, in a Sea of flames, and in an Eternity of Punishment. Moses and the Israelites on the banks of the shore, and in a Paradise of delights  Canticles of joy and Songs of triumph, to render thanks unto God for their deliverance. Which they do in the following manner: Saying, Let us sing, Let us sing Victory: And let it be every where known, that it is the great God of Israel who hath freed us from Irons, and from the slavery under which we have so . He hath loosned our fetters, he hath brokn our Chains, and thrown both Horses and Rirs, Pharoah and his Troops, Egypt and er Chari∣ts, into the bottom of the Sea. Grant then, O Lord! that at the entry into this desert, our Enemies may  such a horror as may render them insensle, and unable to hurt us, untill we are on  Land of Promise, and in our Country where thou wilt  us as flowrs of Paradise, and as so many slips of . Our Conquerours are already vanquished, and all strangers are affrighted. The Philistians already , all the Princes of  are : Fear hath  on the minds of the most Couragious, and the  even of  are become as bodyes with∣ut Sols or resentment. them with far and terrour, whilst we shall  with joy and delight into thy Sanctuary. Mean∣ reign in the Ages of Ages, and if it may be, even yond Eternity: For in fine, Pharaoh is no more, and  all that he ever was, there scarse remains so much as  of it, and none but Mariners shall find some  of those Chariots, which shall be seen upon this , where he intended to erect his Trophey, his Throne,  fairest hopes. Well then my faithfull Companions, let us sing victo∣, lt us sing together you chast Virgins of Iudea,  Daughters of Sion, holy Souls, let us sing Canticles  joy, in honour of him who is our Redeemer; Lucifer  fallen from his Throne; the Dragon is swallowed up
in the billows of the Sea, and all these Traytors, who intended to drown us, are overwhelmed with the waves, and wher they thought to gather Laurels, and Plms, they found nothing but an harvest over-spread with Cy∣pres, and a vast Sepulcher in the bottom of the Sea, where they propse to themselves to erect a Theater of , and a field of Triumph. On Jacob's Purchase. How  was Jacob's motion, and how strange how  was th'exchange! inheritance? Why could not hungry Esau strive t'enhaunce His price a ? So much undr foot; Well might he give him broath and drink too boot: An easie price! the cas is ev'n our own; For toys we often sell our Heaven, our Crown. On Esau. When hast thou ; Nay, what shall Esau do? Lst both his Birth-right and his Blessing too! hath poor Esau lst but empty tears, And plain  cannot reach th old Man's ears? What wi the Father's Di and thine own. The Birth-right's  and thy blessing's gone: How does one mischief overtake another? In both, how overtaken by a Brother? Could their imperious stomach but have stay'd, And if thy Father's had not been delay'd, Thou hadst not need have wept and pleaded so, But kept thy Birth-right and thy Blssing too. Had thy unprosperous, thy unlucky hand Dispatch'd thy Ven'on, as it did thy Land, Thy sorrows had not made so great a heap; That had not been so dear, nor this so cheap:
Had thine giv'n place but to thy Father's will, Th'adst thy Birth-right, and thy Blessing still. On Jacob's Pillow. The Bed was Earth, the raised Pillow Stons, Whereupon poor Jacob rests his Head, his Bones; Heaven was his Canopie; the  of night Were his drawn Curtains, to exclude the Light; Poor state of Isaack's heir! it seems to me, His Cattle found as soft a Bed as he: God appeared there his , his Crown; God us not alwayes seen in Beds of Doun; O, if that God, shall please to make my Bed, I care not where I rst my Bones, my Head; Wih thee,  wants can never prove extream, With Jacob's Pillow, give me Jacob's Dream. On Zacheus. Mthinks, I see, with what a . Zacheus climd the Tre: But, O how ast, full of speed, cast thou imagine ( Our saviour call'd) be powder'd down agen! ne'r made tryal, if the boughs were ound, Or rotten; nor how far 'twas to the ground: Tre was no danger fear'd; at such a Call, He'l venture nothing, that dare fear to fall, Needs must he down, by such a Spirit driven, Nor could he fall unlss he fell to Heaven. Down came Zacheus ravisht from the Tree, Bird that was shot ne'r dropt so quick as he. Short Legg'd Zacheus, 'twas the happiest Tree That ever mortal clim'd, I mean to thee; Thy pains in going up, received the Crown Of all thy labour at thy coming down:
Thy Statute's lowness gave thee fair occasion To mount that Tree, that Tree, to find Salvation: But was't the Tree, Zaceus? No, 'twas he, Whose leeding Body dy'd upon the Tree. Wll clim'd Zacheus, 'was a step wll giv'n: From hence to th Tree, and from the Tre to Heaven. On Abraham's pleading for Sdom. ow ath was rightous Abraham to cease, To eat the price of  pace! Mk how his hly boldness intercpts Gods Iustice; brings his mercy down by steps: He dares not bi so few as ten at irst; Nor yet from fifty righteous prsons, dust Hi zeal, on sudden, mak too great a fall, Although he wisht Salation to them all. thy dying Son has Pow'r to clear, A Wold of Sin, tat one shall not appear fre thine angry Eyes: What wonder then, To se thee fall, from fifty dwn to ten! On the Eyptians Famine. Mark but the course the pin'd Egyptians rn: Wen all thir Coi, when all their Corn is go Thy come to Iosph, and their stomacks plea Thy change their Beasts for Corn, the I  Bread; Yet still the want: Observe now what they They give their Lands, & yield their Bodies to Now they have Corn enough; and now they sh Have Seed to Sow their barren Soil withal; Povded that the fih of their Increase Be Pharo's: Now their stomacks are at pea
Thus when the Famine of the World shall strike Our hungry Souls: our Souls must do the like. We first must part with, (as by their directions) Our Flocks our Beasts, our Bestial affections; When they are gone, and then must sinners do? Give up their Lands, their Souls and Bodies too; O, then our hearts shall be refresht and fed, We shall have Seed to sow, and present Bread: Allowing but the fifth of our Increase, We shall have plenty, and our Souls have peace. How art thou pleas'd, good God, that Man should live, How slow art thou to take! how free to give! On Gods Law. The sacred Law of God, Is like to Moses Rod: If we but keep it in our hand It will do wonders in the Land; If we light and throw it to the ground, 'Twill turn a Serpent, and inflict a Wound. Wound that Flesh and Blood cannot endure, Nor salve, until the brazen Serpent cure: I wish not Lord, thou should'st withold it Nor would I have it, and not hold it: O teach me then, my God, To handle Moses Rod. On Balaam's Ass. he Ass that for her slowness was forbid o be imployed in God's service, did erform good service now in being slow; he Ass received stripes, but would not go:
She baulk'd the way, and Balaam could not guid her: The Ass had far more wisdom than the Rider: The Message being bad, the Ass was loath To be the bearer: 'twas a happy Sloth; 'Twas well for Balaam: had his Ass but try'd Another step, Balaam had surely dyd. Poor Ass! And was thy faithful service pay'd With -repeated strokes? Ha't thou obey'd Thy Lod had bught thy travel with his bloo Such is Mrs pament, often bad fr good: Th Ass begins to question with his Master, Argues th case, pleads why he went no faster▪ Nay, shw him Mstries, far beyond his reach▪ Sure God wants Prophets, when dull As Preach▪ The Ass preives the Angel, and falls down; When Balaam sees him not, or sees unknown: Nor i't a wonr this: God's Spirit did pass From blidfold Balaam into Balaam's Ass. Davids Epitaph on Jonathan. Here lis the fairst Flower that stood In Israls Garden; now in Bloo: Which Death to make her Garland gay, Hath rpt, against her Triumph-day: Here, hre, lies e whose Actions pend, The perfect Cop of a Frind: Whse milk white Vllam did iear No least suspition of a Blur: Here lies the example of a Brother Not to be follow'd by another: The fair intnded Counter-part Of Davids jo, of Davids heart. Rst then, for ever rest alone, Thy Ashes can be touch'd by n ne, Till Death hath pickt ou such another? Here lies a Flower, a Friend, a Brother.
On Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. It spreads the sweet perfume of Solomon's Fame, Affects the Coasts; and his Illustrious Name Cannot be hid: the nbeliev'd report Must fly with Eagles wings to th'honoured Court Of Princely Sheba: Sheba must not rest, Until her eyes become th'invited Guest, Of Fame's loud Trumpet; her Impatience strives With light foot Time, while her Ambition drives Her Chariot-wheels, and give an airy passage To th'quick delivery of her hearts Embassage: True Wisdom, planted in the hearts of Kings, Needs no more glory than the glory 't brings; And lik the Sun is view'd by her own light, Bing by her own reflection, made more bright: The emulous Queen's arriv'd she gon to the Court, No eye-delighting Masque, nor pricely sport, To entertain her? No, her eye, her ear s take up, and scorns to see, to hear neriour things; Sh' allows her ear, her eye No less than Oracles and Majesty: ow empty pastimes do desolve and fly To thir true nothing, when true wisdom's by! Th' arriv'd Queen has audience, moves disputes▪ Wie Solomon attends replys, confutes; he objects, he answers; she afresh propounds; he proves, maintains it, he decides, confounds he smiles, she woders, being over-daz'd, ith his bright beams, stands silent, stands amaz'd. ow Scripture-like Apocrypha's appear o common Boks! how por, when Scripture's near!
The Queen is pleas'd who never yet did know The blast of Fae less proigal▪ than now; For now the gratst part of what she kew By Fame, is sound the least of what is true; We ften find that Fame in prime of Youth: Dos add to Flshood, and sustract from truth, Te thankful Qeen does with a lib'ral hand, Prent him with the Riches of hr Lad, Where wisom gos before, we oftn find Tht temporal Blssings sldom slay bhind: Lord, gant me Wisdom, and I shall posses Enough, have more, or have content with less. On Job's Temptation. God questions Satan: Bos is Iob's desert, In the perfection of a simple hart. Ib's Faith was fervent; Stan was as chill To yield it▪ but must yield against his wi; Condems it to be servile, to be bought With God's own coyn: Does Iob serve God  nought? It is a common trick the Teper uses▪ The Faith he cannot conquer, he abuses. Alas, that aith requires not so much praise, 'Tis a good Faith, as Faiths go now adayes: It is not strength'd by the indulgent hand That blest his Labours, and inrich'd his Land, Puff out the Fire; his Faith will quickly chill: Satan puff tho: nay, Satan puff thy will: Nor , nor lou▪ of small, or great estate, Are certain bags of God's love or hate. What's now to do? Poor Iob must be Of all his strongr Herd; Fire, sent from Must burn his fuitful Flocks, that none His house fall and all his Childer'n slain; And yet not curse? Alas poor Iob addreses His thoughts to heaven, he worships God  bleses:
The lively Faith that can retain her God▪ May groan but seldom rave beneath the Rod. But what says Satan now? The hedge is broke, That fenc'd my Servant Iob? What further Cloak For his uprightness hath he? What pretence For his continual Love and Innocence? Has not thy malice had her own desire? 'Twas soundly puf'd, thy puffs has blown the fire: Gods trials are like bellows: Satan's blower, Blows out false Faiths, makes true ones blaze the more: True, Lord, his faith is tough; but Snailes as well Can thrive without, as live within their shell: To save alive who would not lose some skin? Touch but his Horns, O how hee'l draw them in. Satan, I give thy malice leave, be free To peel the Bark, but spare to touch the Tree; Fear not the li flock: The greatst ill Your fes can do's to scratch: They cannot kill: What now's th' exploit? Afflicted Iob does lie, A very Hospital of sery: I think that all the Vlcers, that have bin In Egypt cur'd are broken out again In his distempered flesh; Iob is still The very same, not charg'd is God with ill. A Faith tht lodges in a double Brest, May stand the touch, non ut true faith the Test. If these be lames poor man must swelter in, He needs a World of patience, not to sin. On Solomon's Rejoyce. Young Man, Rejoyce: What jolly mirth is here; Let thy heart char thee; What deliious Cear? In thy young dayes; Thy caes will relish sweter Walk thy own wayes; Thy cares will pass the lee∣ter:
Pleaset own heart; Carve where it likes thee best: Delight thine Eyes; And be a joyful Guest: But know withal, the day will come, whereon Thy Iudge will doom thee for the deeds th'ast done: O what a Feast! O what a Reck'ning's here! The Cates are sweet; the Shot's extreamly dear: Lord, I have been, and am, a daily Guest (Too oft invited) at the Young-mans Feast? The Reckning's great; although I cannot pay, I can confess; Great God, before this day, I had been dragg'd to the redeemless Jayl, Hadst thou not pleased t'accept my Saviour's Bail; Lord, he must bear't, I doubt, for I can get Nor Coin to pay, nor labour out the debt: I cannot Dig, my Joynts are stark and lame: But I can Beg, although I beg with shame; I have no Grace in begging; can receive The first repulse; I have no Faith to crave: If the entertainments of the Feast be these! Lord, give me Famine, take the Feast, that please. CHAP. XXVIII. Choice remarks upon Daniels being cast into the Lyons Den. HOly▪ Daniel was once chief in commission un∣der great Darius, the very first Minister of tate. Thus you have him in the Zenith of his Ho∣nours, Lord high President over all the Kings, Councils and Treasures, next and immediatly under himself supreme Governour, together with he reason which justifies the Kings great Prudence nd Policy in promoting him to so high degree, viz.
Because an Excellent Spirit was found in him—. He was every  qualified for his station. But this mighty preerment soon contracts an universal Evy upon him from those whose dim Eye could nt see, or whose canked Spirits would no weigh his merits in a Rightes Sale. The Hi of Hnour i dangerously tro, though by neve so air and meritorius Fet. Envious Men hat to aknowlege a worth beyond their own, and loo with a squint Eye on all above themselves. The promotion that flls not n their own Heads, grieve their Hearts, an i plotted against. Yet safely may the Heavenly Aspirer fix h steps while he has no Competitor to contend wit him; and few are emulos of the Celestial Crown The four and twenty▪ lders may pass an Eternit e'ro any below disturb their Honours, while wea Eyes wax sore at the sight but of a Corone though Darius himslf had stuck it on. They sougt to find occsion, &c. And methinks fancy them sitting in lose Consult gainst him, an ransacking every Inh of his Life and Manners. N an unr-Officer, but is brought in and strictly exmin'd upon Oath, if possibly the last defect mig be found in his Managements or Accounts: And pehps the very Attendants of his Family Brib'd  Menac'd into an unreserved conession and disclsure of the dayly Customs of his House, nay  those of his very Oratory and Bed-chamber.  must the freedom of his Table e allowed him upurge. f probably even there but a Syllable mig escape him, which may be Atificially interpret into Treason, or wrench'd (but) into the mispris of it; or but any thing which might bear the lea shadow or Reflection of dishnour or damage to t great Prson, Dignity or Intrest of his Roy Master. But when now after all this, nothing is squeez
out that can (though but) colourbly charge him; how do they fret and vex, and are ready to indict even his Care and his Caution? And are vext that they want Eyes to penetrate into the vry recesses of his Soul. For it may be, there might sculk some Trayterous and Disloyal thought, which gladly would they tear out from his Heart, and produce in evidence against him. But if, even that he White and Innocent too, they again wax mad, and curse his very Loyalty and Truth, and could wih that his Snowy Innocence would take a Crimson Dye, and be (though but superficially) Criminal▪ They ought occasion but could find none, forasmuch as he was aithful— Neither was there any errur or fault found in him, Chap. 6.4. But now what a plague is it to envy innocence, and o make anothers Health ones own Disease? Is the thine Eye evil because mine is Good? Yet for ever e it remarqu'd, to the Honour of hese eager Conspirators, that the height of this eavourish rage did not distemper them into the istraction of perjurious Revenges, nor the detest∣ble contrivances of Subornation against Daniel. They will not Damn Souls to destroy Bodies. Their ery Heathen Consiences boggled at that Hellish ractice. And now very despair make these Plotters witty, hey altr the measues of their Counsels. And nce nothing can be discovered defective in his alle∣iance to his Prince, they will weave a Net that hall ensnare him in the exactness of his obdience o his God. Hi very Devotions shall be twisted to a Cord tat shall strangl him. And if he dare y servi to is Mker, even that shall be High reason aginst his King And (to sve hem the la∣our) h shll  imlf nto the Grve. For,  thse men, w shll find n osion against this aniel, except we find it agist him concerning the w of his God, verse 5.
But I would wish no greater Judgment upon Plotters than to find them bending their Wits against Heaven, whih is ever engaged to destroy them, fr its own security and Honour. Nor can an Arrow be shot against Piety without hitting God himself direcly in the Face. Since all that is in the Worl is but his reflection upon the Soul, and he is as much in one Beam or Ray of his Holy∣ness that shines in the Creature below, as in the whole Sun of it that makes Glory above. The Ma∣lic that wounds a Saint, would destroy the Deity if it could. How do I see them Chuckle, and less their Wits in this new contrivane. A Plot so exquisitely wo∣ven, that there is no room for so much as the least fear or jealousie of its miscarriage and failure. They question not the success in the least. Daniel must turn Atheist to prevent the danger; and forsake his God, or his Life. Projecting Heads may Plot together, and jum∣ble out a decree of Death. Yt to as little Repu∣tation or Issue, as a Club of Physicians that vote that disease to be Mortal, which Heaven cures by a igg. The Decree is universally agreed on by Daniels Enemies. And the Monarch address'd for his Royal Aent. They Enact him a God (by Law) upon Earth, and make it Death to acknowledge another in Heaven. They put a trouble upon hi, to receive all the addresses of Men, and  thirty Holy-dayes for all his fellow Deities to ret i: Whosoever shall ask  Petition of any God r Man fr thirty Dayes, save of thee, O Kin. &c. vers. 7. Drius consults not his Cabal to unriddle this Flattery in his Noles, muh less de▪ he apprehend any treacherous design in the bottom, but is willing to interpret it pure Loyalty, and a Politick advance of his Glory, and greater security in his Empire
now at his first approaches uto it; and therefore easily inclines to the proffered Honour; and (since they will have it so) is content to justle out his Ma∣ker from his Throne for a Month. Therefore God punish'd his rash and unadvised Folly and Pride, whose hand Signs the Decree which afterwards makes his Soul to Ake, and because he did not sleep on't, a-non cannot; and endanger'd the breaking his Heart, as well as his sleep. The Sagacious Daniel quikly penetrates through this shallow desig. He easily sees the Warrant for his own Execution written on the back-side of this plausible Deree, yet will not prevent it. His great Soul bids defiance to it, and them that fram'd it. He scorns to live when he annot serve his God▪ yt will serve him: though he dye for it. He will not neglect his Duty for thirty dayes togther, no not to save his Bloo. But rsolves rather to pass into Immortality to serve him there. The King having pass'd the Law— The Tre∣panners begin to seak about Dnils Lodgings. Malice degenrate them into Eve-roppers, they creep up and down uner his very Winows. If the Casement chance to sye open, the project thrivs, their hopes swell, and the Blood capers in their Veins. And he (brave Spirit) opens it on purpose, to let them see and know that he dreaded not their impious Law, nor would slack an Ae of his dayly Zeal and devotion to his God; and thi he di, When he knew, that the Writing was sign'd, vers 10. 'Twas below his great Person and Spirit to deny or dissemble his Religion. Faith and Love makes him trusty to it, against all Conspiracies of Men or Devils. And what know we, but some were so impudent as to steal up Stairs and peep through the very Key∣hole to discover (but) the first motion towards a Genuflection. But when those Sacred joynts incline
to bend to the resolved Worship, how greedily do they suck in the very first Spiration, and preparato∣ry ighs? But (brave Belshazzar!) how little do we know what various Passions agitate thy Sacred Breast at this time? What contests between Nature and Gre, lesh and Spirit? Or wer't thou all Soul and transported beyond the cares and remembrance of thy Motal and sufering part, that I hear thee  ito suh Rapures as thee? Wha! ad must I forske my God now, or not Live?Spirit. and forske him too upon such un∣happy Terms as thse, to gratifie the wishes of these malicious conederating Heathens? Is Devotion become fatal, and must Praer it self kill? Cannot I go to my God, but the next stp must be to the Grave? 'Tis worse than Dath to live ut one day, without him who i the Life of my Soul▪ how then shll I live thirty? Must I war thes  upon min affections and ips, which thse Men envy and caning hve clapt on me, with design to enslave me fr ever? Rther let  Beasts tear pn a pasage for this Captive within me  pss into th liberties of eerlstingness, than thus to b Cag'd up in so insufferable a Vssalage! Do they think to immure up my Soul? Let thm rn me from the Court of Daiu, my Heaven is not there, as is eirs; my Bod is the Kings to his pleasure and ser∣vice, but my Soul is Gods unto his.  venture an in∣rgment into the Bowels of the Lios, e're they shall lry over mine Apstacy from my Religion and my God. But hold! whither does this Noble but Te∣merarious Zeal transport the Daniel?Flesh. Is this th kindness to thy dearest self? An hast thou no re∣gard to the Glorious and sweets f Life? Is that Holy Fire, that devours its own Altar? And callst thou that
Zeal that hurls thee into nothing, and temps thee to an Annihilation? Is Death so dsireable? and such a Death as will gratifie thine Enemies too? Whose Mlice will Feast it self on thy Ruines, with greater Luxury than the Lyons Banqut on thy Flesh? What is this but to Execute the Plot against thine own Life, which they can∣not prfct without thee? and will thy God thank thee for destroying thy slf, and throwing way thy life for  Nicety, the Ceremony an Cark of Devotion, which his Grace is so rady to dispnce with, an for so little  time as a Mnth too? Is he not the Father of Spirits, and regards more the Orator of a sigh than all the lusci∣ou Expr ssions of the Lips? Vnerstnds he not the Lan∣guage of the Soul, n hearkns to the very desires of the Humble? Maist thou not Offer up the purr Sacrifice from the scret Altar of a Flaming , and be safe? What an advantage hast thou to  the Conspiracy by a Mental▪ Devotion, an to Countermine the Villas of thir Cursed Policy by looking up thy Soul in its self? Ah no! The brave Votry sorns to compound with his God for his Life,Spirit pre∣vails. nor will save himself by so muh as Latching the Door of his Lips; he will not tile the vent of his Soul, tho it self were sure to fly through it: He will glorifie God with his speech, tho he speak himself into Air; he will not difigure the Bo∣dy of his Duty, to save his own from mangling; and would rather the Lyons should open their Mouths to swallow him, than he by shutting up his, to m∣prison his Zealand Affections. He resolve that his Mouth shall Confess unto God (and the World) hat his Heart believth unto Salvation; and (while his Enemies were watching) imagine this devout Sup∣plicant thus pouring out his Soul unto God.
The Prayer. GOD of my Soul and of my Bing, the Glorious Ie∣hoh that  ever∣lastingness, and humlst thy self to bold the things that are in Heaven and Earth— ear nd have mercy. Thou art God alone, and bsides thee there is none else: What is this Darius, whom these mn have blasphemously Exulted to Rob thee of thy Glory and Worship, and  a God of him that cannot help, that cannot save rslf or others—O Pardon their Sin. And this they  done with dsign to Rob me too, of this Glorious Liberty of Access to thee my God, who art the very Life f my Soul, and whose loving kindness is better than Life,  without whom Life is none at all. They would shut  from thy Presence, but do not thou; Opn the Door  thy Grace and my Soul, that I my fly unto thee; and  [these] these mine Enemies lye in wait for my ; yet let me Praise thee with joyful Lips, and Serve  without fear. What, though they have decreed to  away my life, are not my Times in thy hand? and ithout thee sh ot fall an hair from my Head. O  me a Faith beyond my Fear, and a Courage beyond  Malice, that I may dye rather than disown thee;  Dvoting my self a Sacrifice to thy Glory, may  all the World know that thou Lord, art the only God  the Souls of thy Servans who put their . Rdeem thy Church and People— Noise interrupt him: The  cry out amain,The .  Traitor aaist our  and his , away with him to the Lyos, Darius slf cannot sav hi. Thse, we may supose, were the Evide to Swer against him▪ who could safely  (without fear of Perjury) that they h
making his Petitions to the God of Heaven, and so breakig the Decree.) And now ha the Plot taken effect, the Innoent man falls by the Councils of the Wicked:  art thou O Lord, yet le me talk with the of : Wherfore dth the  of the Wicked prosper? Wherfore are hey happ ? Jer. 12.1. So foolish was I and ignorant—Surely thou didst set them in slippery , thou cast est them down ino  are they brouht into D∣solion as in a  wih Terrours, P l. 73.1, 19.22. Now may you see them troop together with jy and speed to Darius Court, where they subtiy r∣pet th Coent of the Law to the King, with a Cursed Plicy of dsigning to oblige him to a sacred and inviolable observance of his own Eict, e're ever they discover the Transgressor, who (they knew) was so dear to him, that (for hi sak) he might have strai'd hi Prerogative unto the length of a Padon, (ipoble.) But having once oblig'd him by the honour of his Royal word to confirm the de∣cre, then they presume to produce the Indictment and thus Ares: O King Live for Ever. THat Danil who pretends so muh Love an Loyaly to thy Royal Person, so muh Vene∣tion an respect to all thy Laws, , he is th  Ungtful man tht he is, whom  of  thou hast  whose very weight  in hi Loylty  th he sulimity  into foly too; he  other Go, as if ou O King wet not
enough for him, who hast been so kind and Royal to him. Never has the largese of Princely Bounty  unluckily micarried by ingatitude and Trea∣chery, which dares be so insolent to give so per∣nicious an Exmple of first Violating that Law, which he should have valued infinitly dearer than his Life, and rather than have prostituted it to  Coempt, should have  the war∣mst Blood of hi Hart to it Glory. We pray therefore that he may (Suffer the Pains and Penalties of the Irrevoca Decree he has so Prophanly despisd, may rceive the just Rcom∣pse of his hughty Rbellion and Pride.)— Be thrown to the Lyons. Now is the King almost dead, with sorrow, the fatal News mre wounds his Royal Heart than the Pioners: The King himself suffers in this Plot, and is persecuted in the Captive; and now is basely betrayed to sign the Decree, which Seals his own vexation and trouble: For 'tis they, and not Daniel▪ were guilty of the Treason aginst his Royal tranquility and peace. Unhappy Danil! to b so lov'd and so hated! so pa sionately lov'd by Darius, so universally  by his Nobles. Here nt one of all the Peers hs a pitty for thee, they joyly address for thy  Executin; (Nmin Cotradicent.) The King, singly demures, and while he does so, they imptientl adrss a second time, (and had not so erously  hitheto. now to  thei Plot to perish in mrio.)  makes them foet good mannrs, they  and uncourly▪  O Ki, that the Lw the  and  it, that no Decre nor  which the King , v. 15. q. We have  a By,  Reel may no be pardoned, te Laws of ty Kingdom will not
bear it, tho thou wouldst; therefore in vain dost thou labour to eliver him, for dye he must and shall. But now metnks how do I see the great Darius hugging him in his Ams; whilst he beholding him (as he fears) with his last Eyes, breaths out his very Heart to him in such dear Expressions as these? Daniel, my dearest Danil, the brightest Star that ever illustrated a Princes Court; the faith∣fullest Servant that ever bless'd a Master; the ve∣ry Glory and Flowr of my Kingdom and Palace, who art passing up into those more glorious Man∣sions, where only dwell suh Spirits▪ as thine. Thou wit no more envy the toys of Regality, nor need the aiery Honours of an Earthly Palace; I am distresed fo thee my dearest Daniel; how willingly could I uncloath my self from these vain Badges of Majesty to pass into Spirit with thee? But tay, may not thy God meet thee in the Den, as (I have heard) Sharach's did him in the Fur∣nace; and methinks I have Faith to believe he will; and least thine Enemies should think so too, and send in Russians more cruel than the Beasts to de∣stroy thee, my care shall obviate that danger▪ while I Seal thee up under the Protection of Hea∣ven and thy God. How stately passes the Captive  the Den,He passes to the Den. richl laden with the Troph of his Princes affections, and the gra∣ces of his God! He leaves nothing behind him, th he should take to Heaven with him, but the thought f Revenge.
A Dialogical Discourse between Adonibe∣zeck, and one of the 60 Kings he tor∣mented and kept under his Table: The Discourse supposed to be in the other World. The Argument. The mighty King, the Tyrant, whose delight In tortures was; who sixty Kings, in spite Of Regal Pow'r that did their Brows adorn, Maim'd, and beneath his Table kept in scorn, Is in like manner serv'd: so fares it still, With those that seek their fellow Creatures ill. . HOw now great Monarch! by what fatal chance you from lights of splendid pomp advance these dull Regions? how cut off by death you the sternest Tyrant of the Earth, midst of all your Glories lose your breath. don. Torment me not in asking how I fell, ow the Fates durst my Ambition Quell. ing. Know you not who I am? know you not me. don. I know too well the dreadful shape I see; ke it from mine Eyes, I wou'd not know, wou'd be known in these sad times of woe. ing. Yet pittyless you durst our patience prove, cou'd our Tears, nor Groans your Mercy move. don. 'Tis true, they cou'd not, but I thought me then the blasting Fate of Vulgar men. made me seem in heights to fly the reach of frail Mortality. ng. So we once thought, yet all we urg'd was vain, ou'd our Sighs, when fallen, ease our pain.
Adon. You were my Captives, by fierce war so made▪ Your Countrey's mine, by me in Ashes laid. King. 'Tis true, yet pitty in a Monarch's Breast Renowns him more, pity to those opprest, A God-like nature in Man-kind creates, And Envy's Keen-soul piercing Shaft Rebates. Adon. But then Compassion knew not my Abode, Revenge and Fury waited on my Nodd, My will was then my law, Death mark'd my Frowns On whm they bent, there he bestow'd his wounds. King. Yet now too plain you see, the God whose Eyes Into the darkest of Man's Secrets pryes, Has found you out, and by his chosen Seed, Now made the Proud Adonibezeck bleed. Adon. 'Tis to my Shame, and sad Confusion know As I have done, to me so be it done; In a base servitude a Mnarch dy'd, Maim'd as he maim'd, Crush't as he crush't the pride Of daring Mortals whom he made to stoop, E're they his Towring Cedar cou'd o're-top. King. Just is thy plague, thy punishment is com And we with joy, behold thy juster doom? So fares it with all those that pityless Afflict their Brethr'n when in most distress; Who proudly triumph over those they may, And make a sport of them they make their Prey So may it fare with Tyrants, so with those, Whose Breast no mercy, but fell rage Inclose, Adon. My guilty Conscience wounds me, Let that Revenge enough, no more then torture me. King. Still, still, I'le haunt you, since the  decree Your Fortune equal in our Misery. Adon. I'll shun you then; my Soul no more can King. Yet you unmov'd our sad laments cou'd Adon. 'Tis true, I did, and scoff'd at all your lutting with your hard Fates my well pleas'd eyes.
King. Then what can you expect, but to indure Our hate and scorn, who cou'd your self enure n prsperous dayes, to nought but cruelty. Adon. That I'll prevent, for with swift wings I'll fly To dismal shades of Night, beyond your reach. King. In vain's such flight, your Walls can't now Impeach Our following fury; now your Guards are gone No power to torture's left; Death has undone The knot of power, and now like us you are, Like us who vow with you perpetual War. Adon. Spare, spare me, I repent my wicked deeds; y Rage is lost, my Heart now melts and bleeds; our want of power this feign'd repentance breeds. King. No, we'll pursue you through the Gloomy Coasts. nd tell your Story to the well pleas'd Ghosts. ho laughing loud shall joyn with us in Mirth▪ o plague you, as you plagued us on Earth. Adon. O wretched me? how woful is my case, ho find in Life nor Death no resting place; Earth I was to Iacob's Sons betray'd nd here the Scorn of once my Slaves I'm made. herefore by me let Tyrants warning take, st they are scorn'd by those, their scorn they make. A Dialogue between Jael and Sisera. The Argument. Sisera routed, flys to Jael's Tent And's Introduced with a Complement; But sleeping, a sharp Nail his Temples wound; Till he his Death in that low Lodging found. el. Ha—who is this? that thus with hasty steps makes to my poor Abode; If I mi∣ not, it is the Warriour that has troubled Israe
yes, yes, 'tis Sisera. — Speak, speak my Lord, why come you thus alone? where, where are all the mighty Captains that were wont to wait upon you, marking your Frowns and Smiles as sure por∣tents of Life and Death; the Signals of the Nations Peace, or dire Calamity. Sisera. Alass! Alass! The God of Iacob has pre∣vailed, and they're no more; the Battel has devoured them, and their slaughter'd Carcasses ly scattered on the Plains of Israel. I. How! is the mighty Jabins Army overthrown. Sisera. It is, and still the danger is too near to ad∣mit of time to tell the dreadful ruine; for the well flesh'd Foe besmear'd with blood and slaughter, hastily pursue; O had you seen the fearful havock Barak's Sword has made; how wheeling with a swift reverse it mowed down Ranks of men? You wou'd have trembled. Iael. My Lord, I tremble at the thoughts of his wide wasting fury; but see the Enemies upon the Mountain-tops. Sisera. 'Tis true, — With speedy steps they hither∣ward advance, Now! now! My life is in your hands, se∣cure me from their fury by denyal, and stay my thirst with water, and I'll largely recompence your care. Iael. Doubt not, my Lord, of safety in my Tent; — Here, here, Drink, drink thou mighty Man of War, drink what my homely Tent affords. Sisera. 'Tis Nectar most delicious, and has much re∣freshed my weary Soul;—But I'll repose, and leave my safety to your conduct. Iael. This covering my Lord; —Ha? —wha a suddain drowsiness has seized the Man of blood —Why can it be that he can securely snore, when Death is hovering round him—Now, now's the time to be revenged for all the slaughter he ha caus'd; for all the Widdows and sad Orpha tears, burnt Towns, deflowred Virgins, ravish' Matrons, and the bleeding Wombs, whence gas∣ping
Infants by rude hands were torn: Heaven prompt my Zeal to act the Tragedy. This sharp Instrument well fits my purpose; and now to free my Country from his future rage. —Thus —thus I seal his Eye-lids with eternal slumber.— The deed is done; convulsive Death now triumphs over him, whose breath has doom'd so many thou∣sands to the Grave: unfear'd he lyes, whose name was wont to make the Sons of Iaob tremble, and at whose approach the well fenced Towns were sligh∣ted, whilst for safety the Amazed Inhabitants lur∣ked in the Caves and solitary Wildernesses. Conclusion. The mighty Sisera slain, glad Jael meets The conquering Captain and his death relates, Which joyes the Israelites, and makes them sing For their deliverance to the Eternal King; Who grants them Peace and Plenty many dayes And chears them with the brightness of His rayes Ruth. 1. Verse. 16, 17. And Ruth answered; intreat me not to leave thee, or to depart from thee; for whether thou goest I will go, nd where thou dwellest there will I dwell: thy People all be my People, and thy God my God. Verse. 17. here thou dyest will I dye, and there I will be buried; e Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death a thee and me. Here we have the resolution of Ruth portray'd  lively colours: so that if we consider her Sex,  Woman, her Nation a Moabite; we may boldly onounce of her what our Saviour did of the Cen∣rion, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great aith, no, not in Israel.
Intreat me not t leve thee. Some read i, be not  against me, as it is in the rgen of the ne Translation Where we see that tse ar o be accounted our advrsares and a∣gainst us, who persd us fr our voa to Ca∣na, fro going to Gos true Rligion. They may be ou Fathrs, they canno b our riens; though they promise us all outwad Profits and  yet in very deed they are or with us, but agains us, and so must be accoed. Where thou Ldgest, I will lode. A good Companion saith the Ltine Proverb, i proviati. I may add also p divers ri. Ruth, s be it she may enjoy Naomie's graci company, wi be content with any lodging, though happily it may be no better than Iacob had, Gen. 28. Thy People shall be my People, Haman being offended with Mordicai, as if it ha been lean and weak revenge to spit his spight upo one person, hated all the Jews for Mordicai's sake the mad Bear stung with one Bee, would nee throw down the whole Hive. But clean contrar Naomi had so graciously demeaned her self, th Ruth for her sake is fallen in love with all the Jew Farewel Mchn, farewel Chemosh, farewel  Welcome Israel▪ welcome Canaan, welcome Be∣lehe; all of a suddain she will turn Convert,  will turn Proselite. Thy God shall be my God. Iehosphat when he joyned wih Aha. 1 King.  said unto him, my People is as thy People,  Hrses are as thy Hses, (that is) he would com with him in a politick League, but Ruth goes ∣ther to an unity in Religion, Thy God shall be  God. Where thou dyest will I dy. Here Ruth supposeth two things, that she  her mother in law should both dye. It is appio
once to dy. Secondly, That Naomi as the eldest, should dy first: for according to the ordinary cu∣stom of Nature, it is the most probable and likely, that those that are most stricken in years, should first de∣part this Life. Yet I know not whether the Rule or Exceptions be more general; and therefore let both Young and Old prepare for Death, the first may dy soon, but the second cannot live long. And there will I be buried. Where she supposed two things more, first, that those that survived her, would do her that favour to bury her, which is a common courtesie, not to be de∣nyed to any: It was an Epitaph written upon the Grave of a Beggar, Nudas eram vivus, mortuus ecce tegor. 2ly. She supposeth they would bury her, according to her instructions, near to her Mother Naomi. Observation. As it is good to enjoy the company of the Godly while they are living, so it is not amiss, if it will stand with convenience to be buried with them after death: The old Prophets bones escaped a buring by being buried with the other Prophets, and the Man who was tumbled into the grave of Elisha, was revived by the virtue of his Bones. And we read in the Acts and Monuments, That the body of Peter Martyr's wife was buried in a dunghil, but afterwards being taken up in the Reign of Q. Eli∣zabeth, it was honourably buried in Oxford, in the Grave of one Frideswick, a Popish-the-Saint; to this end, that if Popery, which God forbid, should over-spread our Kingdom again, and if the Papists should go about to untomb Peter Martyrs Wifes Bones, they should be puzzled to distinguish be∣twixt the Womans body and the Reliques of that their Saint, so, good it is sometimes to be buried with those who some do account pious; though perchance in very deed they be not so.
The Lord do so to me and more also. To ascertain Naomi of the seriousness of her inten∣tions herein, Ruth backs what formerly she had said, with an Oath, lined with an execration. If ought but Death See here the large extent of a Saints love, it lasts till Death, and no wonder, for it is not founded upon Honour, Beauty, Wealth, or any other sinister respect in the party beloved, which is subject to Age or Mutability, but only on the Grace and Pi∣ety in him; which Foundation because it alwayes lasteth, the love which is built upon it, is also per∣petual. Part thee and me. Death is that which parteth one Friend from a∣nother; Then the dear Father must part with his dutiful Child, then the dutiful Child must forget his dear Father, then the kind Husband must leave his constant Wife, then the constant Wife must los her kind Husband, then the careful Master must be sundred from his industrious Servant, then the industrious Servant must be sundred from his careful Master. Yet this may be some comfort to those, whose Friends death hath taken away; that as our Saviour said to his Disciples. Yet a little while, and ou shall not see me, and yet a little while, and you shall see me again. So yet a little while, and we shall no see our Friends; and yet a little while, and we shall see them again in the Kingdom of Heaven, for, n miumur, sed prmittumur, we do not foregoe them, but they go before us.
A Dialogue between Naomi and Ruth. Argument. Kind Ruth, her Husband dead, to Naomi D's cleave, resolving so to live and dy; In all adversity she makes a Vow To follow her, and her kind Aid allow: To prop her Aged years, when kindly she Accepts of her dear Daughters company. Naomi. SEe'st thou not that Orpah thy Sister has left me, and is again returned to her People; why should'st thou then remain, since Heaven's Eternal King has taken to himself Chilion, the dear. Pledge of your tender Love? there live happy, since all hopes are vanished, that from my aged Womb more Sons should spring. Ruth. Have I not lived with you these many years, even when wall-breaking Famine bared the sun-burnt Fields, and Men as well as Beasts (by thousands) fell, to fat the Bosom of our Common Mother. Naomi. 'Tis true you have; but then Heavens plenteous hand showred blessings on me; then my Husband and my careful Sons drew breath. But now.— Ruth. Now — why — Can you once imagine that want can cause my love to wast, no, for your own, and my dead Chilions sake, I'll love you still, and render you he Duty that becomes a Daughter in Law. Naomi. Thy tender years can never undergo the ardship that poor wandring Nami may meet with  she can be setled in the place where first she rew her Breath; therefore consider, and whilst ou are in Moabs borders, think of the plenty that bounds in your own indulgent Mothers Womb.
Ruth. I have already cast the business in my Mind, and am resolved, that Winters chilling Storms, nor Summers scorching beat attended with the sharp Con∣tests of poverty and pining want, shall never part us; Death it self in all his dismal shapes is not of force to shake my fixed determination. Naomi. You yet are young, and have not stru∣gled with Misfortunes, nor contended with the world, and therefore know not of what force they are; consider how belated Naomi (in her long Jour∣ney) must be often forced to make the Ground her Bed; and underneath some spreading Tree lie stretched: Exposed to all the injuries of wea∣ther, whilst soft sleep flys from her careful Breast, and she with sighs and groans is forced to wound the murmuring Air. Ruth. If upon some bleak Mountains top, whose co∣vering is Snow and Globes of Solid Ice, where Win∣ters lasting Tyranny still Reigns, you should be forced  make your Bed, I'de there repose: This Arm should be your Pillow, whilst your Daughter, your obedie Ruth froze to your side. Naomi. Could you do this—Yet think again, and well consider, that old Age comes fast on me, and I shall soon be summoned to the Grave; where you being left a stranger in the Land of Israel; and far from your Relations; meet with much contempt and scorn from the proud Daughters of the Land. Then will be the time of your repentance, the you'll blame that ill starr'd day you left your Coun∣try and your Friends for the sad company of wretch∣ed Naomi. Ruth. Let that not trouble my dear Adopted Mother; for when unfiendly Death with his cold Icy hand, shall grasp your Life, I'll mourn much like a Widdow Turtle, till in floods of swelling Grief I'm wasted to Eternity; and then our bodies shall not be disjoyned; but in  Grave we'll lie, till our returning Souls shall wake
drowsie courses; and hand in hand we take our way to Heaven. Naomi. Can there be such constant Faith in Wo∣man? O thou glory of our Sex! let me embrace thee. Thus whilst my poor heart o'reflows with Joy, O thou dear recompence of all my toils; who makest amends forHusband and for Sons loss; may Heavens Favours shour upon your Head, and you be blessed in all you undertake. Ruth. Your kind Expressions are too large a retribu∣tion for what I have resolved; but see the Morning Dawn salutes the World: let's lose no time, but strait begin our Iourney to the wish'd Bethlehem of Juda. Naomi. Be it as you have said, my only Comfort and blest Solace of my age. Conclusion. Thus setting forth, they unto Bethlehem came, Where Naomi desired to change her Name, As griev'd at her great loss; but in the end Rich Boaz weds Ruth, and soon becomes her Friend. Ruth Soon grows fruitful, and from her does spring The Lineal Rank, good David, Israels King. Dagons Fall before the Ark. The Sins of Israel growing great, Gods rage Was bent against his Chosen Heritage, Old Ely's Sons polluting holy things, And with vile Hads disdain the Offerings. The Lord of Hosts convenes the Heathen Powers To batter down aspiring Iacobs Towers. Before their Swords the routed Hebrews fly, And fill the Hills and Valleys with their cry. The wicked Seed of the High Priest are sain, And the tremendous Ark it self is ta'ne.
In which the Mighty God was pleas'd to dwell, Before whose wrath so many Nations fell And now the bold insulting Foe, as proud Of such a Trophie, bare it shouting loud, To the base Temple of their false feign'd God, Compos'd of Gems of Gold and precious wood; A stock inspir'd by an Infernal Fiend, On whom they durst in Peace and War depend; Ascribing to his power the great success Of their weak Arms, and joyful words express, When lo! the fearful Fiend with hideous cries, From his adored Idol swiftly flies; Not daring view that Face which brightness shrouds The God whose Thunder rends the Marble clouds: Who grasps the Poles, and turns the Spears about, Whose Eyes survey the Universe throughout; Whose Anger kindled is so deadly great, That Hell it self from it would fain retreat. Had not strict Fate fast fix'd it in it's place, With whom alone the Righteous can find Grace. And now forsaken Dagon, wreft of voice, No answer gives, from it proceeds no noise, In vain his Priests enquire of Future things, In vain the Prince his cur'st Oblation brings. Deluding Satan bears perforce the shame, And though aloud they call on Dagons Name, Yet dares not the fate babling Daemon come, Least he before his time receive his doom; And with link'd Thunderbolts be driven back, Or sunk fast chain'd into the flaming Lake: But whil'st they rend their Threats, their wooden God, Begins to totter and most strangely nod; Whereat affrighted the rude Rout recoil; When down at last upon his Face he fell. Yet up the foolish People rear again Their shame and folly, yet 'tis but in vain; For e're the Sun review'd their wicked Coast,
The helpless Stock his Head and Hands had lost: Whilst fearful Plagues his Worshipers dismay, Who gladly send the holy Ark away; Not daring keep what eagerly they sought, Lest all their Land be to destruction brought. On Dagon and the Ark. What news with Dagon? Is thy shrine so hot, Thou canst not keep it? or has Dagon got The falling sickness, that his godship's found. In such a posture, prostrate on the ground? Poor helpless god! but stay! Is Dagon grown So weak i'th, hams: nor stand, nor rise alone? A god, and cannot rise? 'Tis very odd! He must have help, or lie: A proper god! Well, Dagon must require help of hands; Up Dagon goes the second time, and stands As confident, as though his place had bin His own, in Fee: down Dagon falls again: But Dagon's shrewdly martyr'd with the jump, Lost Hands, and Head; and nothing left but stump: Sure all's not well with Dagon, now of late He's either sick, or much forgot the State Belonging to so great a God: hath none Offer'd some stinking Sacrifice, or blown Some nauseous fume into his sacred Nose. And made his Godship dizzy? or who knows, Perchance h'as taken pet, and will resign His sullen place, and quit his empty shrine. No wonder, a false God should stoop and lye Upon the flour, when as a true God's by? It was unlikely Dagon should forbear Respite of Homage when the Ark was there; If I would worship a false God at all, It should be one that would not scorn to fall Before his Betters; whose indifferent Arm, If it could do no good, could do no harm:
I'de rather choose to bend my idle knee, Of all false Gods, to such a god as he, Whose spirit's not too quick: The Fabulous Frog Found greater danger in the Stork than Log: And to conclude, I'de choose him Dagon like; Not having Head to plot; nor Hands to strike. Saul chosen King. THe murmuring people, who Gods Wonders saw, And Glorious presence when he gave the Law. In Peals of Thunder on the dreadful Mount, Themselves unhappy in his Rule account; And like their Neighbour Nations, ask a King, That may their Armies out to battel bring. To which the Mighty God, though griev'd, consents, Yet lets them know the sad and dire events Of their sad wish; tells what their King shall do, And that too late repentance wou'd insue, Which to head-strong Israel prov'd too true; But long they're not debar'd of their desire, ood Samuel marks them out what they require, Confirming▪ after many signs, the Son Of Aged Kish, a Benjamite, well known By his huge Stature, who for many years The Helm of Iacobs mighty Empire steers, But not regarding who the Scepter Gave, The Scepter giver does the Monarch leave: Who long disparing, did in Iacob dwell, Till by his Sword on Gilboa he fell, And scatter'd Israel felt the rage of those, Who ever vow'd themselves their mortal Foes. On Saul and David. SUre Saul as little look'd to be a King, As I: and David dream'd of such a thing
A much as he, when both alike did keep, The one his Father's Asses, t'other Sheep: Saul must forsake his Whip, and David flings His Crook aside, and they must both be Kings. Saul had no sword, and David then no spear, There was none Conquer'd, nor no Conqueror there, There was no sweat, there was no blood to shed: The unsought Crown besought the Wearers head, There was no stratagem, no Opposition No taking parts, no jealous Competition. There needs no Art, there needs no Sword t bring, And place the Crown, where God appoints the King. A Dialogue between Agag and Samuel. The Argument. Saul having spar'd the proud Amalekite, Samuel is griev'd, and when the Pagan quite Had banisht fear of Death, to Death e's giv▪ In order to appease offended Heaven. Agag. WWhat means the Prophet with  stern Aspect to gaze upon a Monarch misery, suffices it not that my slaughterd People at the Plains with streams of blood, and that my burning Citys cloud the Lamp of Heaven with as∣cending smoak. Samuel. No haughty man, 'tis not enough; the  of Jacob is displeased with such small Vengeance. Agag. Then try to turn away his wrath with Scrifice, let ten thousand Altars blaze with fat  Bulls and Rams, the spoil that once belonged to Amaleks now fallen Sons. Saul. In vain thou urgest such abmination, such Sacrifices would be odious in the Nostrils of that God Who dwells between the Cherubims, whose ferc
wrath can be appeased with no less Sacrifice than thy curst Life. Agag. Ha—my life—why sure the fear of death is past now, know you not that your King has pro∣mised Life. Sa. I know him, who in sparing you and your unlawful Spoils has made himself a Rebel to the King of Kings. Agag. Yet he's your Lord, and ought to be obeyed, to him I appeal, to him, who has already sign'd my pardon. Samuel. In vain are all Appeals to Mortal Man, when God, the mighty God, in whose strong Hands is all the Breath of Life; has doom'd you dead. Agag. How—doom'd me dead! O name not such another fatal Word — Spare, spare my Life, and all the Treasures I have hid▪ when first the Rumour of the dreadful War alarm'd my affrighted coast are t your service. Samuel. Your Treasure perish with you; not all the  of the Vniverse shall rescue you from Death. Agag. O draw not, draw not in this rage your  Sword! Consider I am a Man, a Father,  onarch; Seest thou not what Robes of  adorn me? seest thou not this awful Circle  o're with Gems: This Scepter, at whose wave the Princes cring'd, and kiss'd the dust; seest not him, to whome a thousand knees were wont to end; him on whose Breath, dependeth Life and Death, now prostrate on the ground, imploring  for himself. Samuel. All this I see, and as far as humane fr ail∣ can bear sway, am moved; yet must not, dare not,  not disobey my God. Agag. O! consider once again, that my Mother  a Queen in distant Lands; O think what grief will be to her to hear her only Son is slain. Samuel. In vain is all you urge, and this last aying whets my Anger more, when I consider how your
blood-bedaubed Hands have made the Nations mourn; how your destroying Sword has raised the Widdows cries and tender Infants sighs; lo! the many slaughters you have made in Jacob's borders, rendred thousands cild∣less; wherefore the self same Fate be on the Womb that bare you, whilst thus—thus—I execute Gods wrath on thy pernicious Head. Agag. Oh—Oh—I'm slain—I'm slain? I that have scaped a thousand deaths in battel, tamely fall a Victim to the Zealous Fury of an inraged Prophet. Samuel. Thus what Saul left undone, my aged hand finished, and atton'd for Jacobs Land. A Dialogue between David, Saul, and Goliah, upon their Incounter. The Argument. David Anointed King of Jacobs Seed, Hastes to the Camp of Saul, with swiftest speed, And undertakes to fight the mighty Foe, Who with proud boasting, forty days durst show His monstrous Bulk; defying Israels Host; But David with a sling soon quells his Boast. Saul. SPeak, speak young Stripling, is it as my Captain has related, darest thou, that art but a Youth, Expose thy self against this Mon∣ster that defies my Host. David. My Lord, I dare, though not presuming on the Arm of flesh, but totally relying on the Living God, who has delivered me from the devouring Rage of  and of Bears; nor dare I now doubt the assistance of his power to bing low the haughty Pride of this bold Philistine that has defied tbe Armies of the living God. Saul. Bold is your Spirit, and your courage brave, the two first steps to Glorious Actions shine in you, but yet consider, he's a man of War, mighty in strength, and dreaded by the most e∣doubted Captain of the Israelites.
David. Great King. did I rely on my own strength, I must confess his monstrous shape might dash my resolution, but his strength, on whom the high success de∣pends, is capable by meanest things, to quell the mighty, and bring low all strength and power: with him there's nought impossible. Saul. Spoke like a Champion worthy to subdue the world; A Champion on whose Head your King will stake the Didem of Israel,—my Armour there—so, put it on, and gird your self in Walls of shining Steel, to fit you for the danger. David. Alas my Lord, it needs not, for with these few stones I'le quell your Foe, and make him kiss the the humble Plain. Saul. Braver in bold resolutions still— Well go thou worthy, and be prosperous; may the bright Minister of Heaven protect you from his rage, and make him fall before you. David. All thanks great King, and may the God Iacob prosper you; while thus your Servant posteth to assured Victory. David and Goliah come near each other. Ha—ha—ha—how am I moved to laughter, when I think the King of Israel in forty days could find no fitter man than this to fight me, sure this unarmed Stripling is but sent to mock me as ima∣gining when he has teized me with some Railery, to run away, and escape my following fury by reason of my heavy Armour. David. Why laughs the Monstrous Philistine? why with wide Iaws dare he disdain my youth? knew I no other God than Moloch, and accursed Dagon, I should not come resolved to the Combat. Gol. How! to the Combate; Knowest thou with whom, poor youth, thou art to fight? Hast thou not heard of the sad Slaughters I have made? how this powerfull hand has broke through the affrighted Squadrons of the Foe, and mowed with
Whirlwinds Fury on each side, cutting through Groves of Spears, a bloody way to Victory, till hps of slain have ali'd me in; and thinkest thou with a Staff to drive me hence? May Moloch and great Dag blast thy foolish thoughts. Dav. Not all the bloody deeds thou hast done, can fright the Son of Jesse, nr once dismay the Man that ht avow'd to vi oppressed Israel of so great a curb, that henceforth haughty man may not so boldly trust in Arms of Flesh. Gol. Why hoverest thou then round me at this rate, and shunnest my fury, art afraid to come within my reach? Come to me, and I will give thy Flesh to the Fowls of the Air, and to the Beasts of the Field: Tear thee in ten thousand pieces, and thy scattered Limbs set up as Trophies of my Victory in all the Coasts of Israel, when this fatal Sword has made its Monarch stoop to the Philines yoke. Dav. In vain are all thy unregarded Threats; A∣though thou comest to me with a Sword,  Spear and Shield, and I to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied. Gol. O how hot is my revenge! To what a height boils up my ragig Fury; O that thou wert this moment in my reach, how would I toss thee in the Air, and pash thy falling Body on the Rocks. Dav. I'll not be long e're I advance to ty destructi∣on; for this day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hands; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the Carkasses of the Philistines this day unto the Fowls of the Air, and to the wild Beasts of the Earth, that all the Earth may know there is a God in Israel; and all this Assembly shall know, that the Lord saveth not with Sword and Spear, and he will give it into our hands.
Gol. I'll not endure this longer, but chastize thy Insolence with flaming Steel; whose very touch shall make thee fly in sunder. Dav. Nor will I fail to meet your utmost fury; and thus I'll thunder on our lofty Front, and bring you to the ground. Gol. O horrour! Death and Ruine; what dark Mist is this benights my Eyes? what dreadful bolt on flaming Wings, thrown by some envious power, as thus o'rethrown the great Goliah, and laid all his Trophies level with the dust. Dav. Now Monster, now know there's a God in Israel; and as I promised, thus I take thy head; — 'Tis done — done with the Sword thou threatenedst mine: And thus I bear it to the King, taking thy Ar∣mour as my lawful prize. Conclusion. Goliah slain, the faint Philistines fly, Whilst after them pursuing Israel cry; And fearfull slaughter rages every where, The Sword no Mercy has, nor knows to spare, Till all or most are slain: Then David's sought, And to the King in glorious Triumph brought, Declaring who it is, whilst Honour high, Crowns him at last with Rayes of Majesty. On David and Goliah. SAtan's the great Goliah, that so boasts And threats our Israel, and defies her Hosts; Those smoother stones couragious David took From the soft bosom of the silver brook, Are Scriptum ests: the Sling that gives them flight, Is Faith; that makes them fly, and fly aright: Lord, lend me Davids sling, and then I know, I shall have Davids strength, and courage too:
Give me but skill to pick such stones as these, And I will meet Goliah when he please. A Dialogue between David and Michal. The Argument. David advanc'd, Saul envies his loud fame, And fears his Glories, will Eclipse his name; Wherefore fair Michal's given a snare to be To him; She loves, but does not in't agree; For when death hover'd round his threaten'd head, She cheats them with an Image in his stead. Michal. MY Lord, I wonder you'l expose your self at this rate, to my Fathers rage; Know you not that he seeks your life? David. Yet God, the God of Abraham, is able  defend me from his rage, seeing I have done nothin that deserves his hate; but in the uprightness of my heart go in and out before him. M. Know you not, that I was given to you as a snare, to sound the secrets of your heart, and to pry into your Councils. D. I know it, my dear Love, my happiness, and all I prize on this side Heaven; but dare not think that such virtue, tenderness, and innate goodness, can be wrought upon to prove a Traytoress to him, that can ad∣mire nothing but the eternal maker of the glorious Vniverse, above her. M. I question not your love, but sure it is, my Father urges me continually to lay open your se∣crets, that he may find occasion against your life; but hitherto his threats and promises have proved ineffectual. D. And ever will, I hope, my Ioy. — Nay, nay, I dare not doubt it; it were sin once to mistrust your
Virtue. It shall never sink into my thouhts, that Mi∣chal will betray her David. M. And dare you trust to that, consider well, what glittering Gems, a Prince in Marriage, and a Kingdom at command, may tempt me o consider I'm a Woman, and that all the Sex is rail. D. All this, and all the Splendid Pomp the haugh∣tiest Monarch can bestow, I have considered; yet cannot once Imagine they can move my Love to entertain so base a thought. M. Yet once more—what if my Father should threaten me with Death and torture if I disobeyed his lawful will; and if he finds me trifle with him; rashly put in execution what he threats. D. Nor can this make me once imagine, my dear happiness, that you would give me to his Fury; though in this case I'de willingly meet his fierce wrath, when high, to save my Love from such a danger: There is no Torment so outragious, that I would not with a smile embrace, look pleasantly on Death, and tamely bow my head at your rough Fathers Feet, whilst his blood-thirsty Sword cut off my dayes—Thank the hand that took my Life for yours, and bless the King for such a Favour with my dying breath. Mi. Let me embrace my Lord, and let him be assured, that neither hopes of Glory, Threats, nor promises, shall move me to betray him. Rather than I'll prove false to him I love as Life, I'll undergo whatever witty Horror can invent, be for ever banished from my Native Land, to live in lonely Desarts, and dye comfortless in some dark pathless Wilderness; no, all I urged wa, but to try how much you valued me. Da. O! you ravish me with too much joy; I was before confined, and now 'tis doubly done: no more but to our Chambers, where the first fruits of our Love were reaped, and there I will tell my Love how much I am transported.
Mi. I am obedien, and with eager Eye feed∣ding on your manly beauties, thus cast the Daughter of a King into your Arms to lead her where you please. Conclusion. The happy Loers scarce their Loves repeat, When Saul's stern Guards a fierce Alrum beat, For David's head they come; but Michals Wit Sends thence her Lord; and with this Counterfeit Deludes the Captains, whereat Saul's enrag'd, But by his Daughters feigned Tale's asswag'd. A Dialogue between Jonathan and David. The Argument. The Son of Saul to David does express, A Friendship great, nor does he prove it less. Ion. WWhat fears my Brother David? wherefore shuns he me? Da. You know, my Lord, that Men in danger ever dread, especially when they suspect the danger near. Ion. Why, what of danger; whence do these affrighting thoughts proceed? why is the mighty Warriour thus disturbed. Da. Know you not that your Father seeks my Life; and are not you is darling Son. Io. And does my presence create a fear in David? Da. Let my Lord pardon when thus low I beg it? If I have some doubts that your Commission is to bring me to your Fathers presence. Io. Far be that thought from Iesse's valiant Son, whom I must chide for wronging me in such
A nature: O? canst thou once Imagine that an Action so ignoble can e're lurk within my breast? Can you suspect the Man (whse Soul moves in sweet harmony with yours) can be so basely tretch∣erous, as to betray his Friend, Da. Forgive me, my rash fear, my Lord, and I'le not dare to fear again, I must confess, your love to me has been so great, that I condemn my selfe for once so much as harbouring a suspicion, that you e're intended to harm me. Io. Let this dear kind Embrace sign your free granted Pardon, and in Oblivions darkest Land, let your hard censures ever rest. Da. O boundless Love! how can I, how shall I de∣serve it! What recompence is David capable to make that in the smallest measure can requite the Heir Ap∣parent to his Fathers Scepter—thus low.— Io. No more this cringing distance, but to my Arms: I know thy Innocency, and will become a shield to save you from my Fathers wrath; through me, he makes his way to Davids Breast, if Fate de∣cree his ruine. D. O my dear Lord; You make me blush, and at the same time to weep for joy, to hear what you express; such faith, such constancy, such boundless Love, was ne∣ver known from man to man before. Io. Although I know you must succed my Fa∣ther in his Throne, yet will not I for Empire-sake, that by succession should descend to me; suffer my Love to lessen. Da. O! My Lord no more; I am confirmed that I am happy in so brave a Friend, happy as Man can wish; and must make it still the business of my Life, to recom∣pence so great a favour. Io. All I request is, that you would be kind to my Posterity, when Heaven incircles your calm  with the bright Diadem of Israel.
Da. Whatever my dear Friend can wish, I'le do; nor shall there be ought wanting in me to retaliate th kindness of my— Io. I ask no more, nor will I dare to doubt your Generosity; but see the Captains of my Fathers Host approach, which urges my departure; but 're long I'll find a eans to meet my Friend, and tell him all my Fathers thoughts. Till then, ten thousand blessings on your Head. Da. All thanks to my Kind Lord; and may the God, whose Eyes survey the secrets of each Heart, shower lessings on you, and make your Posterity flourish in the Tents of Jacob. Conclusion. Ionathan goes to Court, and sounds the Heart Of cruel Saul, which he does soon impart To David, and advises him to y: who after many Ramblings, fears to dy By Sauls dread hand, and does at Gath remain, Till Saul's o'rethrown, and by his own Sword slain. An Account of Solomon's Concubines with the number of his Wives. Ne doth seldom begin wickedness at the top: Vices have their degrees as well as Virtues;  at first began to grow cool in the worship he true God, conversations with him were not often nor so pleasing, the pleasures of the World  him, the delights of the Court charmed , actions that are so free, soon become evil,  evil ones turn themselves into custom, and  into habit; this Child of God saw the Daugh∣ters
of men, these strange Beauties which pricked him by their Novelty, he became a man, and made of them his Goddesses. The Daughters of the Moa∣bites, and of the Amorites, those of Egypt, of Sidon, of Idumaea, and so many others, whereof God had for∣bidden him any alliance, were the Idols of his Heart, after they had been the Plague and Poison of his understanding. He which had pronounced so many excellent Parables against Love, which had so many times advertised Youth, that the Lips of an unchast woman distilled honey at the beginning, but at the end they gave a portion of Wormwood, was taken by the eyes, inchained with infinite affections; his Love was pompous; his Luxury  sumptuous: he loved as much for glory, as for cocupiscence, he would act the King in his unchastnes as stately, as in the Furniture of his Temple.  had about seven hundred Women, which were  Queens, and with that three hundred Concubine which is according to the Scripture account, a thosand wives, which he had shut in the Seraglio, for th pleasure of his eyes and of his flesh, and of so man loves, there is but one Son to be found, Rehobo void of wisdome and understanding. What  a Prince do among so many delights, so many lurements, so many charms, and so many bewitings! A Man is oft-times much hindred, by  troublesome brain of one Woman only. What seous business could he then set himsef to, that  them multiplyed by hundreds? These strange came each of them with all the inventions of  Nation for to surprise him, there was one  would gain him to her, another that would  him, another that would draw him from one  another, even unto the bottom of Hell; It is  more easie to become a fool with a woman tha make her wise; he had endeavour'd perhaps to  them to his Religion, but they perverted
and drew him to theirs. He took their loves, and afterwards their behaviours, and at last their Super∣stition. Every one of these Women would bring her God into esteem: And thought not her self to have any credit in her love, if she did not make her false Deity to partake thereof. THe great, the Wise, the Glorious Solomon, For whom the Lord of Hosts so much had done, By Womans subtiltie's at last beguil'd, And with base Idols his great Heart's defil'd: Strange Women tempt the King to go astray, To prove Ingrateful, daring disobey The God of Iacob, whilst with Idols vain Strange Wives his Kingdome (he conniving) strai Exalting false pretended helpless wood In places sacred where Gods Altar stood; amn'd Ashtaroth, the cursd Zidonians shame, ilcom the wicked Amorites cheif blame; With Chemosh dire by darkest fiends inspir'd, nd cruel Moloc who mans blood requir'd. o whose dire Orgies horrid Sacrafice, ith clouds of smoak obscure the blushing Skies; hilst he well pleas'd, beholds the Rites prophane, or which the Canaanites were sadly slain. he Heathen Women stupifie his Sence, nd with base charms drive sacred Wisdom thence. ven hundred Wives, three hundred Concubines State maintains; who with Philterick Wines, witch him still, and sway him as they plese, eir lawless Laws a Monarchs reason seize; hich weakness in him makes Iehovah frown, raise up Foes to bring his glory down; hilst all the Tribes but Iuda, from his Son olt, and straiten his Dominion. ares it still with those that dare rebel; ainst the mighty God of Israel.
The disobedient Prophet slain by a Lyon. THe foolish Son of Solomon bereft Of Israels Aid, no Tribe but Iuda left, The bold revolters Ieroboam chose Their King and Captain to subdue their Foes: But he damn'd Idols made, fix'd bleating Gods In Dan and Bethel; to whose cur'st Abodes The mudding People soon a whoring went, For whose restraint a Man from God was sent To cry aloud, whose voice their Altar rent, Pour'd out those Ashes, which as relicts vain Of their unhallowed Sacrifice remain; Which made the wicked Monarch storm and stretc His Scepter'd hand, commanding some to catch The Prophet, but the blood it soon forsook, And every Joynt was with such numbness struck, That all in vain, he strugl'd to draw in A Member guilty of so great a sin, Till humbly he intreats, and is restor'd, And kindest Entertainment wou'd afford; But that's rejected, and the Prophet flies The guilty City; but the hasty Spies, Sons to an old deluding Prophet, tell What had in Iacobs Heritage befell: Who soon o'retakes the loitering Seer, and the With feigned tales decoyes him back agen To tast forbidden food; but when dismist He meets his Fate, and vainly does resist The rending Lyons, Death's commission'd pas, And bloody Fury of his roaring Jaws; Slain is he strait, but not devour'd; so did The Lord, whom all but Man obey and dread. When soon the news was spread, when soon  known On whom the Execution had been done;
Nor stays the Man who caus'd his hapless Fate But to a Grave the Carkase does translate; Commanding all his Sons, when Death possest His Aged Limbs, and life flew from his Breast, To lay his Bones by his, affirming all The Prophet said, should suddenly befall. A Dialogue between Elijah and the Wo∣man of Zarephath The Argument. The Raven fed Elijah, finding dy The Brook of Cherish, at Gods word does fly To Zerephath, and near the Gate does find A Widdow, for whose kindness he proves kind, Saving her Life by miracle, that done, He shows Gods Power in raising her dead Son. Eli. THis is the place, the happy place, ap∣pointed by the God of Israel to give liah rest. And see, according to his word, the Widdow, in whose House I must sojourn till wastful amine destroys the Land, makes her retreat to hose vast Dsarts, where the scorching Sun forbids he falling showers. Wid. Ha! What stranger is this, that hasts to our , wretched, half starved City, whose faint inhabi∣ts resemble Death's pale Image, and seem rather andring shades, than Mortal substances. Eli. Haste, haste, thou happy Woman, whom Hea∣en ordains to find refreshment for a weary Travel∣r, hast I say, and fetch me bread and water speedi∣ to stay my fleeting Soul. Wid. Alas Sir! As for bread, 'tis become so great , that scarce a Morsel's to be found in this  City; Water indeed we have, yet that of late is  o're plenty.
Eli. Can it be that such a stately Pile, such lofty Edifices are so quickly drained of that which is the Staff of Life. W. Know you not Sir, that Meagre Famine, with dread∣ful howlings, terrifies the Nation; tearing up with bra∣zen Talents the long barren Soil, crushing with Iron Teeth the hardest Flints, whilst all her Bones appear through her close cleaving Skin; and her sunk Eyes and shrivled Dugs make her look frightful to poor pining Mortals. Eli. I know for sin, for dire heart hardning sin, the just icensed Majesty of Heaven has chas'd away the swelling Clouds, grown big with showers, whose gentle distillation should assist kind Nature in per∣forming her desired task, and close the crannies of the yauning Earth; nor shall the cattaracts give rain in years to come, so Iacobs God decrees. Wid. If Earth deny her Fruits much longer, wh can live! since we already see so many thousands gas∣ping for a moments Life; and hear no other cries than what proceed from sad necessitie, whilst nothing that's unclean, is left unfed upon; As for my self, all I have left, is but a handful of course meal, and a small qua∣tity of Oyl, nay, and half that's my Sons to dress, whic am gathering these few sticks for, that we may eat an dye. Eli. Dread not Death? since Heaven is carefu of your preservation; dress instantly what now yo have, and still your store shall be continued. Wid. It cannot be—or if it do remain with  unconsumed a while, it soon will wast, and then we hav no more to eat, nor know we where to buy; for now pur Gold and Silver, once a precious bane, is gladly give for the vilest things, with which the worst of Creat heretofore were fed. Eli. Dispute not what I bid, but do as I comman and live, dare you doubt that ought's impossible wi God, who sent me to preserve your life, whi
ll the streets are paved with dead and dying wretches. Wid. My Heart misgives me, and something as it were, does wisper me in my Ear, that it is a Prophet; speak; therefore totally relying on your word, I'le instant∣ly make tryal: If I live, I live, at the worst I can but dy. —Ha—all I have taken out cannot be mist; the Cruse and the Barrel fill again by Miracle. Eli. And so they shall, till plenteous Harvest bends with Golden Ears the feeble stalks, and Wine and Oyl is every where abounding. Wid. Blessed for ever be the Name of Israels God, Who has sent his Servant to his Hand-maid, to preserve her by wayes unexpected, from a Death that could not but by miracle have been prevented. Eli. No more, but dress what's in thy hand whilst I revive, and render thanks to his all glorious Name who has vouchsafed this favour. Wid. With eager Willigness I fly, to do what you mmand. Conclusion. On unexhausted food three Persons fed, Till fatal sickness struck the youngest dead; But by the Prophet he to Life is brought: When bold Elisha furious Ahab sought, And tries by Sacrifice, who is the God That heals and wounds; shedding the curst Priests blood. Then tells of Rain, that quickly does insue, And Earths dry face with Vervant Robes renew; Whilst Iezabel his Life with labour sought, From Earth he is in a fiery Chariot caught, Leaving Elisha, who does strait inherit A double Portion of Elija's Spirit.
A Dialogue between Ahab and Naboth. The Argument Naboth by Ahab sent for, waits upon His King, to know what 'tis he wou'd have done, Who asks his Vineyard, Naboth it denyes, For which denyal, ston'd with stones he dyes. Naboth. LOng live the King of Israel—why is it my Lord has sent to speak un∣to his Servant? Why is such an honour as the pre∣sence of a King conferred upon unworthy Naboth? Thus low I beg to know the reason. Ahab. Rise worthy Subject, 'tis a Monarch bids you leave that Posture, 'tis your King that has a Suit to Naboth. Na. Can Israels great and glorious Prince, the Ruler of the God of Iacobs Heritage, on whose Breath my Life depends, sue to his Subject, or seek ought of him, that his obedience shall not rea∣dily comply with? Ahab. You will oblige me much, if my Expectations are but answered, 'tis a small Request, yet prized by me at no low rate. Na. Speak mighty Monarch! Let your Servant know your Pleasure, nay command, and be obeyed. Ahab. Have you not a Vineyard joyning to the Palace of your King. Na. I have great Sir, your Servant has a poor Inheritage, in which he takes delight to recreate himself, and pass the flying day in rural Labour one while guiding the growing Tendrils where to clime, directing the rich Vines to their beloved Elm, at other whiles pruning the luxurious branches cultivating the hard Soil, and drawing softer Mol
about their spreading Roots; and when the long wish'd Harvest comes, 'tis my delight to crop the swelling Clusters, and press out the Necterous Juyce, Umbrag'd by the leae Verdure from the Suns hot Beams, and taught to know the Works of Nature. Ahab. 'Tis sure you cannot but be much delighted with the pleasant divertisement, since you sem so much transported with relating it. But to urge my meaning home; suppose your King should be desirous to possess it, Would Naboth without grudging part with what does render him such pleasure. Na. How most gracious Lord—what part with my Inheritance! O let me on my knees im∣plore my King would urge this thing no further. Ahab. Nay, let not Naboth be mistaken, Ahab asks it not without a price; Its value you shall have in Ophirs of finest Gold, or else a Vineyard far exceeding it in Circuit, and abounding more in Trees, producing Nectar and Ambrosia. Na. But let the King of Israel consider, that the Vineyard he demands is his poor Subjects dear In∣heritage; O rather ask Life, and take it at your pleasure. Ahab. Then I have sued in vain, and you but trile with your Prince; consider who demanded it, and mourn for your rash refusal. Na. Ha— 1the King has left me, and in such a rage, as does presage no less than ruine to poor Naboth; yet let the angry Monarch use me as he please, I'll never yield to part with my Inheritance. Conclusion. In an ill time Naboth denys the King, Who grieves, till Jezabel does comfort bring, And plots the ruine of the Israelite; Wh's ston'd to death, but what got Ahab by't;
'Tis true, he has the Vineyard, but's soon slain, As is his Son, his Wife, and all his Train. A Dialogue between Jehu and Jezabel. The Argument. King Joram, and King Ahazia slain, To Jezreel goes Jehu with his Train, Where Jezabel rebukes him, but cast down Is slain, and by the Horses trampled on. Iez. Stay haughty Rebel, stay thy rapid wheels, pollute not Jezreel with thy Bazlick breath, A Queen commandeth thee to retire. J. O! art thou found in all thy dazling Pomp and Gallantry, thou baneful mischief of the world, worst of things, whose Whoredoms and prodigious Witchcraft have caused Jacobs Seed so long to mourn under the Scourge of Heaven, and polluted all the Land with blood of Innocents. Iez. Ha— Inglorious Traytor, darest thou this to me, am not I still a Queen? A Queen whose nodd, Whilst Ahabs power remain'd, made Princes star∣tle; and whose Frowns and Smiles were sure pre∣sages of Life, or of Death; then know your di∣stance, and be dumb. J. Yes, witness the consecrated Priests that fell  Sacrifice to your revenge! Witness the blood of Naboth, nd the many mischiefs more the wicked Iezabel ha done, causing not only Ahabs fall, but Jorams and un∣thinking Ahazia's Fates. Iez. How! Is Ioram slain, as it was reported by your cruel hand; consider well, Had Zimri peace who slew his Master; no, fierce vengeance followe lose, nor shall the bold aspiring Iehu escape li
mischief, but o're taken by the stratagems of an inra∣ged Queen: new Tortures, and unheard of Torments shall overthrow his pride, and then too late you'll know the keenest vengeance of a Queen provoked, like Ahabs wife. Jeh. In vain are all your threats; your power's too short to execute your will: this moment ends your malice, with your life, that so the Prophets words may be full∣fill'd. — Slaves, who waits there! — Ha, A Troop of Eunuchs. — Yes, yes, fit panders for a lustful Queen! Come, throw your gawdy Mistriss down, that so much pride in falling, may be made the fluttering sport of Winds. Iez. Ha, ha, ha, can you imagine Tyrant, that those who live but by my Smiles, dare use their Queen at such a rate? Their Queen, on whom their Lives and Fortunes Centre. Jeh. Dare, yes! He dies that dare gainsay, or once delay what I command. — Slaves obey, or Tortures shall force out your wretched lives. He that a moment longer trifles with my pleasure, shall not live to see the falling Sun. Iez. How! Slaves stand off; unhand me Villains. Dare you thus approach your Queen! Vile wretches, Monsters, damn'd ingrateful Monsters! Are you turn'd▪ Traytors too? Ah, Ah, I fall; whilst all my Pride and Glory is dasht in death. O World, instable world, for ever now adieu. Jeh. So, 'tis as I wish'd; I knew the fawning slaves durst not refuse compliance. There let the Pride and Bane of Israel lie trampled till I take possession of the Kingdom, and extinguish Ahabs house. Conclusion. The wicked Queen, with lofty falling's slain; Nor weltring in her blood does long remain, E're Dogs devour her, next her house does feel▪
The dreadful fury of revenging Steel; And Baals accursed Priest the Swords devour, Whilst Jehu (as God bid) does use his pow'r. A Dialogical Discourse between Isaiah and Hezekiah, relating to the fifteen Addi∣tional Years. The Argument. The Syrians, by the wastful Angel slain, Jerusalem is freed, but then again, Good Hezekiah sickens, and is bid To order all things as a man but dead: Yet prayers and tears prevail; for whilst he prays, God fifteen years does add unto his days. Hez. HOw, — set my House in order; why must death with his cold hand, make Iudah Kingless, whilt in Tears the Widdow Nation drowns, and the calm Air is tormented with her sighs? Isa. 'Tis the Decree of him that gave you life, and has preserved you to this day; by him I am commissioned to relate the doleful message, and command you to prepare for immortality. Hez. Dye! O terrible; the very thoughts of Death affright me more than the Convulsions of expiring life can pain! O! Can it be, that he who ruled the chosen Seed, whose hand so long has held a golden Scepter, and every where received the loud applauses of the glad Plebeans, must in the prime of strength and glory, have his luster shroded in a Grave; and there be made the sport and food of crawling Worms. Isa. Consider Sir, that you was born to dye; and
that stern death claims as his due, the lives of Adams Sons, as forfeited by our great Parent, and subjected to his power; nor can the glittering vanities, in whom frail men too often put their confidence, keep back his shaft a moment, when his Commission is to seize their breath; therefore let not the King delay to set his house in order. Hez. O fatal sound! but stay good Prophet, stay, is there no mercy for your King? must, must his rising Sun so soon endure a black Eclipse; his life so soon set in the gloomy Grave? O for a longer course of days, that I might live, if but to tell of all the wonders God has done for wretched me! O with what adoration wou'd I bend before the footstool of his mercy-seat, would he be but in∣treated for my life. Isa. Vrge it n more; Deaths Harbinger I am, nor will the ghastly Terror long delay the execution; there∣fore be wise O King, and do as I have bid before it be too late, before the King of Judah be no more. Hez. Alas! Alas! The strong Disease by preying on the vital powers, has weakned me to that de∣gree, that now I am unfit to take recognisance of worldly things, I know not what my Treasures are, nor how to call my Fields and Vineyards by their proper names; nor can I tell the number of my Servants, nor whom I design the Scepter of Ierusalem: I have put off too long these matters, and now through fear and sickness, am quite unca∣pable of stating 'em; but could I live, I'de be no more so negligent. Isa. Your hopes of life I fear are vain, therefore consider well what I have said; and think them not my words, but his on whom the breath of life depends: and so great King, in Tears I take my leave. Hez. O stay▪ thou sacred Prophet stay, if but to close the wretched eyes of an expiring Monarch▪ Hah, will not the man of God vouchsafe to see his
King put off his Scepter, Crown, and Robes of Ma∣jesty, to be soon clad with vile corruption, loath∣some putrefaction, and deserted by his cringing Courtiers, who will fly the scent, and turn their faces to adore the rising Sun. O now too plain I know, that all the glories of the world are fading shadows; things not worth our smallest care. — But see, the Prophet is return'd, and my heart leapeth with joy, in expectation of some milder sentence. Speak, speak most sacred seer, is there not yet some hopes of a Reprieve for poor con∣demned Hezekiah. Isa. There is: the God of mercy has inclined his Ear to your low supplication; your humility has conquer'd his displeasure, and melted▪ him into compassion: Fifteen years are added unto your days, and for a sign of confir∣mation, Heavens glorious Lamp shall Retrograd no less than ten degrees upon the Dial of Ahaz. Hez. I am confirmed, and dare not be so bold as to dispute ought further, than the sign he is pleased to seal his mercy with. Isa. See then 'tis done; and now it much concerns you to imploy this large addition to the Glory of the Donor. Hez. That shall be all my care; nor will I dare to displease that God that has shew'd such favour to his worthless Servant as this, to snatch him from the Jaws of death, and respite his declining body from the Grave. Conclusion. Thus Hezekiah lives beyond his date, And joys to think of his revived fate, Walking uprightly till the time expires, And then surrenders as grim death requires▪
A Dialogue between Hester and King Ahasuerus. The Argument. The Captive Hester to a Throne is rais'd. And by the great Ahasuerus prais'd, Subduing him with Love, whose Scepter sway'd All Eastern Nations, whom gret Kings obey'd. Aha. A Happy day unto the beauteous fair, wel∣come thou loveliest of woman-kind▪ welcom my Queen, to the soft stretched out Arms of a transported Monarch; whom your charms have  beyond what words can tell. Hest. —Al, great Emperor, I blush to think that ought in me should be of force to give delight to him, whose aweful word commands so many Monarchs, yet at the same time must confess, a joy surprizing seizes every part, that hel vouchsafe thus to esteem his hand∣maid. Aha. Amongst the Beauties of the Land, there's none so charming, so inchanting fair; none so worthy of a glittering Diadem as my beloved Hester; nor could so much amazing brightness (as beams from her starry eyes) shine better than upon her kind Ahasuerus. O what transports found my Age when fired by those warm Joys that spread themselves throughout all your parts. Hest. It shall be still the care of your obedient Queen to do what best may please her gracious Lord; who from a low Estate has daignd to raise her high above the Persian Princesses. Aha. Thou shalt be still more highly in esteem; to you shall bend all Knees: Princes shall wait upon your train; and whatsoever conduces to the Glory
of the greatest Potentate shall be at your command, only be pleasing to your admirer, and Life and Death shall hang upon your breath. Hest. In me, great Emperor, Obedience still shall shine; whatever you command that I can do, my readi∣ness in a compliance with my will, shall testifie the high esteem I have for him that is sle Monarch of the East. Aha. O now you charm me more than ever! now fresh Joys are strugling in my Breast: A passion rises, not to be allayed but by the soft inspiring touch of your alluring Beautis. Then let's my fair, my much beloved Queen, to our retirement; where feeding my insatiate Eyes with many an eager gaze, I will tell thee all the secrets of my heart. Hest. Lead me my Lord, wheree're you please; for your sole will is my law. Aha. Ten thousand blessings on my darling hap∣piness; who by this quaint humility, makes me more indebted to her Love. The Conclusion. Whilst thus we haste to Ioy, too great to tell, To streams of Love that 'bove their banks do swell. A Dialogue between Haman and Mordecai. The Argument. Proud Haman envies Mordecai, because He will not bend and break his Nations Laws; Yet thinking him too mean a sacrifice, He's not content less Jacobs remnant dies. Ham. HOw's this! Will not the stubborn Jew bend to the Favourite of a mighty King?
To him that next his Monarch sways the Empire of the East, to whom Crown'd Heads give way. Mord. To man, great Sir, I dare not bend my knee▪ to God alone that Tribute I must pay; to him both heart and knee I bow, but to no mortal dare presume it, lest I rob him of his honour. Ham. Seest thou not how the Servants of great Ahasuerus, far above you in the rolls of Honour, cringe when I pass by; and yet dare you refuse to Grace my state, by standing on a nicety, waving what is but in it self a Complement: know, wretch∣ed Captain! it is not veneration due to powers Divine, that I expect, but such obeisance as be∣comes a Monarchs Counsellor, the chief among the Princes. Mord. 'Tis what I cannot give. In this case vain is all you urge; nor dare I pass such Complements. Ham. You dare not; nay, you will not: it is your proud and stubborn nature, or a set dsign to cast a stain upon my greatness; which may in some measure shroud its luster. But, by sad experience you shall quickly know, whose anger you prooke by your irreverene; such havock, such a slaugh∣ter shall be made of your stiff-necked Tribe, that e're the silver Moon twie waine her Orb, not one shall live in all the Coasts of Media, or the Land made fruitful by the Streams of Euphrates. The thing is rsolved, and I will about it strait. Mord. There is a God that limits your fierce rage, that can in the midst of al your pride, bring your am∣bition low, and frustrate all your wicked purposes; nor shall the means to move him to compassionate his Captive People, be by Mordai neglected. Prayers and Fast∣ing shall be rise throughout the scattered Tribes; nor must the Queens endeavours want to cross the purposes of this blood-thirsty man▪ whose fall will let him know ex∣perimentally, there is a God that can correct his inso∣lence. — Yet must these measures speedily be put in
execution, to supersede the mischief his dire malice is swelled big with, lest innocence should suffer for what is unjustly called a crime in me. First then I will haste and let the Queen know his intentions. Conclusion. Haman his sure obtains, it is decreed, That all the Captive Jews shou'd quickly bleed. For Mordecais neglect the day is set, Which causes lamentations loud and great: But Counter-plotted is the bloody man, And hang'd at last for what himself had done. Nor scape his Sons, but fall into the snare, Their wicked Father boldly durst prepare For those that were not guilty of a crime; So let Ambition fall where e're it climb. Haman on the Gallows. HAman the Son of Amedatha, of the Kindred of Agag, and the People of Amalek, were highly favored by Ahasuerus Emperor of Persia. I find not what precious properties he had; sure he was a Pearl in the Eye of Ahasuerus, who commanded all his Subjects to do lowly reverence unto him; only Mrdecai the Iew excepted himself from the rule, denying him the payment of so humble observance. I fathom not the depths of Mordecais refusal, per∣chance Haman interpreted this reverence farther than it was intended, as a divine honour, and there∣fore Mordecai would not blow wind into so empty a bladder, and be accessary to puff him up with self-conceit; or because Amalek was the Devils first fruits, which first broke the peace with Israel, and God commanded an Antipathy against them, or he had some private countermand from God, not to reverence him: Whatever it was, I'de rather
accuse my self of Ignorance, than Mordcai of Pride. Haman swells at this neglect, will not his knees bow? his neck shall break within a Haltar; but oh! this was but poor and private revenge; one Lark will not fill the belly of sch a Vultur. What if Mordecai will not stoop to Haman, must Haman stoop to Mordecai to be revenged of him alone? Wherefore he plotteth with the Kings Sword to cut off the whole Nation of the Iews. Reparing to Ahasuerus, he requested that all the Iews might be destroyed. He backs his Petition with three Arguments: first, it was a scattered Na∣tion, had they inhabited one intire Country, their extirpatio would have weakned his Empire, but being dispersed, though killed every where, they would have been missed no where; secondly, his Empire would be more uniform, when this ir∣regular People, not observing his Laws, were take away; ten thousand Talents Haman would pay in∣to the Bargain, into the Kings Treasure. What, out of his own Purse? I see his Pride was above his Covetousness; and spightful men count the revenge a purchase which cannot be over bought; or perchance this Money should arise out of the confiscation of their Goods. Thus Ahasuerus should lock all the Iews into his Chest, and by hp of Hamans Chymistry convert them into silver. See how this grand destroyer of a whole Nation pleads the Kings profit. Thus our puny depopulators al∣ledge, for doing the King and their Country good; and we will believe them, when they can perswade us that the private Coffers are the Kings Exchequer, But never any wounded the Common Wealth, but first they kissed it, pretending the publick good. Hamans Silver is Dross with Ahasuerus, only his pleasure is currant with him: If Haman will
have it so, so it shall freely be, he will give him and not sell him his Favour. 'Tis woful when great Judges see Parties accused by other mens eyes, but condemn them by their own mouths. And now Posts were sent throughout all Persia to execute the Kings cruel decree. I had al∣most forgotten, how before this time Mordecai had discovered the Treason, which two of the Kings Chamberlains had plotted against him, which good Service of his, though not presently paid, yet was scoed up in the Chronicles, not rewarded but re∣cored, where it slept, till a due occasion did a∣waken it. Perchance Hamans envy kept it from the Kings knowledge; and sometimes Princes to reward the desert of Men, want not mind, but minding of it. To proceed; see the Iews all pitifully pensive, and fasting in Sakcloath and Ashes, even to Queen sther herself, (which unknown to Haman) was one of that Nation. And to be brief, Esther invites Ahasuerus and Haman to a Banuet, whose life shall shall pay the reckoning, and next day they are both invited to a second Entrainmnt. Mean time Haman provides a Galowes fifty Cu∣bits high, to hang Mordecai o; fie Cubit would have served the turn; and had it took effect, the bght of the Gallows had bu se his Soul so much he farther on his journey towards Heaven; his Stomach was so sharp set, he could not stay till he had din'd on all the Iews, but first he must break his fast on Mordecai, and fit it was that this bell-weather should be sacrificed before the rest of the flock, wherefore he comes to the Court to get leave to put him to death. The night before Ahasuerus had passed without sleep, the Chronicles are called for either to invite Slumber, or to entertain waking with the less tediousness. Gods hand in the Margin points
Reader to the place were Mordecai's Good service was related, and Ahasuerus aketh Haman (newly come to his presence) what shall be done to the Man, whom the King delighted to honour? Haman being now (as he thought) to measure his own happiness, had been much to blame if he made it not of the largest size. He cats out a Gar∣ment of Honour, Royal both for matter and making, for Mordecai to wear: By the Kings command, he becomes Mordeca's Herauld and Page, lacqueying by him, riding on the Kings Steed, (who he hoped by this time would have mounted the Wooden Horse) and then pensive in Heart, hasts home to bemon himself to his Friends· Hamans Wife proves a true Prophetess, presaging his ruine. If the Feet of a Favourite begin to slip on the steep Hill of Honour, his own weight will down with him to the bottom; once past Noon with him, 'ts presently night. For at the next Feast, Ahasuerus is mortally incen∣sed against him, for plotting the Death of Esther, with the rest of her people. For had his project succeeded, probably the Iews had not been spared for a Jew being Queen, but the Queen had been killed for being a Iew. Haman in a careless sorrowful po∣sture, more minding his Life than his Lust, hd cast himself on the Queens bed, Will he force the Queen, said Ahasuerus, before me in the House. These words rang his passing Bell in the Court, and a∣cording to the Persian Fashion, they covered hi Face, putting him in a winding sheet that was dead in the Kings Favour. The next news we her o him is, that by exchange, Haman inherits the Gibbe of Mordecai, and Mordecai the House and greatnes of Haman. The decree against the Iews being ge∣nerally reversed.
A Dialogue between Job and his Wife. The Argument. Job's wicked Wife does urge him to despair, And curse that God that of him still took care: But wisely he rejects her curs'd advice, And is restor'd to's former Paradise. Wife. WHat a strange temper is this! Can Iob still cringe and bend to him, who from the height of happiness suffered him unpity∣less to fall under such a load of sad adversity? Know you not yet your substance is destroyed; your Sons that should have been the comfort of your Age, slain; and your self in every part, afflicted with tormenting, torturing and consuming Sores. Job. Yet must we not repine, since it is the pleasure of that great Omnipotent who made us out of nothing, breathed into us breath of life; and from whom all we did enjoy, proeeded. Wife. Yet better it is you never had had being, than to be thus contemptible, thus miserable, to undergo this ill-star'd; what wellcomer can be than death, to one who labours under such an Agony? Then turn your praises into curses, that his wrath may vex yet hotter; and by putting a full period to your days, take you from this sad world of wo. Job. Base wicked woman, vile and foolish; darest thou let a thought so monstrous harbour in thy breast! much more, how darest thou urge me to such damn'd Impiety? Shall Job, on whom he showred his favours, once move his lips, though in the softest murmur, when he is pleased to stay his giving hand, or call back what he gave; no, nothing ever shall prompt me to a guilt so horrible. Wife. Then you it seems will suffer patiently, and stand the mark of fierce indignation tamely.
Job. Whatever he inflicts it is for our good; his chastening is to try if we are worthy of his favours; nor will he wound beyond what he designs to heal. His mercies are past numbring, which in the midst of Iudg∣ment he oft calls to mind, and makes a full recom∣pence for what he takes away; therefore ever will I praise, and with just adoration bless his holy name; nay though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; and with dying Arms embrace the wounding Shaft sent by his hand to let out life. Wife. Well, well, I see then all I urge will work no effect on your meek mind, inured to slavery, serve him still, and be the subject of his Tyranny; bear all the Stripes he can bestow; and fawning, kiss the hand that strikes you: do this and more, whilst loud I laugh at the dull man that hugs his misery, and will not daigne to pity him. Job. All you have said is my resolve, no pain, nor loss, nor scorn, shall shake my dear integrity; all tor∣ments witty horror can invent, were they comprised in one, shall never break my constancy, or make me prove a Rebel to the King of Heaven: but with Faith un∣moved I will trust in him till lifes last Sand is run, expecting then to see him as he is, and Hymn his. Throne with Songs of praise. Wife. If that be your resolve, I will fly the Mansion of such sorrow, and seek shelter elsewhere, whilst his Arrows beat on you. Job. Yet shall I not be comfortless; his hand shall still sustain me, and my Eyes shall yet see happy days. The Conclusion. Thus Job bears through afflictions stream, which past, He is restored to health and Riches vast, And once more is the Glory of the East▪ Nor dare the fiend his quiet than molest; So those that trust in God are ever blest.
A Dialogue between Saul and his Armour-Bearer on Gilboa. The Argument. Saul routed flies, but finding flight was vain, He and his Armour-Bearer both are slain. S. NOw, now, 'tis almost come to pass as the grim Ghost related; Israel is ovthrown, My Sons are slain in Battel, and the bloody Foe makes havock of the flying people. A. B. Great King, 'tis true, the smiling Plains that looked so gay, when first saluted by the Morning Sun put on a crimson Robe, and wear instead of Flora's ma∣ny coloured mantle, the sad Livery of Death. S. Yet Saul still lives, — he lives to see the mighty ruine—to see his Children slain, and all his mighty men of War fall by the Sword. A. B. And still may live to be revenged of his now Tyrannizing Foes, live to return as many deaths as now his Eyes behold the Philistins to triumph in.— S. O! Name not Life, for that is the only thing that now is grievous to me—Wretch that I am, why did I fly? why fell I not amid'st the file of War? Why, why did not I break through the pointed Squadrons, and there bravely fighting, ru∣shed upon a thousand Swords, and from a thousand enraged hands received a Death that well beseemed  Monarch. A. B. O! Let not Israels King dispair; although the Fortune of the War now turns against him, et fresh Armies may be raised, and the Foe repelled; live, live? If but to be revenged. S. No —Heaven decrees my fall, and cutting short my Glories, dates them with this day, draw
then your Sword, and e're the Philistins overtake us, sheath it in my Breast, fr now my Life is grown burthensome. A. B. What means the King by this cmmand, can be imagine that his Servant dares stret  his and against the Lords anointed. S. O let me beg you would not dispue what I request, Renown and Glory will attend you for so brave a Deed, nor can you do me better service than to let out my afflicted Soul. A. B. Command me to kill my self, and I will obey,  bid me meet the following Foe, and charge A Squa∣don with my single Arm, I'le gladly do it, but dare not tretch my hand against my Sovereign. S. The Enemy is now at our heels, and time dmits no longer argument; see—see without your elp, your King can find a way to the dread Pallace  magnificent Death: Whilst falling thus —upon is Sword, his loathed Life takes flight. A. B. Hold, hold my Lord for Heavens—▪ is past recall, the desperate Deed is done, the cru word has pierced his Heart, and I'le not long survive;  imitating his Example, fall thus by his side, 'tis , 'tis done, my blood flows fast, now, now I swim  dazy mists, and now a gloomy darkness seales my . dies· Conclusion. Saul slain with his three Sons, the haughty Fo Cuts off his Head, and his guilt Armour show In all their Coasts, possessing Iacobs Towns▪ And much inlarging their own scanty bounds: Nor so contented, but the Corps of Saul They fasten to subdued Bethshan's wall: But thence the Iabish Gileadites it rest, And for the burying of their Lord are blest.
David saluted King. DAvid, who after Gods own Heart, was chose, Having escap'd the danger of his Foes, Run through the hazzards, numerous to tell; Saul slain, he's crown'd great King of Israel; Him the Glad People from all Cities meet, And loudly sing his praises in each Street. Though Saul's rejected House does strive with him For Iacobs Scepter and bright Diadem; Yet 'tis in vain, Heaven soon does end the strife, Whilst mighty Abner is bereft of Life. When as the Darling, from whose Loyns must spring The great Messia, Heavens all Glorious King, In Triumph rides, all fearless, and does see How much he owes for his felicity▪ To his Creator, by whom Kings command, On whom their regal Glories all depend; Who sets them bounds, and limits Kingly sway, Chastizing those that dare but disobey His strict resolves, whose will alone is Fate, And whose bare word can all annihilate. Davids kindness to Mephibosheth. KIng David high establish'd in his Throne, On former dangers safely now looks down, Remembring how Saul sought his Life, and ho Between him and kind Ionathan a vow, Pass'd in the great Iehova's sacred Name; Then calls to mind Mephibosheth, who lame, And in distress, was Son to him, who still Had held him dear, preventing the dire will Of Death conspiring Saul, and that he must Relieve his wants, or prove himself unjust,
Revolving thus, he sent a message great To his low House, who thinking now his Fate A pace drw on, and that his doom was past, Came trembling, and thus to the King at last, Through abrupt stammerings soft speech broke its way; O pardon mighty King, your slave does pray, Nay prostrate on his knees implores that he A guiltlss Man, for others guilt may dy. The Smiling Monarch soon perceives his fears And with kind words does quickly hush his cares, Commanding Royal Robes o're him be cast, And he thenceforth be at his Table plac't, Which banish'd Fear, and made him joy as fast. A Dialogue between David and Ber∣sheba. The Argument. Bersheba's tempting Beauties snares the King, Who strait commands his Servants, and they bring Uria's charming Wife, whom David wins, To sport, and add fresh number to his Sins. . WHat would my Lord with me, the lowliest of his Handmaids? why is Honour heaped on me thus unexpectedly, to ntroduced into the closet of a King. There is a mighty Cause,—See at your feet a arch bends, and wounds the Air with sighs. O! Rise my Lord for Heavens sake, what  you by this complement. Thus low to beg a Favour of the fair inchanting .
B. Of me! Beg ought of me, what can the vali∣ant, the Victorious King of Israel request, tht is in my power to give, when tribuary Nations heap on him the Riches of the Eastern World, and Sceptred Princes pay him Homage. D. O! Read my blushes, and you'll know what it is that I petition for, or if you understand the Language of my Eyes, they'll tell you plain 'tis in your power to ease my labouring restless thoughts. B. Alass my Lord I understand you not, or if I do, I dare not. D. How dare not—Can so much Beauty, so much brightness, in whose lovely Face the Graces chose t dwell—be cruel, when a Scepter is at her feet. B. Cruel! great Monarch, no my nature is too soft to harbour cruelty; consider I am a woman. D. Yes, and the wonder of your Sex, the glorious Masterpiece, and cheifest boast of Nature, who started when she formed you to behold a work so fair, and cried a lucky hit. B, O me! You'll make me bluh to death, if thus you flatter your unworthy Hand-Maid. D. Such Beauty as adores the lovely Bersheba, is not capable of flattery, but casts it off, as Christal dx her stains; the utmost praises of the smoothest Tong cannot enough describe your rare Perfections, O! how  fair Cheeks the Roses and the Lillys strive for mastery▪ How your bright Eyes, more bright than rising Stars  dart Beams of comfort; what Nectre dwells upon th ruby Lips, inclosing Orient Pearls, and what a fragra send they forth, what curling Amber dangles on your ory Shoulders, and how those gentle Hills of war Snow expose the happy Vails between—Oh! I am vished with a Sight so much transporting,—Oh! languish, and shall soon expire, unless you yeild  Love. B. How, love my Lord, is that the thing  press your hand-maid for.
D. Yes Love, and an enjoyment of those Beauties I admire; grant these, and be sole Mistress of a Mo∣narchs Heart. B. Alass my Lord, know you not I am Vria's Wife. D. I do, but you was born to be a Queen, and this happy Womb designed to be the first aboe of Pinces, those Breasts to nourish him, who after me must weild the Scepter of Jerusalem. B. O speak no more my Lord, it never can be. D. Yes you shall be adorned with Robes of Majesty, and with an awful nod, command the Knees of crin∣ging Courtiers. B. But would you have me, for the trifng ho∣nours that attend on state, break my marriage vows, sully my Virtue, and leave a lasting stain upon my Fathers House. D. Uria is my Servant, fighting now against the Amorites—All shall be done in secret, what we do shall not reach his Ears. B. Yet if I should dishonour him, by giving my self into the arms, though of a Monarch; how if he should come to know it, should I look him in the face, or stand the fury of an inraged Husband. D. Let not such thoughts disturb my Love, my Power and Credit shall protect your Fame; what tongue, and des move against the darling Favourite of a King; Come, come thou all composed of transport and delight, trifle not with a Monarchs Passion, till it quite burn out, and in expiring leave him miserable. B. 'Tis true my Lord. I am your subject, and ought not to dispute your will, but yet methinks n this case— D. Come, come thou beauteous Object of my toughts,  these vain fears aside, and let us retire strait to  Alcove strewed all with Roses and with fragrant essimine, shining with Saphiers, dazling Diamonds nd Rubies, overlaid with Gold Imbroidery, studded
every where with Orient Pearl, and wrought by the most curious needle work of Egypt and Palastine, a soft re∣cumbancy that can only be sutable to the dazling beauties of my Bersheba. B. My Lord I am amazed at what you tell, and am unworthy to approach a place so glorious, or if I should presume, it might set me a longing the otner to se it, than perhaps might be convenient. D. O no my Love, it can be only graced by your fair Eyes, then let us hence, and in the midst of transports I'll relate what you must needs delight to hear. B. To your conduct my Lord, I recommend my self, you are my Sovereign,  i'll not prove dis∣obedient to what you command. D. In this your kind, and thus to joys we hast, A Queen thou shalt be when some dayes are past, Conclusion. Bersheba yields, and by the King conceives Vria sent for, David's Army leaves, But will not bd his Wife, the crime to hide: For which he by the sword of Ammon dy'd When David takes his Love, but scarce injoy'd Is she again, e're the Infant is destroy'd; And Aalom agaist him does rebell, In which the Rebel and his Army fell. A Dialogue between Amnon and Tamar The Argument. Amnon does feign him sick, and begs o'th' King That Tamar may Povision to him bring: Bt 'tis a Plt, incestuusly to gain His lustful will, and his chast Sister stain. Am. WHy is it my lovely Sister that  slight me thus, what have I done th
you should prove regardless at this rare? wherefore neglect you him that loves you as his Life? Ta. My Brother, it was far from Tamar's know∣ledge that you were indisposed; the fist news I received was from the King, our Father. Am. That's strange; I thought the Son of David could not have been in such disorder, but the Court e,re now had rung on it. Tam. I fear'd indeed you was not well by reason of your absence, but ad the relation from non but  I named. But what is the reason all your Srants ae re∣tired? Amn. It was my command; because I would be private with my lovely Sister. Tam. Ha! What means this eager gazing on me? Why this wildness in your looks? Why temble you, and wherefore ebbs and flows the blod in your disrdeed Countenance? Sure you are taken with sme suddain ; shall I go and call the Kings Phsitians? Amn. It needs not; you are the only Physitian can case my grief: it is you alone can se your Brothers life. Tam. Alas, I have no skill in Physik; now not  disease. Amn. You bear about you what will ease my in. The distemper that torments me i Lovs urning Feaver, which long time hs pry'd upon y spirits. Tam. Love. — Why, can you conceive yr Siter tes you? Sure you will not injre her so much. Amn. Then come to my Arms, my lovely dear, ar inchanting Tamar, and conei me none of Davids Son. Tam. How—why, am not I your Sise? — Ha, hat mean you by this roughness? Amn. To satiate my self with love, and quench e Feavorish passion of my mind with Tamars Vir∣n Beauties.
Tam. Consider 'tis not lawful: wherefore then should Amnon shame himself and me by such a flly. Amn. My fierce unounded passion has no room for reason; and therefore urge not any thing in op∣position to my vast desire. Tam. If you love me, as you say, forbear to violate a Sisters Honour, and demand me of the King in Mar∣riage, that Jacob's Sons may all applaud your Wisdom. Amn. In vain is all you urge. This hour, this hour is that wherein I chose to perfect my felicity▪ Then tamely yield what I request, or by my Fathers Scepter, thus I will force a passage o my Joys. Tam. Why sure you dare not once approach your Sister with a design to force her Honour. Amn, What dares not Love attempt when it grows high; when reason is wracked, and virtue bears no form. Tam. Oh! Look not thus seerely wild upon me; poor me, a wretch betrayed into your power! Consider, you are David's Son, and I his much loved Daughter: If not for mine, yet for our Fathers sake; if not for love, yet in dread of his fierce Anger, send me hence at this ime undefiled, that I may nt becme a y-word  the Daughters of the Land. Tus low upon my knees, I beg it of my dear, dear Brother. Amn. To all your plaints I will be as deaf as Seas▪ were they as loud as fighting Winds, I'de not re∣gard them. My desperate resolves are fixed im∣moveable as Mountains, or the Wave-repllin Rocks, against whom (in vain) the dashing Surge roar. No Storms at Sea, nor Ships in them, Ablaz with whirling sumes that make the Top-mast crac creates more terror than my wild desire. And sinc you will not tamely yield, but trifle with a passio hot as Aena's mounting Fires, with these stron Arms I force you to my bed. Tam. O help, help, help for Heavens sake! I wi die, I will die before my honour. O spare me, spa
me! Oh, Oh, Oh wretched, wretched me! what shall I do, I am undone, undone for ever. Amn. Now the trifling shadow you so prized is gone; and I have surfeited upon your sullied Beau∣ties. Therefore hence with speed, lest a worse ruine fall upon you; and for the future, know what it is coily to parly with a Princes Love. Tam. O never, never will I hence; but where I lost my honour, there I will lose my Life. See, see my Bo∣som bare to stand your utmost fury; sheath, sheath your wellcome Dagger in a Breast polluted by your Breath. Amn. No, your Life is too mean a sacrifice for my Revenge; but since you dare continue here against my will, I will call my Servants to remove you. What—ho—See, see, they come. Io. Bear this Woman hence; and see that all be made fast after her, 'tis I your Lord commands it, see it be quickly done. Tam. This, this is cruelty beyond degree: O may the just avenger judge my cause, and recompence my wrongs upon your wicked, your incestuous head, that all such Monsters for the future, may take warning by your fall. She is forced out, &c. Conclusion. Tamar thus forc'd and driven out, does fly With Garments rent, and many a piteous cry To Absalom: who smothers his fierce rage, Till at a Sheep-shearing he does engage The guilty Amnon; causing him to fall; Which on his head great Davids wrath dos call.
A Dialogue between Absalom and Joab. The Argument. Absalom flying's tangl'd in an Oak, Where Joab finding him, the fatal stroak Forbid by David: the bold youth receives, Which him of Life ith' midst of Treason reaves. Abs. O Fatal mischief! What could worse befall me, than thus to struggle betwixt Heaven and Earth, not being capable of reaching either; but here, for ought I know, must be the sport of whistling Winds, and dangle till I dye? Nor is this all; my Glory is no more: the battel is gon against me, and my bold Confederates in Rebellio fallen by the Sword. My Conscience stings me with remorse, and all the dreadfull shapes that have been eigned, methinks glare on me, and deride the po∣sture I am in. — But hark, the rushing Bougs give way, and trampling of Horses now invade mine Ear. Hah, 'tis the Foe, the bloody-minded Ioab; now death is near to ease my pain, and wellcom is it to afflicted Absalom. Joab. Hah, Rebel, are you taken in a snare? Hw strangely ha eternal providence fast hampered him, whose Life with eagerness I sought? Abs. Ioab, consider who I am; think on King David, and the charge he gave you. Joab. I have considered, and am come resolved to put a period to his life that durst rebell against a too in∣dulgent Father, and with impious Arms, not only seek is Crown and Life, but trouble peaceful Israel with unexpected War. Abs. My Crimes I grant, and tremble at what eadstrong rashness prompted me to undertake▪
yet what injury have you susained. Let him whom I have injured pass my doom; let him drain out the Rebels blood, that Absalom well pleased at his revenge, may bless with dying murmurs the kind hand that gives the wound. Joab. In vain; you ask a favour that will not be granted.— No, the King is too indulgent; and will melt in mercy towards him that urged his ruine, and pehaps may be inclin'd to hearken to your protestations of future obedience; and in pardoing, give you oppor∣tunity to reach his life. Therefore— Abs. Therefore what — Surly you dare not touch a life the King would save: a life that is so dear to David. Joab. Yes Traytor, Joab dare, and came rsolved to make the Rebel bleed; to let out that rank blood that has infected the unstable Tribes. Abs. Does it become a man of War to bait a Lion thus in the toils; Thus to reproach a Prince, at whose bare beck (when high in favour) you wold fly, and humbly cringe to kiss the ground whereon he trod, and fawning on him for self-interest, flatter his Ambition till it swelled him into ruine. Joab. I will hear no more, but Thus — become the messenger of your death. — Thus make a passage for yur Rebel-Soul. Abs. O! I am slain; my blood and Abners▪ be pon your head, — that —blood. —thou-hast-so— sely sh—sh—shed — Joab. So, I have cropt the bold aspiring Rebel in the lom of all his glory, and given peace to Israel. Here, ake him down, and cast him in this deep pit; the  his Carkass with a pile of massie stones, that so  memory may be forgot. Conclusion. The Captain slain, the battel ceases, strait The crooked Trumpets sound a still retreat:
Then word is sent the King of all that's done, Who full of grief sheds Royal Tars alone For his slain Son; which makes the Conqu'rors steal Into the City, and themselves conceal: Till Ioabs threats oblige him to descend, And comfort that did his life dfend. A Dialogue between Solomon and Pha∣roah's Daughter. The Argument. Old David dead, King Solomon inthron'd, Weds Egypts Princess in his wn abode; Rich are they both in all that men approve, But more than usual, are they rich in Love. Sol. THrice welcom to a Monarchs Arms, my lovely Queen; whose Eyes inlightened swarthy Egypts face, and whose inchanting Beauties charm the heart of Solomon. Queen. My Lord; you cannot love, nor yet admi me more than (blushing I must own, though with  feeling joy) my fancy feeds on you. Sol. Then are we happy far above he reach o Fate; and may look down as from some Towerin height, and pity those that toil and labour fo ought les than Love. Qu. 'Tis that indeed my Lord, that can best contribut to mans felicity; for where it is absent, nothi but disorder and confusn rule. Sol. It is true, my solace and my dear delight nor has the great establisher of my exalted Thron een wanting to add this blessing to the rest;  with paternal care plac'd a Spring of Cordial  Essential Love in either breast.
Qu. A Spring indeed that flows with Nectar and Ambrosial Ioys, more than our hearts are capable, with∣out overflowing to receive. Sol. 'Tis such a blessing Princes seldom meet with, since their Eyes make not their choice; but they are still forced to take their hopes of happiness on trust. Qu. Although they are; yet the great wise disposer of the worlds affairs so orders it, that at first sight their hearts do mostly move in a sweet harony, supplying the defect of tedious Courtship. Sol. Then since Heavens Architect the glorious maker of the Universe, has ordered all things equal to our wish; wha more remains, but that with unpolluted Souls nd Bodies, day y day we send up Tribute-praise, and with all humility adore his goodness. Qu. You know m Lord, what Gds the sons of Egypt worship; I doubt no but you have heard of Isis and Osiris, who are dreaded through the Memphian Coast of seven horn'd Nilus hundred pointed plain. Sol. With detestation I have heard them named, and tremble to think, that the Sons of Adam should still b so sensless as to Worship Monsters, or at most,  stooks ispir'd b Hellish feds. Qu, Ae they no Gods then? Sure it is, I have heard thm speak, and tell srange things. Sol. Ye▪ as the magick owers of darkness have inspired. Gds they ae nt, but base deluding forms to blind the eae ulgar; the advice of Egypts Magi. Qu. Who is it then that gurds, protects and guides us in our great affairs. Sol. The glorious tremdous Majesty of Heaven, whose name is known in Israel; who made the wonders that are every where beheld; at whose brightness Angels vall their Faces, and in whose hand is all the breath of Life: the God who made
the World of nothing, and whose power shall raise us after dath, and bring us (if we trust in him) to Mansions of eternal bliss, where with Ages num∣berless we shall rejoyce, and joyn in Chorus with the dazling Cherubims and Seraphims to sing hi praise. Qu. You tell me wonders, such as never entred at my Ears; but where does such transcendent excellency dwell? What place is capable to shrowd such Majesty. Sol. His dwelling is above all lights; nor is he circumscribed: for though Heavn is his Throne and Earth his Footstool, yet the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; he fills all places, and com∣municates his bounty with a liberal hand to all his Creatures; riding (when he pleases) on the Winds spread Wings, and often makes the Deep his Cham∣ber. Clouds are his Pavilion; and thick darkness is his secret place: whilst his bright beaming Eyes behold the abstrusest things, and pierce our secret thoughts. Q. Wonderful and much amazing is what you relate, nor could I er'e beleive that this vast Fabrick could so so many thousand years continue in perpetual Harmony unguided, unsustained, nor sinks it into my weak Breast, hat Fate or chance rules all below, but that each stand to the Law of over ruling Providence. S. Your thoughts were not in vain, were it pos∣sible that power, that sacred essential Divinity would withdraw his care, and his conduct by crea∣ion, so on would totter; and the warring Element onfound the glorious Fabrick; nay Heavens brigh Lamps would mix wth Earths Impurity; natures oncord then would break, and all return to a con∣used Chaos, if not quite vanish into nothing, when t was derived, —but let us at this time enquir no further into these stupendious secrets, but with oy and fear ador the Lord of Lords, the King of Kings, Even Iacobs mighty God, by whom, through
whom, in whom all things were made, preservd, and have continuance. Q. My Lord shall be obeyed, i'll wade no furher, in these devious deeps, but at an awful distance revere that dzling brighness, that essential good who shines so glorious in his creaures. S. Observe what you have said, and then expect for ever to be blest; but now time calls away, we must this moment to the House of high magnifi∣cence, built to the honour of his Name, who shakes Earth, and rends the Clouds with Thunder, before whose face, when wrath, goes a consuming fire, to burn up Rebel Atheists that disown his power. Q. My Lord, I ge, and from this day shall make it my chief Care to contemplate him and his mighty won∣ders, and next to admire the man I love. Conclusion. The promise holds not with the feeble Sex, For with strange Gods she soon does Iacob vex, Causing the Heart of Solomon to stray, Where Wisdom dwelt, and sometimes lose his way. The Iustice and Magnificence of King So∣lomons Court. Bold Adonija's hasty Treason dash't, And all his hopes, when but in Embrio pash▪ Old David sees his Son anointed King, And to the Throne they him no sooner bring, But executing his dead Fathers will, Ioabs and Shimei's blood his Sword does spill; The Harlots case decides wise Solomon, And gets renown, no sooner was this done But at hi cois Wisdom and Honour stand;
With Riches more than Avarice can command; But the two last, as fading things, he cast Behind his back, and the bright Queen embrac't: All glorious Wisdom, eldest born of Heaven, For which the others were as hand-maids given To wait on her, and next the King proceeds To Famous, glorious, and amazing Deeds, A mortal man does build a House for him, Who rides upon the Starry Cherubim: What David had design'd, his Sceptred Son, Will have with Speed, and countless cost begun, Mount Lebanon with Axes loudly sounds, Whilst cloud-invading Cedars kiss the grond, The Rocks hard intrails are in pieces torn, And Gold from all the Richest Lands is born; From Ganges to Hydaspes Christal Streams Are brought the Glittering glorious Gems, The Silver Mines exhausted every where, And dies the richest Grain with sofest hair Of Beasts, but rarely seen, hard to be caught, And all were by most curious workmen wrought, Before they were set up, that there no sound Of Ax or hammer, the calm Air might wound; But that what had been said, might be fulfill'd, That he should then a peaceful Temple build, Of sixty Cubits length, of twenty broad, And thirty high, a Mansion for the God Of Iacob, who establish'd his high Throne, In peace and truth, whilst none more great was known, Adding a Porch of twenty Cubits long, And ten in breadth, compil'd of Marble Strong; Whilst all within the dores and walls did shine With Gold and Gems, Mozaick work divine In every place appear'd, Each place was bright By the reflecion of so rich a Light, All woods of price were there, each overlaid With Gold expanded, or brigh Silver spread,
Studded with orient Pearls, and Rubies fair, Jasper and Jacincts too were shining there, Christal, and Topaz, Beril, Amahists, And glittring Diamonds, no stone there was mist That could contribute to the dazled sight Of wondrin man, or give his Eyes delight; Plm Ts that flourish and still seem'd to bloom, Adorn' the stately place, and all the Room, With shapes of golden Cherubims was set; But those hat spread above the Mercy Seat Wre trrible to the bholders eyes, As those that fill the Sacred Throne with cries Of Holy, holy—for God chose to dwell In th'inmost place, to guide his Israel y sacred Oracle: All this, and more The King perform'd with Treasure, wondrous store In sevn rs space, and all the Vessels brought Into the House, for sacred uses wrought; When Sacrificing with loud praise, a Cloud Inclosing, dazling brightness soon does shroud The mighty Fabrick, then the Heavenly Guest, Who had the Labour, and the Labourers blest Descended, and well pleas'd, the place possest. Wondr of wonders, so amazing great, That none can think on't, but must wonder at; That he who crown'd with rayes of brightness, he Whom Angels dare not, without vailing, see, Should take up his abode with wretched Man, Who's but a Vapour, Fading Grass, a Span, A Bubble, Shadow, Smoak, or what is less, A thought, that's past; O how can man express Sufficient Praise for such, such Humility In him who made all things e're they could see.
A Dialogue between King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. The Argument. From distant Lands with a most splendid Train Came Sheba's Queen to hear the King explain Mysterious things, and is pad to find A King so Rich, so wise, so Just and Kind. Q. S. I Plainly see great King of Israel, that babling Fame has not been over lavish, as too oft she's wont, in setting forth theGlries of your Court such Magni∣ficence as every where appears, my Eyes in all their tedious search never viewed before: 'Tis true, the Pin∣ces Treasure and his Mind must both be great, that could eret such glorious Fabricks. S. Illustrious Quen, whose awful Septer stretches its Commands through the wide Sabean Coast, con∣sider this aspiring Mansion was not built for Mortal Man, but for the dread Reception of the Mighty God of Iacob, who is pleasd to dwell therein, and condescnd to an acceptance of his Servants Sacri∣fice, and mean oblations. Q. S. It seems no less, and well befits a Deity, or dare the Nations round you boast their Gods inshined in such a glorious Pallace. S. The Gods they worship are unworthy of their lowly Cells—base Idols—But the workman∣ship of foolish Hands, and those that make them, are much like unto them. Q. S. 'Tis true, they are but senseless Images, take them simply, but inspired by Powers inisible, they tell strange wonders, and point at the Nations Fates. S. Yt those inspiring Spirits, who still reply in Ambiguties, and cause the too credulous Nations
to deceive themselves, by making wrong constructi∣ons of the Hellish Syllogisms; work not the strange effects they tell, but are in all things limitted by hi who made them, and whatever else was made, who of himself does all things, and in his Eter∣nal Counsel foresaw what was, is, and is to come. Q. S And is he then the highest, the Supremest Deity. S. He is alone from all Eternity, besides him there is none, no God, but Iacobs God; the great Jehovah, the Almighty Fountain, when what ver is, has flowed, Heaven, Earth and Sea acknoledge his dread power; and all the Creation tremble at his Frown. Q. S. How! Is his power so great, that senseless Creatures can be capable of understanding when he is Angry. S. Yes, all the Glittering Host that dance round us, hear his Voice; the ruffing Winds are still when he commands, nor dare the Ocean rage, if he forbids it's Fury; the ponderous Earth by him is sustained without a prop of ought but thin and fleeting Air; the glorious Lamp of day, when he commands, denies the world its Beams, nor dares it run its Course, but by his order; the fruitful Ground by him forbid, dares not produce her fruis, Nature runs backward when 'tis his command, and does her work preposterously. Q. S. I start at what I hear, and am amazed— But say great King, in whom such Wisdome dwells a to inable you to know this mighty God, and be accquainted with his will; are there not second Causes that produce strange visible effects. S. 'Tis true there are, but all of them have their original from the great Fountain of all power and Wisdom; who out of nothing, made what ever we behold, nay all the orders bright, of Angels, Arch-Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims, are the creation
of his hands, or spung from nthing at his word. Q. S. Leaving those glorious Spirits far above the reach of Mortal Eye; let us contemplate his wonders isible; say mighty Monarch by what secret extinct ebb and flow the briny waves? why shakes the Earth? say why the Bellowing Clouds dart flame? How dread∣full Comets, on whose horrid hair hang pestilence and War, kindle; ad by what matter fed; how is the dayes bright Eye eclipsed; and why does the Silver Moon in the midst of all her lustre lose her light at times? and whereore keep those Luminaries their un∣erring course through the twelve signs of Heaven? say, say most sapient King, proceed these not from second causes. S. Hard things you ask, yet give attention, and I will answer brief to all you have proposed. Q. S. With Ioy I would hear these Misteries unre∣vealed. S. Then thus the great Work-master in six dayes having created Heaven and Earth, Sea, Beasts, Birds, fish, Plant, Men, and every creeping thing that has the breath of Life; nay, all that we have ever heard of, or beheld; to show himself a God of order, he set bounds to all his Creatures that they move harmonious, and firm concord rest througout Creation and in some cases suffers the superiour Bodies, as made of matter more refined, and nearer participating with Celestial substance by their in∣fluence to dispore and move inferiour qualities; as the pale Moon, predominant in wary things, draws after her the Sympathizing Ocean, making it to rise or fall as she ascends or descends in our Horrizon; or in that deprest, or as some take it under us; though the World it self centered, a∣mits no under part; but every part is uppermost (that is) Men travel with their Heads towards Heaven; on the other side the Suns hot beams and fiery influences of the Stars insusing heat into the
Earth; and there it meeting with cold winds, and watery damps convented in the vacant corners; imbodying and mustering all its force; the con∣trary Elements strive with each other, and after long strugling with impetuous Fury, rend the trem∣bling globe to vent themselves: again the fiery vapours flying upwards, and not being able to Break through the Region, armed with cold, in order to unite with whats above; they headlong plunge in∣to some interposing Cloud, grown big with showers and shivering it into a thousand pieces, fill the hollow Concaves with prodigious Thunders: whilst the sallying fire dispersing, vanishes. As for those Shivering fires that are contracted as it were, to warm the world; to fly the wrath of angry Heaven, they are composed of unctious oyly matter, exhaled from Earth and Sea; and fired by vehe∣ment Agitation, or too near approaching the Aethe∣rial fire, that circles in the Air, lasting no longer than the exhalation contracted; or ascending, feeds them, being mostly in or this side the flaming Region. Q. S. Great and mysterious are the words you re∣late; but say are these the effects of second causes, is not Nature most predominate in these contingencies. S. The God of Nature, as the great first mover, it is true, permits the course of things, but orders and disposes by his over ruling providence, as he sees fit; allotting them their times and seasons, nor is ought done without his high permission. Q. S. Infini tely have you satisfied me hitheto, yet let me beg you would proceed to what remains, that I may admire still more the donor of such wisdom. S. As for the glorious Luminary, to whom, by the Creators own appointment, is assigned the rule of the Day, when its all chearing Beams are screened in part from us, and thrown Ascance; be∣hold the Moons dark Body (which is never filled
with lustre, but borrowed light, all her Silver Beauty is but a bare reflex) interposing betwixt the prime Orb and us in the Ecliptick node; nor can the Sun Beams be fully on us, till that let's removed by the various motions of these Planets; the Moon in like manner wanting light, is often screened from from the Suns bright Rayes by Earths ascending shade; which does at certain times, when the great Panets cross, reach the concave of the lowest Orb, and rob her of her pale reflection, That the Sun, Moon, and other celestial Bodies continue a mistick dance; 'tis that their influence may preg∣nate Earth for Man-kinds benefits. So that it is plain, the great, the wise Creator of the Universe, has subserviated those glorious Bodies to the Terrean sedentary Globe, which with far lesser labour might make its diurnal revolution, and as it were, on its soft Axels revolve with noiseless Motion. Q. S. How strangely am I pleased at what I hear, and could dwell upon this theam for ever; admiring next to him that gave it; him that possesses so great a share of Wisdom. Thrice happy are all they that are un∣der the Guidance of such a Monarch, and more happy they that are attendant on you, and have their delighted Ears still filled with knowledge. S. Alas great Queen, these high applauses are not mine; I am but mortal Man, and subject still to humane frailties. If the eternal Fountain, whence not only Wisdom, but all other Graces flows; has indued his Servant with an understanding Heart; let all the Glory be ascribed to him, who has enabled me to satisfie you in all your curiosities. Q. S. Than be it so, and henceforth shall the God of Jacob only be adored by her, who has with Fear and Revrence heard of his mighty wonders; nor shall here blaze an Altar in my Kingdom to any power beside; for he alone is God infinite, and incomprehensible.
S. Bravely resolved, and like a Queen, whose Wisdom has hitherto appeared above her Sex; and may that God, whom Israel adores, be ever pro∣pitious; granting you Wisdom, Honour, length of dayes, and crown you with a peaceful and happy Reign. Q. S. All thanks be returned, and may what you have wished return an hundred fold on your head, the rest my presents soon shall speak. S. See, see the glorious Lamp of day sits on his me∣ridian Throne, and views at equal distance, the smiling East and West: 'Tis time great Queen, I wait on you to your repose. Q. S. With joy i'le be conducted by the wise, the great, the glorious King of Israel. Conclusion. Highly pleas'd, great Sheba's Queen presents The King with Spices, Gold, and Ornaments; And then from him again she does receive Such Presents as became a King to give: When taking leave, and blessing Iacobs Seed, Well pleas'd, she to her country does proceed. Luke 16. v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. There was a certain rich man which was Cloathed in Purple, and fine Linen, and fared sumtuously every day. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of sores, And desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich Mans Table: moreover, the Dogs came and licked his Sores. And it came to pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abrahams bosom: the rich man also dyed, and was buried.
And in  in torments, and seeing Abraham  Lazarus in his bosm, &c. A Paraphrase on St. Luke, the 16th Chap∣ter, from the 19  the end. Being a real Scripture Dialogue between the most happy Lazarus and the tormented Dives. To the Reader. BEhold these Lines crave thy most solid view, Since by the Scriptures they are proved true, Dost thou want Riches? here without all measure Is a most blessed stock of lasting Treasure. This Heavenly Treasure will inrich thee more Than all the Jewels on the Indian shore, Receive it joyfully, and say no more. Poor men rejoyce, while rich men houl and cry, Such is the pleasure of the Deity. Then cease thy tears, poor wretched soul, and lend An ear unto poor Lazarus thy Friend. Lazarus. Most Noble sir, view but these sores I bear, And how each one doth like a Mouth appear; For some relief my wounds do loudly cry, And humbly beg your Christian Charity. I ve lain here day by day unable, E're to obtain the scraps fall from your Table; The very Dogs more kindness shew than you, Who lick my my sores and heal my ulcers too: Alass great Sir I languish? nay I dye, Only for want of timely Charity. Let me request your bounty, for I know, God will repay you double what I owe; For Gods sake and your own, let me but have Some kind relief to shield me from the Grave, Scraps from your Table I do only crave.
Dives. Why how now Sirrah! how dare you presume To urge my patience with your begging tune? How dare you venture at my Gate to ly? Up and be gone, or else prepare to dye. Talk you of Sores and Wounds, what's that to me? The Doggs indeed your fittest consorts be: My Table is not spread to grant relief, To every begging idle lazy Thief; Such as your self may be for ought I know. Be gone you Idle rascal. Sirrah go, Or I'll release your idle cries and groans With a good Cudgel that shall break your bones. What if you languish, perish, rot, or dye: Do so or hang your self, pray what care I. You tell me God will double what I give, Yet will not I believe it, as I live. Go to him then your self, if you are able, And tell me then who keeps the better Table: So get you gone you lazy idle Theif, I fear you there will find but small relief. Lazarus. Farewel proud scornful Dust and Ashes, I Will henceforth only on my God rely; With winged speed I will approach thy Throne, And all my grief and misery make known. Lord thou art able to relieve my wants, elieve my misery, and hear my plaints. rom thee, my God, I do expect much more, han ever I yet found at Dives door. wever Gracious God, I now must try, y strength decays, Great God, behold I dye. Angels. blessed Lazarus! all Hail we say, e're sent thy Soul to Heaven to convey. est Abraham attends with open Arms, ho will secure thee from all future harms. uze then bright Saint, and Hallelujah sing, hilst we with expedition take the Wing.
In order to transport thee to that place Of joy, where Tears shall ne'r bedew thy Face. Dives lifting up his eyes in Hell. Behold me Father Abraham, I lye Surrounded with eternal misery: Shall Lazarus a blessed place obtain, Whilst I all Hellish Torments do sustain. Have mercy on me, Father, pray now send Thrice happy Lazarus to dip the end Of one of his blest fingers, and asswage My hell tormented Tongue, which fire makes rage: Some cooling Water for my Tongue, for I Must now in Hells Eternal Torments fry. Abraham. Remember Son, to add unto thy grief, When living, you allow'd him no relief. You then possess'd your good things, he his bad, You swam in mirth, whilst Lazarus was sad. But now the case is alter'd much, for he Shall ever joy, whilst you tormented be; Besides a Gulf between us two there lies, More deep than is the Earth beneath the Skies. And let me tell you, you will find it true, You cannot come to me, or I to you. Dives. Dear Father, let me then this sute obtain Send him unto my Fathers House again; Five Brethren there I have, O let him tell To them the torments I indure in Hell: And if they will not then their sins refrain, Let Lazarus return to thee again. Abraham. Moses, the Prophets too must be their Guide, And pray what else should they desire beside. Dives. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went Vnto them from the Grave, they would repent.
Abraham. If Moses, and the Prophets will not do, They'll not believe a Messenger from you. But further, let me paraphrase on the Chater as follows. Hearken therefore now, and I will speak of a great rich man, that flourished here on Earth. (as a learned Divine observes) In all pomp and a∣bundance, that shined in courtly purple Robes, that was cloathed in Bissus and fine silk, and fared deliciously, that was lodged sofly, that lived pleasantly. But un∣derstand what became of this rich man; his years being expired, and his dayes numbred, and his time determi∣ned, he was invited to the fatal Banquet of black ugly death, that maketh all men subject to the rigour of his Law, his body was honourably buried, in respect of his much wealth: but what became of his Soul? that was carried from his body to dwell with the devils, from his purple robes to burning flames, from his soft Silk and white Byssus to cruel pains in black Abissus, from his Pallace here on Earth, to the Pallace of Devils in Hell: from Paradice to a dungeon, from pleasures to pins▪ from joy to torment, and that by hellish means, damed pirits, into the infernal Lake of bottomless Barathrum, where is wo, wo, wo! Hearken also of a certain poor Beggar cloathed in gs, with miseries pained, pained with griefs, grieved ith sores, sorely tormented, unmercifully condmed ing at this rich Mans Gate, desiring to be refreshed  with the crumbs that fell from the rich mans table▪ e dogs had more pitty than this rich man, on this d∣essed creature, for they came to visit him, they came comfort him, they came and licked his sores, Well, his time being also determined, he went the  of all flesh, and death was the finisr of all his
miseries and griefs; Vita assumpsit mortem, ut mors vitam acciperet; he dyed once, to live for ever. And what became of his Soul? it was carried from his body to his Master, from a House of Clay, to a House not made with hands, from a Wilderness to a Paradice, from an earthly prison, to a heavenly pallace, from the rich mans Gate, to the City of the great God, from pains to pleasures, from miseries to joys, from Adams corruption, to Abrahams bosom. It was carried by An∣gels into the quires of Angels, to have his being and moving in the very moving Heavens with God himself. Where is life, food and abundance, and glory, and health, and eace, and eternity, and all good things: all aboe all that either can be wished or desired: And this is the subject that I shall now speak of. What poor Lazarus! What! lying at a gate▪ and full of Sores too? Would not this rich Man af∣ford thee some out-house to ly in, to shroud thee from storms and tempests? no: would not his servants pitty thee? no: would not his Childre speak for thee? no: would not his Wife intre her Husband for thee? no: Hadst thou ever do them any wrong? no: But, Lazarus, it may be thou art stout, and often-times Beggars will  chusers? thou perhaps wouldest have some gre Alms, or some Copy-hold, some Farm of this ri Man? no: Or thou wouldest have some delic Meat? no: Many Dishes? no: Or thou would sit at the Table with his Sons and Servants? no  What is it then that thou dost desire? Nothi but Crumbs to refresh my Soul, nothing  Crumbs to save my Life: Nothing but Crum Crumbs, Crumbs that fall from the rich Mans  I know that he fared plentifully, and that he  well spare them. What shall I say of the hardness of this  rich Mans Heart? Let me speak for Lazarus  his rich Man; yet I shall but Asinam comere,
one well observes) get nothing of this hard Fellow: I have a Message unto thee, O thou Rich Man, from the great God of Heaven, and he doth desire thee that thou respect the Beggar that lyeth at thy Gate pained with Sores, pained with grief, and even starved through Hunger: And I beseech thee in Gods stead, that thou have pity on this Beggar, as God shall have Pity, Mercy, and Compassion on thee, and look what thou layest out, it shall be paid thee again. But he answered, I warrant you he is some Runnagate Rogue, and so long as he can be maintained by such easie means, he will never take any other Trade upon him: Nay, but good Sir let it please you only to behold this poor Creature; which suppose it were granted, and he coming to the Gate where this wrethed object lay, seing him bewrayed with Sores, betattered with Rags, and the Dogs licking him, stopping his Nose with a squeamish Face, and disdainful look, began to say unto him: I see thou art some lude Fellow, that such Miseries happen unto thee, and such Plagues come upon thee; it is not for thy Godness or Righteousness, that these afflictions light on thee. But he replyed, O good Master, some comfort, some Relief, some Crumbs to save my Life, I shall dye else, and starve at our Gate; Good Master, I beseech you for Gods sake, for Christs sake, take some Pity, some Compassion, some Mercy on me. But he with an angry look disdaining Lazarus, said, Away hence thou Idle Rogue, not a penny, not a Morsel, not a Crumb of Bread; and so stopping his Nose from the scent, and his Ears from the cry of Lazarus, retur∣ned unto his stately Pallace: And this poor mans Throat being dry with crying, his Heart fainting for want of Comfort, his Tongue cleaving to the roof of his Mouth, being worn out with Fastings and Miseries, starved at the Rich mans Gate. Now must I speak for dead Lazarus against the Rich Man. Nam si hic tacuissent, nonne lapides clamabunt; If I
should hold my peace, the very stones would cry. O thou rich Miser, and more than Cruel wretch, Lazarus is dead, he is dead at thy Gate, and his Blood shall be upon thee, thou shewedst no Mercy unto him, no Mercy shall be shewed to thee, thou stoppedst thy Ears unto his cry, thou shalt cry and not be heard. It is inhumane Wickedness to have no Compassion on distressed Lazarus, but most of all, to let him starve at thy Gate for want of Food: What did he desire of thee but only Crums to save his Life? Is it not a small thing, I pray thee, that thou having abundance of Meat, should see him starve for Bread? That thou flourishing in Purple and Silk, would see Lazarus, lye in Rags? That thou seeing eve thy Dogs have pity on him, thou wouldst have no pity up∣on him thy self? What Eyes hadst thou that wouldst nt see his Sores? What Ears hadst thou, that thou wouldst not hear his cry? What Hands hadst thou that would not be stretched ou to give? What Heart hadst thou, that would not melt in thy Body? What Soul hadst thou, that would not pity his silly Soul, this wretched Body, poor Lazarus? If the stones could speak, they would cry  upon thee: If thy Dogs could speak, they would condemn thee of unmercifulness: If dead Lazarus were here, his Sores would bleed afresh before thy face, and cry in thine Ears, that thou art guilty, guilty of his Blood, and that thy sin is more than can be pardoned. Why should not I tell thee the Portion that i prepared for thee? This shall be thy Portion to drink: Let thy days be few, and another take thine Office: Let thy Children be Fatherless, and thy Wife  Widow: Let thy Children be Vagabonds and beg their bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places, l the Extortioner consume all thou hast, and let the stra∣ger spoil thy Labour: Let there be no man to pity thee, nor to have Compassion on thy Fatherless Children: Le thy memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next Ge∣ration let thy Name be clean put out: Let him be  accursed example to all the World: Let him be curse
in the City, and cursed in the field; let him be cursed when he goeth out, and when he cometh in; let him be cur∣sed when he lyeth down, and when he riseth up: Let all Creatures and the Creator himself forsake him, Angels reject him, Heavens frown at him, Earth open thy mouth, Hell receive him, Spirits tear him, Devils tor∣ment him, let no mercy be shewed unto him that shewed no mercy; Thus shall the miseries of Lazarus be re∣venged by the just plagues that shall justly fall upon the rich mans head. And now the rich man being in Hell Flames, me∣thinks I hear him crying out, saying; O Wretch that I am, why did I suffer Lazarus to starve at my Gate? for which I am shut in the Gates of Hell. Why did I not give Lazarus a crumb of bread? for which I cannot have here one drop of water to cool my tongue. Why did I shew Lazarus no mercy on Earth? for which no mercy is shewed to me in Hell. What shall I do? for I am tormented in this flame, I will cry unto Abra∣ham, Abraham have mercy on me, and send Laza∣rus, that he may dip the top of his finger in water to cool my tongue. I am tormented here: Abraham, I am plagued and continually pained here; Abraham, here my purple rayment in flaines of fire, my light is darkness, and my day night, my companions are Devils. O how they hale me! O how they pull me! O how they ex and torment me! Here my feet are scorched, my hands are seared, my heart is wounded, my eyes are blinded, my ears are dulled, my sences are confounded, my tongue is hot, it is very hot: send Lazarus therefore Abraham with a drop of water to comfort me; one drop, good Abraham, one drop of water. But Abraham answered him: Thou damned wretch, once thou didst disdain Lazarus, once thou didst refuse Lazarus, once thou didst scorn Lazarus, now Lazarus shall disdain, refuse, and scorn thee; once thou stoppest thine ears from the cry of Lazarus, now he stops his ears from thy cry: once thou turnest thy face from Lazarus
now he turneth away his face from thee: once thou deny∣edst crumbs to Lazarus, now he denyeth water to thee, not a spoonful, not a drop of water. Oh Abraham, but now if I had my goods, I would give Lazarus all for a drop of water: Now if I had a million of gold, I would give it all for a drop of water, now if I had a world of wealth, I would give it all to Lazarus: therefore good Abraham, one drop; But he answered, No, not a drop. Not a drop; then cursed be the day wherein I was born, and cursed be the night wherein I was conceived; cursed be my Father that begot me; and cursed be my Mother that bare me; cursed be the place that kept me; cursed be the delicate Robes that cloathed me, cursed be the delicate meat that fed me: let me be most accursed of all creatures both in Heaven and Eath. Oh! cursed, cursed, most accursed Soul, Where am I now? what Fiends are those that howl▪ They seize upon me, they torment me sore, I Shriek with anguish, they in fury roar. In Earths deep center; dark and dreadful Cell, Where only angry damned Spirits dwell In grossest darkness, yet my sight so clear, Mt hideous Visions to the same appear. In Hell, indeed, where I indure that curse Which shall not cease, but be hereafter worse In fire infernal; out of measure ht, Which ever burns, and yet consumeth not. I rave, I curse, and I accuse my fate, As if such torments were unjust, too great; But Conscience nips me with, not so; I try To kill that worm, but oh! it will not dye.
Most wretched I, besides the Woes I have, Methinks I hear my bones within my Grae▪ (As troubled with some fatal Trumpets sund) Begin to shake and shiver in the ground. Alass, alass, what shall of me become When wretched, go ye cursed is my doom. How shall my Soul and Body both affrighted, Then curse the hour they were again united. How shall the Devils then with fury driven Seize me for Hell, when sentencd out of Heaven; And on me with much insultation rage, As if my torments might their own asswage. Then with the hideous howling heard of Hell, I shall he thrown to that dreadful Cell, Where we in Flames that never fail shall burn; From whence we never, never shall retun. A fancyed Dialogue between Dives and La∣zarus. The Argument. Dives contemns poor Lazarus's wretched state, Who humbly sues for crumbles at his gate, Deriding his advice, till in the close, One mounts to Heaven, the other to Hell goes. Di. HOw kind has Fortune been to me? how am I made her Favourite, whilst with a lavish hand she heaps the worlds chief treasure on me; which makes me be admired, and sought un∣to by all; the golden Goddesses charms them at the
rate, that still they watch my looks, and when  smile are overjoyed,—But who is this that cries thus at my Gate, —Ha, a miserable wrech, an outcast of Fortune, whose miseries have made him loathsome, and contemptible an object, that offends mine eyes. La. O why turn you from me, mighty Sir, consider that I am your fellow creature, made of the same mold, inspired by the same Breath of Life, and retain in me the self same faculties. Di. Ha, ha, ha, canst thou boast thus, nay make these comparisons, and but the meer shadow of a man, a skeleton, whom famine with her pressing hand has griped, and turned into a thing detestable to behold. La. Dispise me not, great Sir, nor slight me for my miseries, 'tis in his power, whom I adore, to raise me to the heights of Honour, and depress your towring greatness. Di. No, no, that ne're can be, my Chests are rammed too full of Gold, the precious Idol of man-kind. La. Yet cannot your Riches in the least avail you, if he please to stretch out his hand against you; nay gran∣ting you continue as you are, admired and courted by the crouding vulgar; yet the wretched, the poor despicable thing thou seest is far happpier. Di. How —happier—why now you make me smile, sure you but jest, sor one more miserable  never yet could fix my eyes on. Laz. It is not Riches, Pomp, nor high applause that makes men happy, but a mind armed with content  bear him through all sad misfortunes, and a faith  firm affiance in the Donor of all things that we can  or in the world to come possess. O true content is an  estimable treasure. Di. Content is an Eternal treasure; why,  more create contentment, than to have
World at will? be waited on by crouds, and feed upon what ever Sea, Earth, or Air af∣fords. La. Yet this, without a conscience void of guilt, can yield you no felicity, a good Conscience is a continual feast. Di. Conscience, why I never knew what Con∣science balls, nor know I whether I have any; for when first she checkt me for laying my foundation upon Widdows and sad Orphans tears, I shook hands with her and bid her trouble me no more, nor since that me has shee much molested me, or when she does, Musick and charming Beauties shall divert my cares, and hush her into silence. La. Although at present she is still, yet there will come a day when she will cry as lud as thunder, and proclaim the wrong you hav done her efore the Iudge of all the Earthpunc; from whoe dread Presence none can flie. Di. Meer fbles are they that you tell, think you to scare me from my Joyes with telling me what I will never believe; why, when I dye, I am no more, nor an ought trouble me, why should I not enjoy my se then whilest I live? La. Yes,  deluded, that after de ath you must ap∣pear before  dread tremendous Majestie of Heaven, and answer for the smallest sin comitted; know there is an everlasting Lake of burning Sulphur▪ for all those that trust in vaniti, and joies unspeakble for such as tread the paths of prightness, Di. Pish, tell me no more of such vain dreams, the meer imagination of such as pretend Religion for a Trade, things all together unworthy of my great thoughts, nor will I stay to hear, but retire, and glu my self with pleasure. La. Go and be fatted, for you shall laugh now you fill, that you may mourn hereafter.
Conclusion. The rich Man not believes, but slights till death Seizes him, and rob him of his breath. The poor Man likewise dyes, but now their state Is different far, one Angel does translate To Abrahams happy bosom, whilst the fiends Snatch th' other where fierce Torments never ends. In vain is then his cry, no mercy is found, He must indure, whilst t'other's with joy crownd· Luke 15.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And when he came to himself, he said, how many hired Servants of my Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and be∣fore thee. And am no more worthy bo be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants. And he arose and came to his Father; but when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned a∣gainst Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more wor∣thy to be called thy Son. Take the Paraphrase upon the whole, as followeth, Viz. A certain Man had two Sons, one where∣of, and he the Eldest, continued always in his Fa∣mily, content with his provision, subject to his Govern ment, and in diligent Obedience to all his Commands. But the other, viz. the Younger Bro∣ther, full of Juvinal heat and confidence, and
the Age of Discretion, grows impatient of Restraint and desirous of Liberty, especially fancying that he could live better to his own content, and eve∣ry whit as well provide for himself; if he were at his own disposal: Therefore he desires his Fa∣ther to set him out his share, and to put his Por∣tion into his own hands, and leave him to his own conduct. The Father gratifies him in all his desires, gives him his Portion and his Liberty; which done, the Son, as if his Fathers presence or vicinage would put too great a restraint upon him, and give check to his freedom, he betakes himself to another Countrey; where being in the height of Jollity amongst his Harlots and lewd Companions methinks I hear him speak to his own Heart af∣ter this manner following, viz. O! sweet, what rare felicity is here, Where nought offends, where all things fit appear; Where Natures shop full furnish'd with supply, Stands alwaies open to the Passers by. My thoughts, what think you of these Streams so clear? My Senses, can you not suck Honey here? Affections, can you here not feed desire And with contentment to the Heart retire? Here are the Beds where sweetest Roses grow, Here are the Banks where purest Streams do flow, Here are the only Instruments of Mirh, Here are the only Iewels upon Earth. My stragling thoughts then here set up your stay▪ My striving Sences seek no richer prey; Affections, here your Fancies may be quieted, My pleased Heart then rest thou here delighted.
But to proceed: This Prodigal being now out of his Fathers Eye; Reach and Controul▪ he indul∣ges himself in the highest surfeit of Licentiousness, by which means in a short time (whilst he enjoys the present, took no care for the future) the the stock his Father allotted him, was utterly exhausted; and with that his pleasures also fail; the Roots that ministred to them being thus dryed up; and where his pleasures end, his cares begin: For now he hath leasure to look about him, and finds himself in a bad case, having no course left, but either to reurn to his Father, and confessing his Folly, and imploring his compassion; or to put himself a Servant to a Stranger; thereby to get a mean lively-hood; the former of these he was yet loath to come to; having not as he thought tryed sufficiently the folly of his own counsel, and to take to himself the shame of his own ill conduct, by so plain a retreat, was thought a sharper calamity than any he yet felt; therefore he resolved upon the latter; as if the severities of a stranger were more tollerable than the re∣prohes of a Father: For he concluded a Man was not perfectly miserable that had no body to upbraid his Folly. And now being in a strange Country, he comforted himself with this; that if he should find none to pity him, he was sure there would be none could torture him with the g rating remembrance of what he was and might have been. Well, he becomes a Servant, and he that could not brook the grave restraint of paternal Authority, now feels the yoke of servile obedience; for he is put to the base drudgery of feeding Swine, and hath the coursest fair for his maintenance: the Swine and he feed alike upon Husks, only with this difference some body cares for the Hogs, but nobody for the Slave; and the former have enough of that which agrees with them, but the latter is pinched with
hunger, having not allowance of that sordid diet answerale to the importunity of his needs. Bng sorely afflicted with this, he that formerly drea∣med of nothing but sweets of liberty, and the sur∣feits of voluptuousness, and never once thought of those hungry Wolves, Want and Necessity, which now stand at his door, after many a sad sigh, dis∣courses thus with himself: Ah fool that I was, who knew not when I was well, that understood not contentment without satisfaction, nor could take up with the substance, but must grasp at shadows till I lost both; that knew not what it was to be happy, but by the sad experiment of becoming miserable, that could not distinguish between the chastisements of a Father, and the wounds of an Enemy, nor believe but all yoaks were equal, untill I was convinced by tryal, that could not brook the Government and restraints of my Fathers Family, though indeared by the re∣verence of my relation, and sweetned by the benig∣nity of his countenance, and liberal provision for ne∣cessity and delight; nor be satisfied of my Fathers wisdome, but by the effects of my own rashness and folly. Time was when I had the respect and dignity of a Son at home, wha now find the contempt of a Servant abroad. I was then put to no drudgery, nor had other task than to serve the honour and interest of my Father, and in so doing I consulted also my own; for my duty and my happiness were then uni∣ted, but I am now put to the basest office, to the vilest employment, as if my drudgery were not so much imposed in order to my Masters profit, as to my own contumely. But that which comes nearer to me yet, and pinches me very sore, is that wherea in my Fathers House I could neieher feel nor fear want, I can now hope for nothing else, there the meanest servant had bread, not only to the full, bu to superfluity; much less was any thing wanting to me then a Son; now the case is sadly altered, I that
seldom had so much hunger as might serve for sauce to the plenty of my Fathers Table, feel now the difference between the liberal hand of a Father, and the evil and nigardly eye of a hard master. Oh the sweet fumes of Plenty, and the gnawing pains of Wind and Emptiness! And here methinks I hear him speaking to Ex∣travigant and head-strong Youth in the following manner, viz. Ah! wanton Youth take warning by my woes, And see in me the summ of vain repose; Which like a Bud Frost-bitten e're it blooms Appears, but unto no perfection comes. All Earth Pleasures are but like a bubble, Straight turn to nothing, which were rais'd with trouble. The fairest Faces soonest change their dye, The sweetest Charmers are most apt to lye. Thus mov'd with sorrows I may tell the same, And make the world take notice of my shame; But till I had experience of this woe, No means could make me think it would be so. But now I think upon my Father here, Whose Fore-sight now I find exceeding clear; He often told me, and with many a Tear, What would befall, but then I would not hear. Ah fellow companions! what would I give now for what I have formerly wasted or despised! the I loathed wholsom food, and now feed upon husks; how do I now envy the meanest Servant in my Fa∣thers house: they have enough of all things, and I the want of all things; they surfeit, I starve. But alas, it is to no purpose to complain here, the Swine I
feed cannot pity me, and the Master I serve will not: There is no other choice left me now, but I must re∣turn to my Father or perish; little did I think what would come of it when I forsook him, and per∣haps little does he think what I have suffered since: If my sufferings have brought down my proud heart and taught me submission, it may be, my deplorable condition may move his Bowels; it is true, he cast me not out, but I forsook and abandoned him: My Youthful heat and folly precipitated me upon my own Ruine, but as he hath more Wisdom than I, so perhaps the affections of a Father are more strong than those of a Child; and the more he sees my Foolishness, the more arguments he would find to shew me Mercy; at least, I will make tryal of his Clemency, I will humbly prostrate my self before him, I le embrace those knees that educated me, I'le lick the dust of that Threshold which I contemptu∣ously forsook, I'le own my fault, and take shame to my self, and so both magnifie his Mercy if he receive me, and justifie his proceedings if he reject me. I know my Father is subject or obnoxious to no body, who shall blame him for pardoning, or set li∣mets to his mercy? nay, who can tell the measure of a Fathers Bowels? it may be too there is irresi∣stable Eloquence in misery; and the spectacle of a Sons adversity may have Rhetorick enough in it to carry a cause where the Father is Judge: Or if he, provoked by my Folly at first, and Extravagances since, will no more own me as a Son, perhaps he may receive me as a Servant; for if my rebellion ath extinguished in him the peculiar affections of a Father, yet it hath not destroyed the common Passi∣ons of Humanity, Mercy, and Pity; if he will re∣ceive me in that lower quality, I am now broken to the condition of a Servant, and shall think his Yoke easie hereafter, having been innured to so sharp and heavy an one; I will chearfully submit my Ear
to be boared to his Door-post, and be his Servant for ever. Or, Lastly, if he will not trust a Runnagate, nor believe he will ever prove a constant Servant that hath once deserted his station, let him be pleased to take me as a hired Servant, whom he may turn off at pleasure; make tryal of me, and admit me only upon good behaviour. But if all fail, and he should utterly cast me off (which yet I hope he will not) I can but perish, and that I do however. Well, this being resolved, he casts a longing look towards his Fathers House, and puts himself on his way thither: but no sooner was he on his way, (though yet a great way off) but his Father spies him. Those lean and wan Cheeks, and the hallow funken Eyes his extremity had reduced him to, had not so disfigured him, nor those rags unable to co∣ver his Nakedness, so disguised him, but his Father knew him; and the memory of his former disobedi∣ence had not so cancelled the interest of a Son, or shut up the Bowels of a Father, but that the sight of his present misery kindled his Compassion. And whilst the Son, partly through that weakness which his Vices and his Sufferings had conspired to bring upon him, and partly through a Combination of shame and just fear of his Fathers indignation, with difficulty makes towards him; the Father, prompted by Paternal affection, and transported between joy and Pity, runs to meet him, falls on his Neck, and kisses him. And now see what entertainment his Father gives him being come into his presence. He calls for a Robe; yea, the best Robe, and so cloaths him; for a Ring to adorn and beautifie him; for Shoes for his Feet, that stones might not annoy or hurt them; for the fat Calf to feed and refresh him; and whatsoe∣ver is wanting he bestows upo him. Now, had the Father fit time, and his Sons sins deserved it,
that he should rip up unto him his former Faults, and call to remembrance the offences of his Youth, and welcom him home after this manner: Ah, Sirrah, are you now come, is all spent amongst your Whores and Harlots? Return unto them, let them provide for you, come you no more within my doors. But behold the love of this his Father, he useth no such thundring speeches, he threatneth not to cast him off, nor yet doth he cast him in the teeth with the former Cour∣ses; he Remembreth not old reckonings, the Offen∣ces of his Youth are not spoken of: But he (seeing this his Riotous and unthrifty Son return home with an humble Heart) presently offers himself to his Child, and before he had made an end of his Confession, or could beg a supply of things need∣ful, his Father intercepts him by his hasty calling to his Servants, Bring hither the best Robe, the Shoes, the Ring, let the fat Calf be killed, make a Feast, send for Musick, let all be forgotten that is past; let my Son old Courses no more be remembred. And here further we may Fancy the joyful father thus bespeaking his returning Child, viz. Welcom my Son, thrice welcom, is't not meet Thou shouldst be welcom'd by Embraces sweet? Thou who wert lost, and now art found again; Thou who wert dead, doest now alive remain, Long have I long'd for this thy safe return, Whereat my Bowels of compassion yern: Why shak'st thou then, why blushest being poor? Thy fear is past, thou shalt have Rags no more. Revive, my Son, be chearful then, my Child, And cease thy sorrows, I am reconcil'd: Oh! let those Tears be taken from thine Eyes, They stir the Fountain where Compassion lies.
Come▪ tast my dainties, I have choisest Fare, And sweetest musick to delight the Ear: This is my Pleasure, I will have it done Inspight of Envy, for thou art my SON. The Son, though astonished at this condescention, and surprised with the unexpected benignity of such a Reception, yet could not but remembe what his Fathers Joy made him forget; namely, his for∣mer Dis-ingenuity and Rebellion: and therefore humbly falls on his knees again, and with shame and remorse makes his contrite acknowledge∣ment after this manner. Father, (for so this admirable goodness of yours gives me encourage∣ment to call you, more than the Blood and Life which I derived from you) I have, I confess, for∣feited all the interest the priviledges of my Birth might have afforded me in your Affection, having become Rebel both towards God and you, had I not first neglected him, I am sure I had never greived you; and having forsaken you, I have not only vio∣lated the greatest Obligation I had upon me (save that to his divine Majesty) but also despised and affronted a goodness like to his; whatsoever there∣fore I have suffered was but the just demerit of my folly and contumacy, and whatsoever Sentence you shall pass upon me further, I will willingly submit to and here expect my doom from you: I condemn my self, as no more worthy to be called your Son, be pleased to admit me but into the condition of your meanest Servant, and I have more than my miscar∣riages give me reason to hope for. Whilst the Son was going on at this rate, the Fa∣thers Bowels yearned too earnestly to admit of long Apologies, and therefore chuses rather to inter∣rupt him in his Discourse, than to adjourn his own Joys or the others comfort: and because he thought
not sufficient in this case, he makes his deeds the Interpreters of his mind, commanding his Servants forthwithto bring out the best Robe, and put it upon his Son, together with a Ring on his hand, and Shoes on his feet, i. e. in all points to habit him as his Son, and as a Son of such a Father; by all which he maketh the full demonstration of a perfect Reconciliation; and not content herewith, to give vent to his Joy, that it might not overpower him whilst he confined it to his own bosom, and perhaps those also who had sha∣red with him in his sorrows for the loss of a beloved Son, might participate also in the joy of his Reco∣very; he goes on, bring out also the fatted Calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for this my Son was dead, and is alive again, was lost and is found; and they began to be merry. In the midst of this extraordinary Jollity, it happens the elder Son, who had always continued in his Duty towards his Father, comes out of the Fields, where he had been Negotiating his Fathers Affairs, and wonders at this the unusual Iubilee: And when (demanding the occasion) they of the Family made him acquainted with the whole matter, he takes it ill, and interpreting this marvellous transport of joy at his Brothers return, to be in derogation from himself; as if his Father was too easie and inclinable towards him, but se∣vere to himself, and unmindful of the long and faith∣ful service he had done him, begins to expostulate the matter somewhat warmly with his Father; but the good Old Man mildly replyes: Son, I am very sensible of, and set a just value upon the long course of your Obedience, and I have it both in my Power and in my will to reward you. 'Tis true, I have not hitherto made such solemn expressions of my Love to you, as I have now done upon this Occasi∣on, for the case did not require it; you, as you have been alwayes dutiful to me, so you had my
House and all I have constantly to accomodate you; as you have never rebelled against me, so you have never felt the hardships your poorBrother has under∣gone by his foolishness; and as you that have never offended me, never could distrust my Favour, nor need not such demonstrations of my Reconciliation, which this former Guilt and Extravagancies of your now penitent Brother renders necessary in his case, so also was I never overwhelmed withGrief for you who were never lost; but for as much as we have beyond ll xpetaon received your brother again, whom we long inc dpaired of, and had given up for lost; you canno  and you must allow me this unusual transport; or  say again, This your Brother was lost, and is found, was dea, and is alive again. An Imagined Discourse between the Prodi∣gal Son and his Father. The Argument. The Son return'd, relates the wretched state He underwent; when absent does create A tenderness in his ag'd Sire, whose Love On his repentance ne're the less does prove. Son. ALass dear Sir, my disobedience has bin so great, that without shame, I dare not lift my Eyes to look upon your aged Face, without confusion, and disordered countenance; I cannot hear you speak thus kindly to the man that is un∣worthy to be called your Son, but merits more the name of slave. Fa. Come to my Arms, my dear dear Child, I cannot see you stand thus cringing, nor can I permit you this range distance.
Son. The more your kind indulgence showes it self, the greater are my wretched Crimes, to leave so good a Father, leaving him in tears for my de∣parture, nay to spend the substance he had gotten on the lewd profane debauches of the flattering world, whilst he was sighing for absence. Fa. O! Name not what is past, but let your future care prevent the like revolt, the like extravigance. Son. I dare not think I am forgiven; I am sure I could not well expect forgiveness from the man I had so much offended. Fa. All, all's forgiven, whilst I sign this pardon with this kiss, this kind embrace, nay with my aged tears that spring from streams of joy. Son. Thus low I bend to meet your blessing, and will henceforth be circumspect and cautious how I move, least I again, though unwittingly, offend such innate goodness, such a tender Father. Fa. Arise my Son, and may ten thousand blessings and happinesses more than your aged Sire can wish, fall all you: but tell my Son, tell of the strange adventures that befel your absence. Son. My Father shall be obeyed — Then know great Sir, that when I left your Mansion in my pompous Gaityes, I soon betook my self to places of resort, and found the joval crew that courted me to recreate my Fancy with delights made up of Plea∣sure; Riotting and Musick was our recreation for the most, though sometimes we dwelt upon a Harlots smile, and spent at other times the flying hours in gaming, or beholding some vain Pagentary, till in the end my stock being gone, I soon had lost my gay Companions, who studied then to shun me more, than they had done to court my Favour: when ashamed to return home, I wandred as a man forlorn and friendless over many a dewy Plain, and through a thousand devious Paths; till in the end I met a humane shape, though dreadful to behold,
who seemed to take compassion on me, and used many subtil arguments to bring to his lure, till in the end I was content to yeild to his desire, Imagining what he pretended was real and substantial; but having got me in his power, he shackled me with Chains; and loaden with strong fetters sent me out to feed his swine, yet scarce would suffer me to feed upon the Husk; nor was Famine all, for still my Stripes were as grievous as my wants; which lamentable case made me begin to cast about and think from what a happiness I fell; bewailing sore my rashness, till in the end, inspired or prompted by some good Angel, I resolved to leave my Hellish Tyrant, and throw my self at the Feet of you my Father, and to try, if peradventure I might move you to compassionate your wretched Son. F. In a blessed hour were your resolves, and more happy was the moment when I again receied my much beloved Son, for whose return loud Instruments of Musick shall proclaim, and feasting for his sake last many a day; then let us in and order it. Son. A thousand thanks your now obedient Son (if I dare own that name) returns, resolving for the Future to devote my cheif indeavours to de∣serve such favour. Matth. 25. Vers. 34. & 41, Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the world. Then shall he say also unto them on the left Hand, De∣part from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, pre∣pared for the Devil and his Angels. I Will begin here and speak something of this sen∣tence to the ungodly, wherein every word speaks woe and wrath, fire and fury, death and damnation; and every syllable speaks the deepest Sorrow and dreadfulest Sufferings to wicked Pilgrims. The Lord
Chief Iustice of the whole World, the Judge of the Quick and Dead is now (as it were) in all his Robes and Royalty, with millions of glorious Atten∣dants, in the G lory of his Father, with all his holy Angels, set on the Bench. The poor prisoner, whose trembling Soul is newly reunited to the loathsome Carcass of his Body, is drag'd to the Bar awaiting and expecting some doleful Doom. He is lately come from hell, to give an account of his Life on earth, and to receive his Sentence; and loath he is to go back to that place of torments, as know∣ing that the pain of his Body will be a new and grie∣vous addition to his misery, when that shall burn in flames as his soul doth already in fury. Therefore he pleads. Prisoner. Lord let me stay her (though poor wretch he hath his Hell about him in his accusing, af∣frighting Conscience) rather then go to that Dungeon of darkness. A sight of thy beautiful Face may possibly abate my Sorrows, and thy Presence may mitigate my Sufferings. Iudge. No, saith Christ, here is no abiding for thee, be gone hence. Thou mayst remember when my Presence was thy Torment, when thou didst bid me depart from thee, choosing my room before my company. Now my Absence shall be thy Terror, I like thee not so well to have thee  me. Depart, I say, from me. risoner. Lord, If I must undergo so dreadful a doom, as to depart from thee, the Father of Lights, and Foun∣tain of Life, yet bless me before I go; One good wish of thy Heart, one good word of thy Mouth will make me blessed where ever I go. Those whom thou blessest, are blessed indeed; Bless me, even me, O my Fa∣ther: At this parting grant me thy blessing. dge. Sinner, be gone, and my Curse go along with thee. Thou hast many a time despised my Blssing when it hath been offered to thee, though I was
made a Curse to purchase it for thee; therefore, I say, depart from me, and the Curse of an angry Lord, and of a righteous Law accompany the for ever. Depart, I say, Thou cursed. Prisoner. Lord, if I must go, and thy Curse with me, send me to some good place, where I may find some∣what to refresh me under thy loss and curse. It's mi∣sery enough to lose thy presence, Good Lord command me to some good place. Iudge. No, Sinner, be gone with my Curse to that place which will torture and rack thee with ex∣trmity and universality of pains. The time hath been that thou hast wallowed in sensual pleasures, now thou must fry in intollerable flames. Depart thou cursed into fire. Prisoner. Ah Lord, if I must go with thy Curse, and to so woful a place as fire, I beseech thee let me not stay there long. Alas, who can abide devouring flames one moment? material fires of man's kindling are terrible, but how intollerable are those flames which thy breath, like a stream of brimstone, hath kindled! I beseech thee, if I must go to it, let me pass swiftly through it, and not stay in it. Iudge. No, Sinner, depart, and my Curse with thee, to those extream Torments that admit of no ease and no end, where the worm never dieth, and the fire never goeth out? to the Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone for ever. Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire. Prisoner. Lord, this is dismal and dreadful indeed to go from thee, who art all good, and to go to fire which hath in it extremity of all evil, and to lose thee, and fry in flames for ever, ever, ever; yet, Lord, if it is thy Will it should be so, hear me yet in one desire let me have such society as may mitigae, at le such as may not aggravate my misery. Iudge. No, Sinner, thy Company must be such  evr as thou didst choose in thy life time.
who was thy Tempter shall be thy Tormentor. And they who led thee captive at their will, shall be bound with thee in chains of everlasting dark∣ness, and faggoted up with thee together for un∣quenchable fire. Such fiery Serpents, gnawing Worms, stinging Adders, poisonous Toads, roa∣ring and devouring Lions, hideous Monsters, frightful Fiends must be thy eternal Companions. Depart from me thou cursed, into everlasting fire pre∣pared for the Devil and his Angels. But now, kind Readers, because particulars do sually most affect us, we may here again at this Gene∣al Iudgment, suppose we here the Iudge crying out with a loud and angry voice, saying, Bring now ll the wicked Prisoners severally to my Bar, that so hey may all distinctly receive their Sentence, or those particular sins by which they have most ffended my Justice; And first, Come forth all ye ignorant persons: who ave not known the Father, nor me, nor the my∣eries of salvation. Take them Devils, bind hem hand and foot. 2. Come forth all ye slothful and unprofitable persons. ad not ye talents committed to you for my use and rvice, and what have you done with them? did ou bury them in the earth? or lay them up in a apkin? what, could you lye down and slumber, hen you had so much work to do? could you trie ray so many hours, when time was so precious d sweet? Take them Devils, bind them and and foot. 3. Come forth all ye that have neglected Family , and never sought after God in your Closets; Were  you creatures, and did the law of Creation re∣ire no worship; were not you subjects, and shold  you have shewen homage to your Sovereign▪  not you live upon God's finding and bounty e∣very
day, and should not you have ackowledged your dependance; did not God bring you into your Family Relations, and did he require no duty? Did not he threaten to pour out his wrath upon irreli∣gious Families? and yet would not you set up Reli∣gion in yours? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 4. Come forth all ye Sabbath-breakers, you that have spent the day in sleeping, in eating and drink∣ing to excess; who instead of holy meditations, have been thinking and contriving your worldly business; who instead of religious conferences, have discour∣sed only of earthly matters: instead of going to Church to worship God, have walked into the Fields, and spent the time in Recreations. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 5. Come forth all ye Swearers, and Profaner of the Name of God; did you never read or hear of the third Commandment, which forbad this sin? Did you never hear of my strict Injunction, that you should not swear at all in your discourses, but that your Communication should be yea and nay? were you never told that swearers would fall into Condemna∣tion? was the great and dreadful name of God of so little regard, that you could not only use it irre∣verently, so frequently; but also even tear it in piec by your Oaths? You call'd upon God some∣times to damn and sink you; can you speak in that language now, now damnation is so near you? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 6. Come forth all ye scoffers at Religion, and the zea∣lous professrs thereof; who taught and spake of Re∣igion, as if it had been a fancy, and cunningly de∣lised Fables; and of the most holy, humble, and -denying Christians, as if they were the mos
mean spirited, foolish, and contemptible People up∣on Earth: and have used the name of a Saint in de∣rision, and proverb of reproach. Have you the same mind now, that Religion was but a fancy? Is your Resurrection and my appearance, but a fancy? Is your punishment eternal in hell, like to be but a fancy? Have you not a sure ground and bottom for your faith in the Scriptures? Could you have de∣sired more reasonable evidence of things done be∣fore your age? Could you laugh at Scripture threat∣nings: And can you laugh now you are come to▪ Execution? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 7. Come forth all ye Persecutrs of my Disciples; was it not enough for you to mock them; but you must persecute them too? Was it not enough for you to persecute them with the tongue, but you must persecute them with the hand? What, could you betray them like Iudas for a piece of money, or out of malice, which was worse? Could you disturb them in their service and worship of me, when they were praying for your very Conversion and Salvation? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 8. Come forth all ye intemperate and licentious per∣sons; who have indulged your flesh, and laid no re∣straint upon your sensual appetite; who have made provision for your flsh, to fullfill the lusts thereof; but made no provion for my glory, and took no care to fulfil my commands; did you never hear of sch a duty as self-denial, which I required of all my Disipls and Followers? Take them De∣vils, bind them hand and foot. 9. Come forth all ye Gluttons, who have prepared you flesh with delicious food, but never had the least regad to feed your souls. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.
10. Come forth all ye Drunkards, who if ye have not vercharged your bellies with excessive eating, et have often intoxicated your brains with the fume; of excessive drinking; what excuse can you find for this sin? were you inticed to it, and overtaken be∣fore you were aware? but who could entice you to drink a potion which would kill your bodies? and was not the death and damnation of your souls more to be avoided? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 11. Come forth all ye Adulterers, you that have neighed like full-fed Horses after your neighbours Wives, and assembled by troops into Harlots houses; or if not so, have committed this sin in secret corners; was there no shame in you to keep you from this nasty filthy sin? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 12. Come forth all ye Covetous persons, whose treasure▪ and heart, hope, and confidence hath been in earth¦ly things. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 13. Come forth all ye unmerciful persons; whose bowels have been shut up against the poor and eedy; who have spoken churlishly to the poor, and looked upon them afar off. Take them De∣vils, bind them hand and foot. 14. Come forth all ye unrighteous persons; who have wronged Widows and Orphans; who have over∣reached your neighbours in your dealings; who have heaped an estate together by unrighteous pra∣ctices; who have squeezed and oppressed the poor▪ which have had no helper. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 15. Come forth all ye liars; you who have taught and accustomed your selves to this sin; who have
not only reported lies, but also made them. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 16▪ Come forth all ye Slanderers and Back-biters▪ who have walked about with slanders; and carried about tales unto the reproach and injury of your neighbours good name: Did you not know it was your duty to endeavour the preservation of your Neighbours Reputation as carefully as your own? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 17. Come forth all ye proud and ambitious persons; you that have builded your nests on high; that have taken many dirty steps to get into the seat of honour, whose hearts have been lifted up with high towering imaginations and conceits of your own ex∣cellencies unto the scorning and contempt of others; who have had proud hearts, and proud looks, and proud speeches, and proud carriage towards others Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 18. Come forth all-ye envious and malicious persons; ye that have grieved at the good of others, which they have had, or done; that have grieved at the good Estates of others, or because they have thriv∣ed faster then you in the world. Take them De∣vils, bind them hand and foot. 19. Come forth all ye wrathful and contentious persons▪ ye that have had fiery spirits, and fiery tongues; whose tongue, have been like swords, wherewith▪ ye hae lashed and wounded others in your reproach∣ful rviling speeches. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 20. Come forth all ye civil and moral persons, who have had moral righteousness, and been upright in your dealings, but wholly strangers unto the power of godliness, who have observed some precepts of
the second Table of the Law in reference to your selves and others externally; but have grosly neg∣lected the duties of the first Table. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 21. Come all ye Hypocrites, who have made a shew of Holiness; and have born the name of Zea∣lous professours of Religion, but have been acted by carnal designs and principles, who have used Religion as a Cloak for your Covetousness, who fol∣lowed me only for the Loaves; who have been hol∣low at the heart, rotten at the Core, painted-Sepul∣chers, blazing· Comets, wandring and falling Stars, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 22. Come forth all ye Back-sliders and Apostates, from me and my wayes; You that turned back to ways of prophaness, and open wickedness, after some time of profession, and joyning your selves with my People, was my service so burdensome that you could endure it no longer? was the way to hea∣ven so unpleasant, that you would walk no longer therein, after some trial in shew of me, did you prefer and make choice of the Devil before me? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 23. Come forth all ye impenitent Persons and Vnbe∣lievers, all ye that▪ have not yielded obedience to the Gospel; were you not called to repentance by Ministers, and the Spirit in Ordinances? and when a stiller voice was not heard, were you not called lou∣der by God in his judgments? did you not know, that except you repented you would certainly perish. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.
Zacharias and Elizabeth. An imaginary dis∣course. The Argument. The way preparing Prophet born, his Birth O'rejoys his Parents, who with holy mirth Return their thanks to Heavens eternal King, The Maker, Giver, Author of each thing. Z. WHat Wonders has God wrought? how gracious has he been, in opening thy barren Womb, and giving us a Son in our old Age; nay, more, a Son that is a Prophet to pre∣pare the way of him on whom the happiness of mankind does depend. E. My Heart is o'reflowed with joy, nor can my tongue relate what I conceive; nor am I capable of rendring sufficient praises to the Lord, who has been peased to isit his low hand-Maid, and took from her,  her loa∣thed reproach. Z. Had you but seen the glorious Vision, the bright Messenger of Heaven, that brought the happy news, that blest assurance of what is come to pass you would have been the more transported. E. I dare beleive no less, yet you durst doubt the truth of what his high Behest imorted. Z. I did indeed, and had my punishment for so much incredulity, the Organs f my voice denyed their office, rendring me a Mute, till my aged Eyes beheld the dear, the welcom, the thrice welcom Babe sprung from the Womb of my Elizabeth. E. 'Tis just with Heavens eternal King, who had done such great things for you, that you were so punished, and stand as an example to the diffident. Z. But since I am restored, i'le use my diligence to make Attonement for my vile stupidity, apply the voice return'd in hyming him, and telling of his won∣ders;
nay more, that we may both be happier in our Son, let us observe to train him up as Heaven has given directions. E. That, next to praising our great Benefactor, who with Mercies and choice Favours every way incompasses us, shall be my cheif care, but see the Sacrifices wait, you must now to the Temple. Z. With joy I go to glorifie the God who does ouchsafe to dwell with his Inheritance. E. Hast then whilst I retire, and offer up the Sacri∣fices of a contrite Heart, which God has promised never to reject. Conclusion. Thus joy the blessed Pair in their success, Whilst God, what e're they take in hand, es bless. A Diologue between the three Kings of the East upon their return. The Argument. The Scepter'd Monarchs that so lately came To worship him that made the Glorious Frame Of the whole Vniverse: Herod deceive Of what he durst expect, and Juda leave Vnknown to him, which makes him storm and grieve. 1 K. WIth what earnestness the bloody minded King of Iuda made inquiry for the Heavenly Infant; I then perceived his drift was ut to get him once into his power; for why, the prophecy concerning the all-glorious Babe, and our enquiry started him, and made him doubt his mpire.
2 K. It could no less to one who (blinded with the Guilt of such great crimes as he by his Tyranny has pulled upon himself) had no further sight of Sacred things: The Babe is born a Heavenly not an Earthly Prince, his Kingdom is above all heights transcendent, glorious, beautiful beyond expression. 3 K. 'Tis true, and we have seen a God on Earth, this, this is he of whom the Cybils did so darkly sing: The Child let down from Heaven in a bright burnish'd Chain of Gold, that should shut Ianus's Temple, and invest the World with Peace. 1 K. Undoubtedly the same, and happy is the Jewish Nation, if they understood aright this bles∣sing, this is the Star that should arise out of Iacob, this is the great Deliverer, the great Preserver of his People, this is he of whom the Prophets have so loudly told. 2 K. Nor are we less obliged to wise Omnipo∣tence, that did vouchsafe to make us privy to so great a mystery, revealing to us what had happened, and disposing us to follow the bright Star hung low in the thin Region of the Air, that it might be our kind Conducter to the happy place. 3 K. Nor was the glittering Angel less careful of his Lord, when in our slumbers he forwarned us to return another way, and not as we determined, see the wicked King. 1 K. I can but think how Herods rage will rise, to find himself so much deluded. 2 K. Doubtless it will, but all his fury will be spent in vain, the end, for which the Glorious God came down, and was incarnate, must be accomplished e're he does ascend to seat himself upon his Saphire Throne. 3 K. It must, so all the Prophets say, yet in the end, when as his grious course is  when he has finished his great  or lost
1 K. That indeed must be the result, but then triumphing over the Grave, he will in rayes of brightest Majesty ascend, and draw all those that love him, and adore his goodness after him 2 K. No less do I conclude, but see we are arri∣ved at a fair City, here let us repose this night, and contemplate on this wonder. 3 K. Agreed great King, we will be content to do as you have said. Conclusion. Thus to their County the pleas'd Monarchs go, And there whate're they have heard and seen they show. A Dialogue between Herod and his chief Captain. The Argument. The bloody minded Tyrant in a rage, To kill him, whom the Prophets did presage King of the Jews, in Bethlehem murders all 'Neath two years old, that he i'th croud may fall. H. AM I then deluded by the Eastern Kings, say you, are they departed to their own Abodes, and he that Fame has rumour'd must deprive me of my Scepter, is hid, past, finding out. 'Tis so most Potent Monarch, the Kings are journyed through the Wilderness, and by this time have reached their Native Lands; the Infant, though all diligent in∣quire has been made, is no where to be found. H. So to be served makes me all Fury, O! that  was not such a March over the vast Desarts to the
ands of those deluding Monarchs; Fire and Sword should speak myanger; what is in my power I'le do, to make my Title sure; Captain make hast, and draw up all my men of War, I have a great design in hand, which Labours in my Breast. C. What means my Lord the King, what are his thoughts? thus low I beg to be made privy to the intentions of a Monarch. H. You are my faithful Counsellor, and to your Care and Conduct, what your King intends shall be committed; all the male infants in suspicious Beth∣lehem, and throughout every Border appertaining to that City, are doom'd dead from two years old and under; that amongst them, him that I suspect, may fall, so that the madding People, who are ever fond of innovation, may be retained in their obe∣dience. C. 'Tis brave, though bloody, yet the King shall be o∣beyed before to morrow this time; not a Brat shall live beneath the Age you mention, no ity or remrse shall be of force to stay our Hands, to the cries of tender Mo∣thers we will be deaf as Seas, and whilst the Younglings sprawl upon our Spears, our Hearts shal be as hard s Adamant, no lurking holes shall save them from our fuy; death, death shall be their portion, from the tender breasts we will snatch them to untimely Graves. H. Your resolution fits my purpose, and when put in execution, will quickly hush my fears; therefore about it strait, make no delay, whilst I retire, and with impatience expect a full account of your proceedings. C. My Speed shall show my willingness in what I un∣dertake, Death and Fury now inspire me for the blackest Murthers the bright Lamp of Day ever yet beheld.
Conclusion. The Plot thus laid, in practice soon is put, The Throats of near six thousand Infants cut By Herods cruel Soldiers, whilst the cries Of tender Mothers, pierce the weeping Skies: But vain the Tyrant seeks the Life of him That wears the glorious starry Diadem; For he to Egypt flies, but Rachel sore Laments her Sons, because they are no more. Imagined Discourse between Joseph and Mary upon their returning out of Egypt. The Argument. The blessed Pair admire Gods Providence, And glorifie his great Omnipotence, Who, murthering Herod struck with fearful Death, Briging them safely to fair Nazareth. I. THe cruel Tyrant that late raged in slaughter, and dyed deep his hands in blood of Inno∣cents, is tumbled in the dust, his bold Ambition is sunk beneath the Grave. M. In vain he strove to rob us of our only Ioy, in vain he plotted to surprise the Life of our dear Son and Lord. I. All that Man does against the great decrees of Heaven, is unprosperous, no force nor policy can ever prevail against Omnipotence. M. 'Tis true, but yet his murder  have made some thousands childless.
I. Although his cruelty, by Gods high sufferance, extended to the shedding of their blood; yet they are happy, falling for the sake of him who came to save them from eternal Death; and God that can make fruitful barren Wombs, can when he pleases give their Parents a supply. M. With him 'tis true, there is nothing impossible, therefore how ought men to adore his sacred Name, and at an awful distance struck with admiration, contemplate his wonders. I. They ought indeed with lowest reverence ad∣mire, and love such boundless goodness; nor shall my Tongue ever want praises for the Mercies he has shewed, nor will I spare to tell of all his loving kindness. M. We will praise him in the Beauty of his Holiness' and never cease to bow before the Foot-stool of his Throne of Grace, and with humility revere his tremendous Majesty. I. 'Tis fit we should, but now Night hasts apace▪ and we must rest our selves awhile, and in this hospi∣table place refresh the blessed Infant, the sole car of Heaven. M. 'Tis indeed convenient, that when the Sun, risin lorious in the East sends forth his Beams to chear th Bosom of the Earth, we may reach the much desire Coast of Galilee, it not being yet safe for us to go t Bethlehem, because the Tyrants Son reigns in Judea. Conclusion. Thus out of Egypt did God call his Son, Whom there e sent, the Tyrants rage to shu
An imagined Discourse between Jarus and his Daughter, after her being raised from the dead. D. ALass my Father, why is it you suffered me to slumber thus unmeasurably. F. Slumber my dear Child, had not Heavens Fa∣vourite been propitious, it had been everlasting sleep. D. Indeed I could have been contented to have slept on, if I thought you'd not have chid me for my drowsiness, for I was much delighted with the pleasant Visions I beheld, or Fancy represented. F. Vision says my Child —Alass they were Visions, but must needs be strange ones. D. O me! I must confess they were something strange, for I remember whilst you and my Mother sat weeping by the Bed, that a blew mist came o're my Eyes, and doz'd my Senses; when methoughts a lovely Youth ld in a glorious Garb, stood by me, and with beaming Eyes so dazled me with rayes of Light, that I was much amazed; But long he pawz'd not, e're he snatched me from my bed, and with expanded Wings slew swift, as I thought, through many Regions paved with Stars, a shining with glittering Fires; where I beheld strange shapes, and heard amazing voices, when mounting still, at last he brought me within sight of a most Glorious Mansion, whose out-side shone with such exceeding brightness, that I was obliged sometimes to shut mine eyes, as not capable of steady gazing: At the Gate stood throngs of Glorious Forms, in Robes of purest White, with Crowns of Gold upon their Heads, Palms in their Hands, and Golden Harps, whereon they play melodious, and ravish'd all my Sences with their charming voices, seeming in their Songs to express much joy at our approach;
but being about to enter, methought I heard a voice as loud as thund er cry, return, when on a sud∣dain down I sunk like Lightning, and starting at the supposed fall, I waked. F. And do you fancy then you only slept. D. What more, since what I saw, I wakening, find to be a dream, the meer representation of a roving Fancy. F. Mistake not my dear Daughter, for to your Fathers grief, your Soul was separated by the hand of Deat from its loved Mansion; this beauteous Form in which now streams warm blood, was some hours since a cold, pale, lifeless course. D. How?—was I dead—How? dead, O speak. F. Yes, Death had snatched thee from me, leaving me to mourn for so great a loss, and thou hadst been no more, had not the mighty Prophet by his word called back thy fleeting Soul. D. How can it be that I should be dead? but if it be no more pain to dye than what I felt, I shall hereafter dread Death less; yet say, was that the Pro∣phet that stood by me when I waked, methought he look'd most lovely. F. It was the wonder-working Prophet, whose great Miracles astonish all man-kind; but since my joy again is full, in having my sole comfort by his power re∣stored, and rescued from the Grave; let us hence, and publish the amazing news to our Relations, that they all may joyn with us in praising him, who has given back my Daughters Life. D. My Father shall be in what he thinks fit, obey∣ed, and I for my part will addict my self to Virtues wayes, that when I dy, if dy I must again; I may enter at the glorious Gate I was, or fancied that I was so near. Conclusion. That there with those blest Spirits I may sing Loud praises to the Glorious Heavenly King;
And him adore who kindly brought me back To Life again, for his dw Mercies sake. A Dialogue between Herod and Herodias's Daughter. The Argument. The nimble footed Virgin pleas'd the King So well, that he commands her to ask any thing That's in his power to give, the crafty Maid Consults her Mother, and does ask the Head Of John the Baptist, who for her must bleed. H. HAs the beauteous Maid, whose nimble feet in mystick order moving, so well pleased a King, considered what to ask, that as I promised, I may grow lavish to compleat her wish. Dam. My Lord I have considered, and it is neither Gold nor Silver I demand, no nor Gems, nor places of high Honour, but— H. But —What, speak out thou pretty charming Creature, and be soon possest of whatsoever your thoughts can form. Dam. It is but a trifle, My Lord, that I demand. H. A trifle, why were it half my Kingdom, 'tis at your command; my Oath is past, and shall not be recall'd; therefore let me soon know what it is you long for. Dam. Then great King 'tis— 'tis— the— Head— H. The Head, what Head? speak boldly, come. Dam. Why, to be plain, the Head of John the Baptist. H. A trifle say you, O! that I had never past so rash a Vow; this it is to trust a Woman with a power unlimited— But why is it you demand the
Head of that good Man? you are young, and should not thus delight in cruelty. Dam. Great Sir, he has displeased the Queen my Mother. H. O are you thereabout — Cruel—Cruel Wo∣man, could no revenge, but such as bears a horrid guilt even in its name, appease her fury. Dam. She charged me on her blessing I should k no other recompence, therefore the Guilt be upon your Queen, your Brother's once beloved Wife, and not on me; for so much crudelity is contrary to the soft Nature of a ten∣der Virgin. H. Although I much repent I trusted a Wman∣kind with Vows unnamed, yet shall it never be said a Monarch broke his Oath—Go Executioner, and fetch the Head of him I dearly love, and give it her, to satiate the cruel eyes of her Blood-thirsty Mother, from this moment my much hated Queen. Dam. Well great King, I'le wait its coming, though you are very angry, for I will assure you, I dare not re∣turn without it. H. What would you more, have not I given command; though I must needs confess it was more for honours sake, than any kindness to my Queen, or you, whose Bold Petition has disturbed my rest; and may the blood return upon your Heads, whilst I retire, and mourn my unadvised concession. Dam. How angry is my Father in Law—yet let him know I fear not all his Frowns, for well I am as∣ured my Mother soon can smooth his wrinkled Front, and calm the tempest of his mind.—So, it is brought, and in a Charger; O! how wan it looks? how throb the Lips with dying murmurs; but however, Ile go bare it to my Mother as it is, that it may save her longing. Conclusion. Thus, thus the glorious Prophet fell By Malice deep, as could be forg'd in He ll.
A wicked Woman and an easie King The stroke of Death to that great Prophet bring, Whose voice cry'd loud; he who was sent before, As Messenger to him we do adore. An Imagined Dialogue between the five foo∣lish Virgins. The Argument. The foolish Virgins mourn their oversight, And grieve, their Lamps retain'd not Oyl to light The Bridegroom through the dark and gloomy Night. 1 V. O! What has our Folly done? in what sad darkness are we left? how wretched! O how miserable! 2 V. Indeed we are, though we fear'd no such matter; alass, alass what shall we do? you see com∣panions that we are shut out, not for a time, for then there was some hopes, but out for ever. 3 V. How! For ever! O Heart-breaking news, must we never see the Bridegrrom then? no not see his Face. 4 V. No, he has withdrawn himself, the Gates are ever closed against us, and our knocking will be vain. 5 V. O! I am almost mad to think how foolishly we lost the happy opportunity, that would for ever have enabled us to stand in his bright presence. 1 V. Name, name no more our fatal oversight, least it add yet to our weighty Sorrow 2 V. Yet methinks I cannot forget the h appiness we lost, methinks the bright and dazling Idea of the lov'd Bridegroom still represents it self to my well pleased Eyes.
3 V. And yet we never must behold him more, his Face is turned away, he knows us not, his Coun∣tenance so Amiable, so ravishing, and so transpor∣ting, will no more shine on us with Soul-inlightning Rayes, his Smiles most afable, we never more shall be delighted with. 4 V. Since it is so, let us retire and mourn the loss our Follies have occasioned, weep till our heads are water, and our eyes a Fountain of continual Tears. 5 V. Weep for our Folly, fill the world with grief, Since our condition is beyond relief, Torment the Air with sighs, and loudly cry For want of Oyl, though 'tis too late to buy. A fancied Dialogue between Judas and the High Priest. The Argument. Judas is tempted to betray his Lord Taking the Coin the wicked Jews afford, To mark him out, whilst he is seiz'd at last, And into bonds the Lord of Glory cast. H. P. COme, come, why boggle you? at what, when once recorded, will make you known in story, till the world shall be no more? why, who would not act a thing of such small mo∣ment, to have his name registred in the Rolls of Fame. Ju. What will that profit me? when it is but to my Infamy, my shame and everlasting blot; I shall b so ex∣posed to after Ages. H. P. Have you not the protection of the great High Priest, Aarons successor, and expounder of the Law, to guard your Fame by countenancing wht you undertake.
J. But yet my Conscience — Methinks something within informs me it is a horrid Crime, the basest of Ingratitude, to prove perfidious to so good a Master. H. P. Pish—Let not such vain imaginations star∣tle you; come, come, resolve to do it, nay I find what it is that you expect; here, here is the thing that must prevail above all arguments. J. How! thirty Roman Pence — A Summ it is true would tempt a man to do a daring deed. But,— H. P. But what—nay trifle not, see night comes on, the night that must be followed by the day, that must behold him that does stile himself the King of the Iews, in bonds. J. Well waving further Ceremony, I'le stifle my up∣braiding Conscience; sere it with all dark resolves, and desperately comply with your demands. H. P. Bravely spoke, our Guard shall instantly attend you; but what is the sign by which you will distinguish him. J. With a Face as bold as Death, frought with mis∣chief, I will bare up to him, and with a treacherous kiss salute him, and then let those that have the charge, be sure to catch him. H. P. No fairer token can you give, but it is no time now to delaythe thing; come, come, let us bout it, and secure him e're the Sun salutes the East; least the mad People, fond of innovation, should murmur, nay should mutiny upon such a sei∣zure, which they will term an outrage; for we are not ignorant what fame his Miracles have won, and ow he is beloved; see, see the Guards are ready, hen along with them▪ whilst I retire to the consul∣ing Sanadrim, and there contrive what shall be urther done. J. I go, though to perfm the blackest deed that Hell ever put into the Heart of Man, yet I have promised, and I will perform, though Fa and Destiny does push me dlong into monstrous ruine.
Conclusion. The Plot thus laid, the Lord of Life's betray'd And bound before the Sanadrim is lead, Scorn'd and revil'd, scourg'd, and at last condemn'd Crown'd with sharp thorns, and impiously blasphem'd. Stretch'd on a Cross, the Lord of glory dyes Who reigns in Haven above the starry Skies. Peters Lamentation. WRetch that I am, what have I done? how great Is this black Crime, O where shall I retreat? To hide my Guilt, what blushes burn my Face, What Stings my Conscience feel, what hiding place Can shelter him; from woes he cannot fly: No place can shroud me from his piercing eye, Who views at once Hells depth, and Heavens vast height; To whom all gloomy darkness is as light. Fool that I was to be so confident, So resolutely, so presumptuous bent Upon my strength, when I'm at best but dust, Frail man, too weak my own resolves to trust; But it is past—sad thought—yet now in vain I would recall what I have done again All I can do is now to mourn the sin, That I, presumptuous I, have plunged in: O let my eyes then be a Stream, a Flood, Nay let me weep for tears, a stream of blood, Sighs and sad Groas shall all my musick be, Sobs and laments shall dwell, shall dwell with me; Lord look on me, me wretcd man, Who wanting thy Compassion, am undone.
O mercy, mercy ease my troubled mind, Let me, ingrateful me, some mercy find, Me that deny'd him, who first gave me breath, Me that deny'd him who's condemn'd to death. O pity me, my weakness Lord forgive, Without thy Pardon, Lord, I cannot live; My Soul's distracted, a fierce war's within Disturbs my rest, the bold, the shameful sin, Preys on my Spirits, and will give no rest: Then mercy show to him that is opprest: O let thy dear compassion take away The Sting of Conscience, ease me Lord, I pray; I cry loud, cover'd with dust I lye Even at thy Feet, O pity, or I dy. Raise, raise a sullen Wrech, that he may be An object of hy saving Clemency. My Cries are heard, a calm o'respreads my Soul, No storms of trouble my free thoughts controul: O boundless, boundless is his goodness still, Therefore I'le strive henceforth to do his will. Swine possest. SEe, see how Satans Malice still is bent, He who was in a guilful Serpent pent; When he in Eden did seduce fair Eve, And her, to man-kind's misery, deceive: Rather then now he'l idle be, he'l joyn Infernal nature with the dirty Swine; Not sparing sensless Brutes, such is his hate To all, that God for his glory did create; Yet limited is his fierce wrath we see, It cannot without Christs permission be: But having leave, the spightful Legion strait The grunting Herd with horrid cries amate, Who now grown wild, their Keepers put to light, And all the Tribe with antick dancing fright.
Sometimes they stand an end, sometimes they roul, Nay, bound aloft, and lap without controul, E're all that does oppose them in their way; No bars nor bounders their fierce course can stay, Till like a torrent down the hills they scour Into the Sas, which does them all devour. Considerations upon our Saviours compassion to the Thief upon the Cross. HOw good, how great, how merciful, how just, Is God to those who in him put their trust; How is his Arms of mercy open wide To those that in his saving Power confide; See, see the Thief, who all his life had bin A Drudge to Satan, slave to wrthed sin; At that sad time whn Death look'd grimly dra, And he of Lie bt a fw mmnts had, Repnting, is rstor'd, ay more, i blest, With ios, that are with mns tongue exprs▪ rely acknowledging To raie his Sol above th  Skies, Acknoin his sin, and reachig thence Te ord of glis pr innocence: care was not or  hppies, ut suddain  him to expr, emember me, Lo, when  into Kingdom that can only bee thy ue. ut his compr dsirous still reaming o Plasurs  jo wt strie, orgot his Soul▪ an aild ag t Lo ho for his sake, did . o that  ellow chose the beter part, hose ws once ded, swift as hes his dluding Sul to th blet oys, here Care nor  no more man-kind ▪
Iudas his Dispair. Wretch that I am, why do I view the light? Why sink I not in everlasting night? Why do not hottest lightnings strike me dead? Why fall not Bolts of Thunder on my had? Why yauns not Earth to suck me in? and why Find I not means my self wih speed to dy? Why live I in these torments worse than death? In this sad torture, this sad Hell on Earth; O Wretch! what sting of Conscience do I feel? More sharp thn all the force of fatal steel, More deadly than the poison stings of Asps: Dread horror my affrighted soul now clasps: Accursed Silver that could make me prove A Traytor to my Lord, who sacred love Beam'd on me ot, but I have cast it back, May it my ruine on the givers wrack, Whilst this fit Cord stops—thus my loathed breath Whilst thus I seek some easement in my death. A Dialogue between Pilate and his Wife. The Argument. The virtuous Wife of Roman Pilate`s griev'd, Because she was not as she ought believ'd, Telling nw plainly wha is her true sence, And let`s him know his desperate offence. W. UNhappy are you to be over-rul'd by the ma rout; why would you yield to their roug clamours, to destroy the innocent? P. I laboured to deliver that just man, but found it w in vain, for still no other cry than crucifie him, sound through the Iudgment-Hall. W. Yet you might have used your high Authori o still the rout; who being set on by their malicio Rulers, knew not against whom they cry'd, nor wh it was they did. P. I dare beleive as much, but the sad deed is p ecal, and all you argue now is vain.
W. As to retrieve the fact it is; but yet the glo∣rious Prophet, whom the foolish People think now dead, if my Dreams inform me right, lives, lives Immortal, never more to dye. P. How, lives! Then fear strikes me, horror chills me, and I tremble at what you relate. W. It was no common man, that in that barba∣rous manner they have used; but one who in his Hands has power of Life and Death: A Power in∣vincible, not to be subdued by Armies, had he not consented to lay down his Life. P. Indeed his meekness melted me into Compassion, and made me labour to deliver him. W. This, this was he of whom the Cibils sung in mistick numbers, this, this was that dear Prince of eace▪ that should give Peace to the long warring World. P. Then I am guilty of a horrid Crime, but now it is ast, in vain it is to argue it; what I have done, I in a anner was compelled to do; therefore the Blood s ed, be on the guilty Nation, as the clamorous Rout equired. hilst I go mourn to wash away the Guilt f Blood so precious, yet so vilely spilt. W. And I likewise retire with fear and dread o worship him the foolish Iews think dead. Zacheus in the Sycamore Tree. A Prophet Risen, yes, a Prophet great, Good, just, and wise, if Fame the truth relte, s is wonder-working power has rais'd in me wondrous longing his loved Face to see; t still he is incompass'd with such croud, at each huge bulk the happy Object shrouds, om my low stature, yet I heard men say, was to travel through a narrow way ading directly to my house, if so, add a height to what appears so low;
Upon the Branches of this shading Tree Little Zacheus shll advanced be: So—now I`m up, and hither flows the croud With shouts, with Praises, and Hosannahs loud; 'Tis, 'tis the Lord, now I shall see his Face; O that I in his eyes may find some grace, How lovly looks he? O! ow innocent, And now on me his radient eyes are bent: Ha—see he beckons, Ile with speed descend, And on the wonder-working Lord attend. Conclusion. Thus goes the faihful Man, and by command Does entertain the Lord of Sea and Land, The King of all the Glious Heavenly Band. Nicodemus his Considerations, form'd int a Dialogue between him and the World. The Argument. By night the Ruler comes, resolv'd to hear The sacred Doctrine, 'cuse the Panik fear He had of misbeleiing Juda w'd, Mor than the wrath of an incnsed God. W. STrange it is you should neglect my moti at this rate, and pin away with Imagintions of you know not what. N. Be sill lud  Flly, smething wit command me to obey is ditates, and fly wit speed the Physitian. W. To the phyitian, why? are you disase then if so, it is sue I have a thousand Cordials give you ease, made up of rich ingredient, such seldom fail man-kind.
N. Alss, t oft they do, and ae at bst but luscious Pisn, wich ma be antidoted fr a time, but in the ed detrs the Patient. W. How—why sure the Man on whom I have stowed so many Favours, cnnot be so much in∣rful to reject my kind advice. N. Forbea t trouble m, se it is no in your ow∣r t ive me ease, a wounded Sol you cannot cre, but  make it wrse. . hat the thing that thu disturs my darling,  i that be al, it is  ing oal fr a day r o, but fasting our dull Sens wih dlight, and all your cares ill vanish. N. In vin you rge i, therefore uge no mre, frm his da I renunce you and yo guild vnitis; my , Tresures, or whte you  a soli  hencefoth be no  te sllce of m mind, bt Vitue, that essential hanss, shall b my der com∣anin. W. And will you then cast off our Grandure, Gai∣y, lay by your awful Robes, an leave your sump∣uous Fare, to pine and languish, to be fed with ears and sighs, as those that do forsake me are; will you, I say, fall under sad reproach, contempt, nd scorn. N. This and much more I`le do for everlasting Life. r will I argue longer, least the happy motion tha dis∣ses me to happiness, should fail; but with sift feet, hilst arkess antles in the World, fly o the Fontain f all os. W. But thither I will ollw the, and pull the ick, if possile. our belei▪ and stive to blind your Sence, That you shall dimly see true Excellence.
A Memento to Hypocrites, or an Imagined Dialogue btween Ananias and Saphira. The Argument. The Plot's contriv'd, they would have Heaven, and yet Too great a price they would not give for it, But purchase at a rate themselves think fit. SEe how the crowding Pe ople flow to hear the new sprung Doctrine, and bring dayly Gifts to those that teach it. A. It is true, nor must we be behind hand, since we have embract it. S. It is true, but if we sell our poor inheritance, and part with all the price, how shall we afterwards subsist; Indeed I'de willingly partake of the joys the Teachers promise; yet methinks I would not be poor, for that will rnder us contemptible. A. Take no care for that, we`ll give, and yet we will save enough to keep us from contempt. S. But how if the fraud should be discovered. A. O fear it not, what Mrtal can discover it? he that bought it, knows not ou intention, or if he does, will never inquire how we bestow the coin. S. I dare beleive as much, therefore go you, and lay a part of it at the great Teachers Feet, whilst  secure the rest, and then I will follow for my Be∣nediction. A. I'le do as you advise, and hope to be as well ac∣cepted as those who part with all they have, S. But if you should be asked, if what you bring, is the total Summ, where are you then. A. Why thinkest thou, he that has devised, canno without a blush, affirm it is the whole? nor let you assuration be less, least we should differ, and by tha means be detected.
S. I'le warrant you I'le have my lesson, therefore be concerned no further, but about it. Conclusion. Thus is the project laid, though all in vain, Yet such an one as might deceive meer man; But good St. Peter fill'd with holy fire, Sees through the thin device, and as their hire Gives them to death, by whose hard hand they dy, That to the holy Ghost durst boldly l. A Dialogue between Satan and Simon Ma∣gus. The Argument. The Prince of darkness angry that his power Is baffled by Gods sacred Word, a shower Of wrath designs to rain, but can't devour. S. HOw now my Vice-roy, wherefore is it you give ground? have not I furnished you with Miracles, and sealed you with my mighty wonders. Si. Great Prince of kness, whom I still admire, I cannot be that you are ignorant of all the wonds; that of late have oversprad the Coast, Miracles so far ex∣ceeding what is in my power, that now watever I doe, but dimly shines, my Fame is quite eclipsed, and all my Reputation is lost. Sa. Ha —Can such a thing ever be, when I use such transcendent dilignce to make you dreaded throughout every Coast; what Miracles unheard of hast thou wrought? when once assised by my fla∣ming Legions; what storms have risen at thy bid∣ding? What loud thundrings roar'd, and lightnings seem'd to burn the World? how has the trem∣bling
Earth been tost? and how the ocean still'd and sirr'd; what Macins hast thou reared by Magick power to please the eyes of Princes? how at thy voice have swiftest Rivers stayed? and when you pleas'd, the standing pools raved like the Ocean; how have you turned clear Waters into Blood? and formed dire serpens, from whose threatning stings amazed man kind fled, and is it possible that you should be out doe. Si. It i, and all my Magick Power i vanished, nr can you b ignoant of whse command I am utterly dis∣abled. Sa. It is true, I am not, yet I will do what is in my Power, to overthrow the Power set up against my Kingdom, nor must you be wanting, as an in∣srument in my Fierce hand; all my dread Lgions shall be set on work to raise up Eneies against them and inspire my Servants with revenge to shed the blood of those I hate; and such a storm I will raise, that they shall soon be sensible against what power they strive; be diligent then, and expect to e protected, if my force and stratagems do not de∣ceive me, whilst I descend and muster up my Le∣gions. vanishes. Si. I wish I were well rid of this die slavery, O what a Wretch is he that is und to such a Master! But I'll stive, althugh I think it vain, To cast his hellish yoak and break his chain. T those blest men I'le g, that do sbde Infernal pwers, and hmbly t them sue That th ll  on me a power that may Obliege my wicked Master to obey.
A Dialalogue imagined between the dispos∣sessed Damsel and her Master, when Paul and Silas were released out of Prison. The Argument. The Mutineer's rebuked, and grieves to find His wickedness so vainly was design'd. Dam. CRuel man, how durst you raise an accusa∣tion against those who have commission from the highest God, even him that rules all things and fills all places. Ma. Was there nt a cause, since thy have disposessed me of my profit, that was daily wont to accrae t me by yr strange divination, when to purchase you of your aged Paents, I was obliged to sell my dear Inheritance. Dam. That was not cause sufficient, but if it was, you see your purpose is quite frustrated; I knew them who they were, and therefore cryed on pur∣pose to be thus released, to be delivered from the srugling Fiend that laboured in my Breast, and see is come to pass as I could wish. M. It is so, and by it I am undone for ever; O! how rich should I have been, had not these Men unhappily ar∣rived; but yet they went not hence unpunished. D. Yet wo to them, whose wicked hands have done so cursed a deed; better it was they never had iewed the light: It plain appears how much their God was angry, when he shuck the Earths foun∣dation, that the tottering World seemed to un∣hinge; his presence too was seen in the amazing brightness that filled all the place, 'twas he that loosed them from their bands, and stayed the Goa∣lers rash design, he bowed the hearts of those proud Magistrates, and made them tremble at what they had done.
M. 'Tis all mysterious, and methinks I am smitten with remorse, but tell me are you pleased now as here∣tofore, when your admired breast was held the Cabinet of Fate, to tell things admirable, and unriddle darkest Misteries, proclaim what future Ages should produce, and well presage the sure events of Peace and War. D. Pleased infinitely more, for now instead of a damned fury that inebriated all my Senses, whilst he yell'd his horrid stories, divine rayes of saving Grace enlighten my dark Soul, O blessed change. M. You tell me stories strange, but yet I must beleive hem true, and henceforth make it my endeavours to be∣wil my crime. That I may scape the Fury of that God, That shook the Earth, unfixing its vast load. D. 'Tis well if you repent you of your sin, E're his fierce wrath to fall on you begin; And ask a pardon where you did offend, Least Cattaracts of flame on you descend. A Supposed Dialogue between Demetrius and his Fellow. D. SEe you not Fellow Labourer, how great Di∣ana's Name is almost sunk, since this new Doctrine has or'espread our Coast, none now regard her Shrines as heretofore. F. 'Tis true, we see it but too plain, how her negle∣cted Altar stands, no crouds of Grecians now rest her Faun, but listening to new Doctrine, are become re∣gardless. D. Our trade you see is lost thereby, and we re∣duced to poverty, therefore give counsel what course we must take to uneclipse the Goddess fame, and settle the giddy Multititde to their old de∣otion.
F. No better way, than by insinuating the dangerous consequence of this new doctrine, to set the rout a mad∣ding, raise a tumult, and whilst each gabbles out he knows not what, put all into confusion. D. But what would be the effect of such disorder, should we raise it? F. O! slow of apprehension, why in the uproar, these Teachers, ten to one, will fall a Sacrifice to the unruly Fury of the vulgar, who in their heat triumph in mis∣cheif, that wen cool they sadly lament. D. Let us loose no time then, but disperse our selves amongst them, and proclaim the wonders great Diana has already done, and tell what more she is like to do, and clamour loud, great is Diana of the Ephesians. F. We will instantly put this in practice, that your trade may be restored; come, come about it. Conclusion. Thus boldly they presume, for gain, to do, A wickedness, and madness does insue, Unheard of insolence, the senseless rout Haling the blest Apostles, who past doubt Had there been slain, had not the Town-Clerk stood Their Friend, and sav'd the shedding of their blood. Euticus his considerations after his being raised from ohe dead. O Fatal slumber! Satans guilded bait; Our Souls, of Gods most powerful word, to cheat. O dismal drowsiness! in such a place, Could I not give attention for a space; No, the temptation was grown strong, and I
For not resisting it, deserv'd to dy: Dy, yes, why dead I was, and dead I might, Have plunged by this time into eternal night, Had not the great Apostle taken care, In Christ's dread Name, e're my Soul stragled far, From its left Corps, to call i back again, And by his word restor'd it without pain: Rescued thus from the hands of cruel death, Who had already seiz'd upon my breath. I live a monument to glorify The Lord of Host, whose dwelling is on high, And henceforth will not dare offend my God, Who in his mercy is to me so good. A Dialogue between the Mariners, after St. Pauls shipwrack. The Argument. The Mariner's now safe at land, adie The great Apostle, who from Seas dread ire Preserved them safe, and Heavens hot darling fire. 1 M. O What a Tempest have we scaped! how the rough winds assailed from all their quarters our distressed Bark, and yet strong she laboured with the waves. 2 M. 'Tis true, the laming Skies sent fire upon us in such dreadful sort, that every moment I ex∣pected we should be a blaze. 3 M. 'Tis wonderful that none of us should perish in sogreat a danger. 1. M. We might have prevented this sad ruine, had we taken the good Prisoners word, who told us what would come to pass. 2 M. Sure he is some Angel, that was sent to save, for I never thought we could have weathered such a Tempest, to have brought our Ship into the Harbour.
3 M. He is a Heavenly Man past doubt, some man protected by a power divine, or else the Viper would have killed him. 1 M. Nay he wicked Soldiers were about to do it, and we should have perished for his blood. 2 M. I wonder what he is sent to Caesar for. 3 M. They say about his Doctrine, If so, I doubt not but he will come off, for all he speaks is Hea∣venly, and I hear him ever. 1 M. Nay of us admire; but now night calls us, and we must to our apartments, and for the future, if we get another Vessel, I kope our Master will re∣gard him more, and give good heed to all he says. 2 M. He ought to do it, and no doubt when Cae∣sar hears of what has passed, he will not frown up∣on a Man, for whose sake, Heaven has spared our lives; but come for this time let us hence. Conclusion. Thus far the great Apostle is arriv'd, In vain is all, his Foes have yet contriv'd; To Rome he next proceeds, and wins applause In pleading his dear masters sacred cause: Strengthning the weak, confirming those that stand, Converting many, and has great command O're Hearts of men, till monsterous Nero, stir'd By Satans Malice, kills him with a Sword. On the Infancy of our Saviour. HAil blessed Virgin, full of Heavenly Grace, Blest above all that sprang from humane race, Whose Heav'n saluted Womb brought forth in One A blessed Saviour, and a blessed Son: O! what a ravishment' had been to see Thy little Saviour perking on thy Knee! To see him nuzzel in thy Virgin-Breast:
His milk-white Body all unclad, undrest! To see thy busie Fingers close and wrap His spreading limbs in thy indulgent Lap! To see his desp'rate Eyes, with childish grace Smiling upon his smiling Mothers face! And when his forward strength began to bloom, To see him diddle up and down the Room! O, who would think so sweet a Babe as this, Should e're be slain by a false-hearted Kiss! Had I a Rag, if sure thy body wore it, Pardon, sweet Babe, I think, I should adore it: Till then, O grant this Boon (a Boon far-dearer) The Weed not being, I may adore the wearer. On the Young man in the Gospel. HOw well our Saviour and the landed Youth Agreed a little while? And, to say truth, Had he had will and power in his hand, To keep the Law, but as he kept his Land; No doubt, his Soul had found the sweet fruition Of his own choise desires without petition: But he must Sell and Follow, or else not Obtain his Heaven; O now, his Heaven's too hot; He cannot stay, he has no business there: He'll rather miss, than buy his Heav'n to dear: When broth's too hot for hasty Hounds, how they Will lick their salded lips, and sneak away! On Peter's Cock. THe Cock crow'd once; and Peter's careless ear Could hear it, but his eye not spend a tear: he Cock crow'd twice, Peter began to creep o th'Fire side, but Peter could not weep: he Cock crow'd thrice, Our Saviour turn'd about nd look on Peter, now his tears burst out.
'Twas not the Cock, it was our Saviour's Eye, Till he shall give us tears, we cannot cry. On the Penny. HE that endur'd the tyranny of Heat, The Morning sorrow, and the Mid-day-swea, The Evening toil, and burthen of the day, Had but his promis'd Penny for his pay: Others, that loyter'd all the Morning, stood I'th' Idle Market, whose unpractis'd bloud Scarce felt the warmth of labour, nor could show A blush of action: had his penny too: What Wages can we merit, as our own: Slaves that are bought with price can challenge none, But only Stripes: alass, if Servants could Do more, than bid, they do but what they should: When man endeavours, and when Heav'n engages Himself by Promise, they are Gifts, not Wages, He must expect: we must not look t' obtain Because we Run: nor do we run in vain. Our running shows the effect, produces none: The Penny's given alike to every one That works i'th' Vineyard; Equal price was shar'd T'unequal Workers; therefore no Reward: Lord, set my hands awork; I will not serve For Wages, least thou give what I deserve. On Ananias. THe Land was his, the Land was his alone 'Twas told, and now the money was his own▪ The Power remain'd in the Possessors hand To keep his money, or have kept his land: But once devoted to the Churches good, And then conceal'd, it cost his life, his blood. If those that give may not resume agin, Without a Punishment, without a Sin
What shall become of those whose unjust power Despoils the widowed Temple of her Dower? Who takes her profits, and instead of giving Encrease to her revenues, makes a livig Upon her ruins, growing plump and full Upon her wants, being cloathed in her Wooll: While she sustains th' extreams of cold and hunger, To pamper up the fat Advowson-munger; To thrust their Flesh-hooks, and their thirsty Pot, And only leave her, what they value not, And whilst her sacred Priests that daily tread Their slighted Corn, must beg their early Bead; Or else, be forc'd to purchase easie shar With that dear prie of their ungranted Prayers: Let such turn back their Sacrilegious eyes, And see how breathlss Ananias es, Behold the Wag that his sn procures, That was a Mole-hil, to these Als of yours: He took it from the Church, did but coneal Some parts he gave: But your false singers steal Her main Inheritance, her own Possession: His was but are deceipt, yours bold Oppression: O, if no less than the first death was due To him, what death d'ye think's prepar'd for you? So often as your paper'd eyes shll look On your Estates, think on the Flying-Book.
There is Newly Published Fifteen extraor∣dinary pleasant and useful Books, which are to be sold by John Dunton at the black Raven at the corner of Princes street near the Royall Exchange, London. [1.] A Very delightful New-years Gift, entituled Heavenly Pastime, or pleasant Observati∣ons on all the most remarkable passages throughout the Holy Bible of the Old and New Testament, new∣ly Allegoriz'd in several pleasant Dialogues, Poems, Similitudes, Paraphrases, and Divine Fancies, To which is added: (1) The Miraculous manner of the production of our Old Grandmother Eve, with the supposed manner of Adams first Nuptial Addresses to her, with the pleasant circumstances of their Mar∣riage. (2) You have an account of Eves first Addresses to Adam, and her Industry in making a Garment for her Husband. (3) You have a pleasant account of Adam and Eves Winter Suites, their lodging and first building, with an account in what pretty manner they first invented a Fire to warm them. (4) You have abundance of supposed Dialogues, very full of delightful reading, The first is between Adam and Eve, and Eve and the Serpent, the second Dialogue is between Cain and Abel, Monster Sin and Conscience: 3. Between Abraham and Sara upon her laughing at the thoughts of her bearing Children in her old Age. 4. Between Abraham and hi dear and only Son Isaac before his Father went to offer him up as a Sacrifice. 5. Between Isaac and Rebea at their first meeting. 6. Between Iacob and Rachel, upon his being willing to serve fourteen years to obtain her ove. (5) A wonderful Account how Pharaoh and all his Host were drowned in the Red Sea. (6) A Dialogue between Grim Death and the lying Mi∣nutes. (7) Between Balaam and his Ass. (8) The
Triumphs of Chastity, or a Dialogue between Ioseph and his Mistress upon her tempting of him to un∣cleanness. (9) A Dialogue between the wanton Har∣lot and the Debauched Youth. (10) A Dialogue be∣tween Sampson and his beloved Dalilah (11) Between Ruth and Naomi upon these words, Nothing but Death shall part thee and me. (12) Between David and Goliah upon their first encounter (13) Between Ionathan and David including all the sweets of an intire friend∣ship. (14) Between David, Vriah, and Bathsheba. (15) A choice Dialogue fancyed between King Solo∣mon and the Queen of Sheba, about the wonderful works of God throughout the whole Creation; to which is added the glory and splendor of King Solo∣mon's Court, together with the Queen of Sheba's glorious progress to it. (16) A Dialogue between Iehu and wanton Iezabel. (17) Haman on the Gal∣lows, or a Dialogue between Haman and Mordecai. (18) Between Adonibezeck and one of the sixty Kings he tormented under his Table, supposed to be in the other world. (19) A Dialogue between Iob and his Wife (20) Between Isaiah and Hezekiah re∣lating to the fifteen years that was added to his Life. (21) A Dialogue between Nebuchadnezzar and the three Children, called Shadrack, Mesheck, and Abednego, that were cast into the fiery Furnace. (22) Between Darius and Daniel, when he was cast into a Den, to be devoured by roaring Lions. (23) Between Ionah and the Mariners in the Storm before he was wallowed up alive by a Whale. (24) Between Za∣charias and Elizabeth. (25) A fancy'd Dialogue be∣tween rih Dives and poor ragged Lazarus. (26) A very affectionate Dialogue between the returning Prodigal and his loveing Father, together with choice Meditations upon our Saviours great com∣passion to the Converted Thief upon the Cross. (27) A Dialogue betwen Iudas and the High-Priest about betraying of Christ, together with Iudas's doleful des∣spair.
(28) Between Nicodemus and the deceitful World, wherein the World promises glorious mat∣ters. (29) A Dialogue between Pilate and his Wife after he had condemn'd our Blessed Saviour. (30) A choice Dialogue between Iairus and his Daugh∣ter after her being raised from the dead, represent∣ing what ravishing sights probably her Soul might behold during all the time her Body lay dead in the Grave, (31) A memento to Hypocrites, or a Dialogue between Ananias and Saphira. (32) A strange Di∣alogue between the Devil and Simon Magus, (33) Between the dispossest Damosel and her Master, when Paul and Silas were by a Miracle releas'd out of Prison, (54) Useful Meditations upon Eutichus▪ falling down dead, sleeping at a Sermon. (35) An a∣wakening Dialogue between the Mariners after St. Pauls Shipwrack: With above fifty extraordinary pleasant Dialogues and Poems besides. By Iohn Dun∣ton Author of the Sickmans Passing-bell. Price Bound two Shillings and six pence. [2.] The Compleat Tradesman, or The Exact Dealers daily Companion, Instruting him throuhly in all things absolutely necessary to  all those who would thrive in the  in the whole Art and Mystery of Trad  and will be of constant use for all  whole-sale∣men, Shop keepers, Retailers▪ Yog Tradesmen▪ Countrey Chapmen, Industous Yoen, Traders in petty Villages, and all Farmers, and others tha go to Countrey-Fairs and Markets, and for all me whatsoever that be of any Trade, or have any consi∣derable Dealings in the World. Written by N. H. Merchant in the City of London. The Third Edition with large Additions, wherein is now fully taught The pleasant and delightful Art of Money-Catching▪ Price Bound  s. [3.] An Ingenions Discourse against Naked Breast and Shoulders, Patches, Painted Faces, and Long Per∣riwiggs:
By Mr. Iay Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. Price Bound, 1 s. [4.] A Coniuation of Morning Exercise Quesins and Cases of Conscience, praially resolved by 31 Reverend Divines in the City of London, October 1682. Some of the Cases in this Exercise are as follows: 1. How may we Experince it in our selves, and Evi∣dence it to others, that serious Godliness is more than a Fancy? 2. What may most hopfully e at∣tempted to allay animosities amongst Protestnts, that our Divisions may not be our Ruine? 3. How may we best cure the love of being flattered? 4. What are the best Preservatives against Melancholy and over∣much Sorrows? 5. How may our belief of God's governing the whole World support us in all worldly distractions whatsoever? 6. Wherein is a middle worldly condition most eligible. 7. How may we improve those Doctrines and Providences that trans∣cend our understanding. 8. How ought we to do our Dutys towards others though they do not theirs to∣wards us? 9. What distance ought we to keep in following the strange and ridiculous Fashions of ap∣parel which came up in the Days wherein we live. 10. How may Child bearing Women be most en∣couraged and supported against, in, and under, the hazard of their Travel With 21 most excellent choice cases of Conscience more, which I have not room here to insert. Price bound, 8 s. [5.] The Pilgrims Guide from the Cradle to his Death-bed, with his glorious passage from thene to the New Ierusalem, represented to the L in a De∣lightful New Allegory, wherein the Christian raveller s more fully and plainly directed than yet ever he ath been by any in the right and nearest ay to the Celestial Paradise, to which is added the Sick mans Passing-Bell, together with the Customs of several Nations in the burial of their dead, with no less han 50 several pleasant Treatises besides, rarely if
ever handled bfore, all of them being distinctly use∣ful, and will affrd the Reader etraordinary Plea∣sure and Dlight in the perusal, if eiher Profi or Novelty will do it: To these are anxt, (1.) An a∣wakening Dialogue between the Soul and ody of a Damned an, ach laying the fault upon the other, fancied in a Morning Dream: In which Dialogue the Speakers are, the Author, a Soul lately departed, a dead Carkass, and lastly the Devils. (2.) An impar∣tial Treatise concerning Devils, Apparitions, Spectres, Phantasms, Pharies, Familiar Spirits, Goblings, Hags, Witches and their Imps; Wizards and Witchcraft (with the manner how Persons become Witches) of Conjurors, Impostors, places haunted, and of the Ghosts of Persons walking after they have been buri∣ed a long time in their Graves; together with two real Dialogues that passed between the Devil and two famous Divines. And lastly is added the Sighs and Groans of a dying Man: Written by Iohn Dun∣ton, late Rector of Aston Clinton. The whole Work is illustrated with eight curious Copper Plates▪ Price Bound 2 s. [6.] The Travels of true Godliness, from the begin∣ning of the World to this present day, in an apt and pleasant Allegory, shewing the Troubles, Oppo∣sitions, Reproaches, and Persecutions, he hath met with in every Age: Together with the danger he seems to be in at this present time, by Vice, Papistry, and other grand Enemies, also where he makes hi last and final abode. The Second Edition, to which is now added five lively Cus, together with ue Godlines's Voyage to Sea, with many new Additions besides. By B. Keach, Author of the War with the Devil. Price Bound. 1 s. 7. The Progress of  in, or the Travels of Vngodli∣ness, from the beginning of the World, to this present▪ Day; in an apt and pleasant Alegory. Wherein you have an account of his cunning and roguish Sub∣ties
nd hateful Villanies: Together with the won∣derful Victories he hath obtained, and abominable Mischiefs he hath done to Mankind, by the help of the Devil, in all his Travels. As also, how a great Hue and Cry was sent after him, to search for him in those Houses where he was us'd to lodge in his Travels; with a remarkable Account of his Apprehen∣sion, Arraignment, Tryal, Condemnation, and Execu∣tion, &c. In which Tryal, Old Father Adam, the whole Creation, and the Lady Grace, with her three Beautiful Daughters, were subpoena'd as Witnesses of Vngodliness; who all appearing in Court, and their Evidence being strong and clear (after a full hearing of all Vmgodliness had to say for himself, why Sen∣tence should not pass upon him) the Iury brought him in Guilty; upon which a Quaker, with his hat on, stood up in open Court, and pleaded hugely for a Pardon for him; but it would not be granted. In the First Chapter, you have an an Account, how the Devil gave Vngodliness a Commission to travel all the World over; with the base Retinue that doth accompany him, and the great success he had in his first Enterprize. The Second Chapte shews, how Vngodliness came into a Country called Non-Age; and of the strange projects he played there. With a pleasant account of some little Bantlings▪ that (to to their eternal Renown be it spoken) were too hard for him. Upon which in the Fourth Chapter he sneaks into Youthshire, where one pious Youth (a∣ove all the rest) made up to him, and cuft him so riskly, that he was forced to cry out, Quarter, Quar∣er, Quarter, but being rescued at last by some oor Plow-jobbers of the Country (after he had re∣covered Breath) he Travels in the Fifth Chapter, long with the Father of Hell and Damnation, into a ast Country, and City, called Sensuality. With the manner how three poor honest men made there e∣pe out of the said City and Country. The Sixth
Chapter shews, how Vngodliness came huffing aga a little Town called Religion, or Mount Zion, with  great Army of mixt People, and besieged it. Wit the huge and bloody Battel he fought there. The Seventh Chapter shews, how Godliness and Vngodli∣ness happened to meet each other in their Travels upon the Road: With the various Discourses that passed between them: With the manner of their parting. The Eight Chapter shews, how Vngodliness travelled into the great City Babylon; and from thence into a great Country of Commerce, that stands by a small Village called Morality, with the mad Tricks he played there among the Tradesmen and Citizens Wives, &c. With abundance of more Heads; and a lively Cut. Written by B. K. Author of the Travels of true Godliness. [8] The English Rogue compleat in four parts, wherein you have a discovery of the Knavery of all Trades in the City of London, Illustrated with seve∣ral Copper Plates, Price Bound 8 s. [9.] A Famous and Impartial History in large Folio, written by the Learned Doctor Frankland, en∣tituled the Annals of King Iames and King Charles the first, wherein you have a full and large account of the great Affairs of State, and the Transactions in England for several years, wherein several material Passages relating to the late Civil Wars omitted in all former Histories are now made known, Price Bound 18 s. [10.] The Key to the Holy Bible, unlocking th Richest Treasure of the Holy Scriptures, whereby the (1) Order (2) Names, (3) Times, (4) Penmen, (5) Occasion, (6) Scope, And 7. Principal parts, containing the Subject mattr of the Books of the Old and New Testament, are familiarly and briefly opened for the help of the Weakest Capacity in the understanding of the Whole Bible. A Book very useful for all Chri∣stian Families. The fourth Edition diligently revised,
Written by Francis Roberts, D. D. Price Bound 12 s. [11] A Ravishing glimpse of the Crown of Glory, wherein the Christians Portion, or the unseen Beau∣ties of the other World are fully aserted and proved (serving as a Cordial to the Heaven Traveller in his way to Paradise) together with several choice Funeral Sermons occasionally preached, and now published by Samuel Willard an eminent Minister o the Gospel at Bston in New England. Price Bound, 1 s. and 6 d. [12.] Mr. Hows Sermon at the Funeral of that faithful and laborious Servant of Christ▪ Mr. Richard Fairugh (late of Bristol) who deceased Iuly the 4th. 1682. in the 61 year of his Age. price 6 d. [13.] A choice Pattern for all Young Prsns of either Sex, isplayd o the Life in a Seron prachd by Mr.  Dth of a oun Pious Gentlewoman Mrs. , Daughter of Mr. Nathaniel  late of Hackney, together with her  and Death, price 6 d. [14] The Pilgrims  in a Dream: by Ihn Bunian. Price 1 s. [15.] The Life and Death , with large Additions. Price 8. d. Tgethe with all man∣ner of aeable Chapmns Books. ¶ Likewise some of the most Delightful Histories that ever were yet extant, are to be sold by Iohn Dunton at the Black Raven at the Corner of Prines-reet near the ROYAL EXCHANGE in Lon don, together with all manner of good, pleasant, and practical English Books. ¶ Note, that whosoever buys a compleat set of all those fifteen books mentioned in this Bill, shall be us'd very kindly for them all together. FINIS.
