d354 19720939 109350
An Explanation of the Roman Catholikes Belief, concerning these foure Points: Their Church; Worship; Justification; and civill Government. As it was presented to some Persons of Quality, for their particular satisfaction. WE believe the holy Scriptures to be of divine inspiration and infallible Authority; and whatsoever of therein contained we firmly assent unto, as to the Word of God, the Author of all Truth. But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16 which the ignorant and stable wrest to their own destruction; we therefore professe (for the ending of controvers in our Religi∣on, and setling of peace in our Consciences) to submit our private judgements to the Judgement of the Church, represented in a free Generall . 2. We humbly believe the sacred Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, one Eternall, Almighty, and Incomprehensi∣ble God, whom only, we adore and worship, as alone having Soveraign Dominion over all things, to whom only, 1 Tim. 1.17. we acknowledge as due from men and Angells, all glory, service, and obedience; abhorring from our hearts, as a most detestable Sacriledge, to give our Creators honor to any creature whatsoever. And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we addresse to Angells and Saints, we intend no other then humbly to sollicite their assistance before the Throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one ano∣ther here upon earth, not that we hope any thing from them, as originall Authors thereof, but from God the Fountain of all Goodnesse, through Iesus Christ, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Neither do we believe any divinity or vertue to be in Images, for which they ought to be worship't, as the Gentiles did their Idolls, but we retain them with due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections. 3. We firmly believe, that no force of nature nor dignity of our best works can merit our Iustification, but we are justified freely by grace,Rom. 3.24. through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly life and holy obedience to the Commandements; yet are our hopes of eternall glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus. All other merits, (according to our sense of that word) signifie no more, then Actions done by the assistance of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his goodnesse to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being in∣suitable to the sense of the holy Scriptures, the  their principall design to invite and provoke us to a dili∣gent observance of the Commandements, by promising heaven as the reward of our obedience, 1 Tim. 4.2. Godlinesse is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. And Rom. 2.6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by patient confidence in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternall life. And again, Rom. 8.13. If you live after the flesh you shall die, but if through the spirit you mortifie the deeds of the body, you shall live. And Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labour of love which you have shewed for his name, &c. Nothing being so fre∣quently repeated in the Word of God, as his ons promises to recompense with everlasting glory the faith and obedience of his servants; Nor is the county of God barely according to our works, but high and plentifull, Luk. 6.38. even beyond our capacities, giving  measure, heaped up, pressed down, and running over into the bosomes of all that love him. Thus we believe the merit or rewardable  holy living (both which signifie the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our be , as they are ours, but from the Grace and Bounty of God; and for our selves, we sincerely professe when we have done all those things, which are commanded us, we are unprofitable servants, Luk. 17.10 having done nothing but that which was our duty, so that our boasting is not in our selves, but all our glorying is in Christ. 4. We firmly believe, and highly reverence  Mor all Law, being so solemnly delivered to Moses upon the Mount, Exod. 10. so expressely confirmed by our Saviour in the Gospell, and containing in it self so perfect an Abridg∣ment of our whole duty both to God and man. Mat. 19. Which Morall Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfullnesse and sincerity in their  all contracts one towards another; Eccles. 12.13. and therefore our constant Profession is, that we are most strictly and ab∣solutely bound to the exact and entire performance of our promises, made to any person of what Religion soever; much more to the Magistrates and Civill Powers, under whose protection we live, whom  taught by the Word of God to obey, not only for fear, but conscience lake; and to whom we will most faith∣fully observe our promises of duty and obedience, notwithstanding any dispensation, absolution, or other proceedings of any forraign Power or Authority whatsoever. Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous position, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretikes, as most uncharitably imputed to our practises, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion. These we sincerely and solemnly professe, as in the sight of God, the searcher of all hearts, taking the words: plainly and simply, in their usuall and familiar sense, without any Equivocation or Mentall Reser∣vation whatsoever.
