e1057b 99830321 34772
Anno Regni GULIELMI ET MARIAE, REGIS & REGINAE Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, SECUNDO. On the Fourteenth Day of April, Anno Dom. 1690. In the Second Year of Their Majesties Reign, this ACT Passed the Royal Assent. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI IT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. MDCXC.
Anno Secundo GULIELMI & MARIAE. An ACT for Recognizing King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and for Avoiding all Questions touching the Acts made in the Parliament Assembled at West∣minster the Thirteenth Day of February, One thousand six hun∣dred eighty eight. WE Your Majesties most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Com∣mons in this present Parliament Assem∣bled, do beseéch Your most Excellent Ma∣jesties, That it may be Published and Declared in this High Court of Parlia∣ment, and Enacted by Authority of the
same, That we do Recognize and Ac∣knowledge Your Majesties were, are, and of Right ought to be by the Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady King and Queén of England, France, and Ireland, and the Do∣minions thereunto belonging, in and to whose Princely Persons the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with all honours, Stiles, Titles, Re∣galities, Prerogatives, Powers, Iuris∣dictions, and Authorities to the same be∣longing and appertaining, are most ful∣ly, rightfully, and intirely Invested and Incorporated, Vnited, and Annexed. And for the Avoiding of all Disputes and Questions concerning the Being and Au∣thority of the late Parliament Assembled at Westminster the Thirteénth day of Fe∣bruary One thousand six hundred eighty eight, We do most humbly beseéch Your Majesties that it may be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the King and Queéns most Excellent Majesties, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all and singular the Acts made and Enacted in the said Parliament, were and are Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and as such ought to be Reputed, Taken and Obeyed by all the People of this Kingdom. FINIS.
