e1447 08940710 42035
THE DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster; PRESENTED TO THEIR HIGHNESSES THE Prince and Princess of ORANGE, At White-Hall the 13th. of February, 1688/9, WHEREAS the late King James the Second, by the assistance of divers Evil Counsellors, Judges, and Ministers Imployed by him, did endeavour to Subvert and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liber∣ties of this Kingdom, By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws, and the Execution of Laws without Con∣sent of Parliament. By Committing and prosecuting divers worthy Prelates for humbly petitioning to be excused from concurring to the said assumed power. By issuing and causing to be executed a Commission under the Great Seal for Erecting a Court called the Court of Com∣missioners for Ecclesiastical Causes. By Levying Money for and to the use of the Crown, by pretence of prerogative, for other time and in other manner than the same was granted by Parliament. By raising and keeping a standing Army within this King∣dom in time of peace, without consent of Parliament, and Quar∣tering Souldiers contrary to Law. By causing several good Subjects being Protestants, to be dis∣armed, at the same time when Papists were both Armed and Im∣ployed contrary to Law. By Violating the freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.
By prosecutions in the Court of Kings-Bench for Matters and Causes Cognizable only in Parliament, and by divers other Ar∣bitrary and Illegal Courses. And whereas of late years Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons have been returned and served on Juries in Tryals, and particularly divers Jurors in Tryals for High Treason which were not Free-Holders. And excessive Bail hath been required of persons committed in Criminal Cases, to elude the benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subject. And excessive Fines hath been imposed, and Illegal and Cruel punishments inflicted. And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfei∣tures before any Conviction or Judgment against the Persons up∣on whom the same were to be Levyed. All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes and Freedom of this Realm. And whereas the said late King James the Second having abdicated the Go∣vernment, and the Throne being thereby vacant. His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it hath pleased Almighty God to make the Glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitary Power) did by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and divers Prin∣cipal persons of the Commons, cause Letters to be written to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being Protestants, and other Letters to the several Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports, for the choosing of such persons to repre∣sent them as were of right to be sent to Parliament, to Meet and Sit at Westminster upon the 22d. day of January in this year 1688, in Order to such an Establishment, as that their Religi∣on, Laws and Liberties might not again be in danger of being Subverted. Upon which Letters, Elections have been accordingly made. And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons pursuant to their respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a full and free Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration the best means for attaining the ends aforesaid, Do in the first place, as their Ancestors in like Cases have u∣sually done, for the vindicating and asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare, That the pretended Power of suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal. That the pretended Power of dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, as it has been assum∣ed and exercised of late, is Illegal. That the Commission for Erecting the late Court of Commis∣sioners, for Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of like nature are Illegal and Pernicious.
That Levying of Money for, or to the use of the Crown, by pretence of Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, or for longer time, or in other manner than the same is, or shall be Granted, is Illegal. That it is the Right of the Subject to Petition the King; and all Commitments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Il∣legal. That the Raising or Keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parlia∣ment, is against Law. That the Subjects which are Protestants, may have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Condition, and as allowed by Law. That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be free. That the Freedome of Speech and Debates, or Proceedings in Parliament, ought not to be Impeached or Questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament. That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, or excessive Fines Imposed, nor cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted. That Jurors ought to be duly Imparmelled and Returned, and Jurors which pass upon Men in Tryals for High Treason, ought to be Freeholders. That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons before Conviction, are illegal and void. And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthning and preserving of the Laws, Parlia∣ments ought to be held frequently. And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and sin∣gular, the Premises as their undoubted Right and Liberty. And that no Declarations, Judgments, Doings, or Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said Premises ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into consequence or example. To which Demand of their Rights, they are particularly incouraged by the Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange as being the only means for obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein. Having therefore an intire Confidence that his said Highness the P. of O. will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still preserve them from the violation of their Rights which they have here asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons Assembled at Westminster, Do Resolve, That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange be, and be Declared King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging. To hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Domini∣ons, to them the said Prince and Princess during their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of them. And that the sole and
full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in and Exercised by him the said Prince of Orange, in the names of the said Prince and Princess during their joynt Lives. And after their Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess. And for default of such Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body. And for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange. And they do pray the said Prince and Princess of Orange, do accept the same accordingly. And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned, be taken by all Persons of whom the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them, and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy may be abrogated. I A. B. Do sincerely and Swear, that I will be Faithful and bear true Allegiance to their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. So help me God, &c. I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as Impious, and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope or any Authority of the See of Rome, may be Deposed or Murdered by the Subjects or any other whatsoever. And I do De∣clare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Prehe∣minence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So help me God, &c. It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, That this Declara∣tion be Engrossed in Parchment, Enrolled among the Rolls of Parliament, and Recorded in Chancery. Printed in the Year 1689.
