E2799 15691419 104420
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms Die Veneris, 13 Decemb. 1661. FOrasmuch as upon Writs of Error retornable into this High Court of Par∣liament, The Plaintiffs therein often desire to delay Iustice, rather then to come to the determination of the Right of the Cause; It is therefore Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the Plaintiffs in all such Writs after the same, and the Records be brought in, shall speédily repair to the Clerk of the Parliament, and pro∣secute their Writs of Error, and satisfie the Officers of this House, their Feés justly due unto them, by reason of the prosecution of the said Writs of Error, and the proceéd∣ings thereupon; and further, shall assign their Errors within Eight days after the bring∣ing in of such Writs with the Records: And if the Plaintiffs make default so to do, then the said Clerk, if the Defendant in such Writs require it, shall Record, That the Plaintiff hath not prosecuted his Writ of Error; and that the House doth therefore Award, That such Plaintiff shall lose his Writ, and that the Defendant shall go without day, and that the Record be remitted. And if any Plaintiff in any Writ of Error shall alleage Dimi∣nution, and pray a Certiorari, the Clerk shall enter an Award thereof accordingly, and the Plaintiff may before in Nullo est Erratum pleaded, sue forth the Writ of Certiorari in ordi∣nary course without special Petition, or motion to this House for the same; and if he shall not prosecute such Writ, and procure it to be returned within Ten days next after his Plea of Diminution put into this House; then unless he shall shew some good cause to this House, for the enlarging of the time for return of such Writ, he shall lose the benefit of the same, and the Defendant in the Writ of Error, may proceéd as if no such Writ of Certiorari were Awarded. Die Veneris, 13 Decemb. 1661. ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That this Order be forthwith Printed and Published. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, 1661.
