E3463 12595056 64040
A Rule from Heaven▪ OR, VVholsom COUNSEL TO A Distracted STATE: Wherein is discovered, The onely Way for settling THE GOOD OLD CAƲSE, AND▪ Removing the Maladies incident thereunto▪ and Mr. Pugh his Prophe∣sies▪ opened▪ By ARISE EVANS. 1 Thes. 5. 20. Despise not Prophesyings. Mat. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you▪ LONDON▪ Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at his House in Long-Alley in Black-fryers. 1659.
The INTRODUCTION. ALthough we have been of all Nations the most sinful, yet from time to time, God in Mercy did deal with us, that we Bri∣tans might be a People saved to the Glory and Honour of his free Grace: as it is written, Isa. 43. 2. This people have I formed for my self: they shall shew forth my praise. And as it is seen from age to age, Gods Justice is such, that it will not pass by the sins of any people, but especially his own people, as you see, Amos 3. 2. so he owning us, did severely punish us for our sins at all times: First, by the Grecians, when our Royal City of Troy was destroyed; and then after we came hither, by the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans; yea; God made use of all the Nati∣ons round about us, when we sin∣ned, to punish us for our sins, not ac∣cording as our enemies willed, who would have utterly destroyed us, nor according to our deserts, who de∣served no less then utter destruction; but God, according to his purpose, corrected us in mercy and measure. And when our City of Troy was destroyed, and we scattered from thence, to seek a new habitation; some of us came to Italy (which Country long after gloried in being Trojans) but the Nobles followed Brute their Prince, and from all parts as they were informed, came unto him, into Grecia, where in time, Brute became potent, having with him in Towns, Woods and Desarts a strong Party: & when at the Request of Brute, Pandrasus King of Greece would not grant them Liberty in his Countrey, or leave to depart out of his Country,
but went about to punish them; Bru∣tus overthrew the King in battle, took him prisoner; that Pandrasus King of Greece, to reedeem himself according to agreement made be∣tween them, was glad to furnish him with a Navy and much Treasure, and give him his Daughter to wife: whereupon Brute and his company leaving Grecia, came through many Countries, found many more of the dispersed Trojans, fought many Battels victoriously, got much ho∣nour and riches, and made no stay until he came to this Land, which God had promised him in a Vision at Leogitia. And coming, by Gods Providence, to this Land, we found here certain Giants descended from Ham the son of Noah, who then called the Name of this Land Albion; from Albion the fourth son of Neptune, that was the first King which reigned here of that Race: those Giants did oppose
us; but we destroyed them all; and the name of the Land we called ac∣cording to the name of Brute, Bri∣tain: and as we searched the Land, we found in many places of it, but most of them inhabiting North-Wales, a people descended from Japhet the son of Noah, called Samotheans. This Samothea by Moses, Gen. 10. 2. is call∣ed Meshech, and he came here with∣in 200 years after the Flood; he ex∣celled all the men of that age in wis∣dom, learning and knowledge, both in Divinity and Philosophy; and being skilful in the Law of God and Man, he was exceedingly given to the Religion of his Grandfather Noah, which he upheld in his Fami∣ly; and when the earth was divi∣did, Gen. 10. 5, 25. he had for his portion in Europe all the Country lying between the River of Rhene and the Pirenian Mountains; which Lands he peopled with such num∣ber as could be gotten in those days:
but he chose for his own habitation this Island, and called it Samothe: he dwelt in North-Wales; and Samothea▪ begat Magus; Magus, begat Sarron; Sarron, begat Drius; Dri, begat Bardy: these five, Samothea, Magu▪ Sarron, Drius, Bardy, reigned here long time before Albion came; and they were so famous for learning, that every one of these erected a Colledge of himself; so that the Greeks, Persians, Athenians, even all the Gentiles, had their Chara∣cters and Learning from these Col∣ledges first; which then was pure Knowledge, though afterward cor∣rupted by new devises among them of other Countries, who thought they were no body if they did not adde to it. When we Britains being descended of Gomer the son of Japhet& found these Samotheans our Brethren, not onely because of kinde, but also for their Learning and Vertue, we were right
glad to meet with them, so that we joyned with them, and became one people; and in short time after, things in Britain were so settled, spe∣cially in matters of Religion, that as I may so say, we were Christians above a thousand years before Christ was born. First, we believed in the onely true ever-living God, Maker of all things. Secondly, we had three Names to the same God, by which we called upon him, and did worship him; be∣lieving that he was three in One, and One in Three. Thirdly, we believed that the soul is immortal; and that when one died, his soul entred into another body prepared of God for him: so that if he that died was a good man, his soul was raised and went into a more honourable and glorious bo∣dy; but if he that dyed was a bad man, his soul descended and went
into a more dishonourable and base body: God in this case judging e∣very man according to his works done in his body: thus we believed the Resurrection; and surely it doth in some measure agree with the Go∣spel, as may be proved by many Texts; and was not the soul of Eli∣jah in John the Baptist, which made our Saviour affirm that John was Eli∣jah? Mat. 11. 13, 14. Fourthly, for the Government of this Religion, the Land was divided into 28 parts, where were seat∣ed 28 Flamines, whereof three of them were called Archflamines, which were then as the Bishops and Arch∣bishops of our time, but after a more perfect manner; for then there was three Archflamines over the Britains, which did signifie the Trinity and Personalty of the Godhead; but our Church of England had but two Archbishops. Therefore it was not a hard thing
for Lucius King of the Britains to stablish the Christian Faith in his Kingdom, it being all one with that they had in Doctrine and Govern∣ment, onely differing in Names and Ceremonies; so that Lucius which was the first Christian King in the world, quickly, and without violence, brought the Britains to the Christi∣an Faith: who hearing Christ prea∣ched, immediately believed, and were baptized: that Lucius change∣ing the word Flamine into Bishop, thus altering few Names and Cere∣monies, the work of reformation in Britain is done quickly. And in Contemplation of these things, I see Jesus while he was on earth viewing the Daughters of the Gentiles, to finde out his Spouse; and among them all, concludes Bri∣tain to be the most amiable; and being in love with her beauty, accor∣ding to Solomon, song 4. is resolved to take her to wife, that he might beget
a son of her body to inherit his glo∣ry: therefore Jesus the King, after the manner of Kings, sends the most honourable of all his Disciples, Jo∣seph of Arimathea by Name, an Em∣bassadour to Britain; and he coming to Arviragus then King of Britain, was so courteously received, that the King gave him some Land to inha∣bit, and liberty to declare his mes∣sage to the British Lady, so called for method sake: but the said Lady, notwithstanding the Kings consent, for modesty sake, as prudent Ladies use to do in such a case, doth not seem to grant her love to her beloved at the first motion, because she might have been judged to be of an unconstant minde, for altering her e∣state suddenly, and without mature deliberation: for these causes the suit continueth; so that the agree∣ment is not fully made between Je∣sus Christ and the British Lady until King Lucius time, and then they
were married with great joy: and not long after, the British Lady brings forth a son to Jesus Christ, namely, Constantine the great, who gave such a wound to the enemies of Jesus Christ, that they could never recover it: we then being assured that the British Lady should bring forth another son to destroy all the enemies of Jesus Christ, and receive of his glory, for this cause Britain had many enemies that envied her, because of this honour that God was pleased to give her: which is worth your consideration. Britain being thus exalted, and her son made Emperour, Satans Friends fell into a tottering conditi∣on; therefore he stirreth all his in∣struments against the British Nati∣on; as the Saxons, Danes, Normans, and all the Nations round about sought to destroy them, till they drove the Britains into Wales; and at last, after much Wars for a long
time, through a guile used in their a∣greement with Edward the first, who privately sent his Queen to Carnar∣von, where the first Prince of the English Race was born; and the Britains submitting to him, brought themselves into such misery, that from Edward the first, to Henry the sevenths time, the Britains were in great slavery; the English using them cruelly, destroying their anci∣ent Records, prohibiting them to bring their Children up in Learn∣ing, intending to extinguish their ancient Language, and bring the prophesies and promises written in the same Language to none effect: but for all that, the Britains through Gods Providence preserved their Language, and so much of their Writings as is needful to hold forth the truth for them. And of all the enemies that we had since our coming to Britain, the Romans were the most honest and
noblest Enemy; for they indeed e∣steemed the Britains according to their worth and quality, making a difference between us and the Bar∣barous people round about us, be∣cause the Romans found the Britains to be as good men as themselves were: for all the Countries herea∣bout submitted to Julius Caesar with∣out any great resistance: but when he sent to Cassibelan King of the Bri∣tains to have him submit, Cassibelan sent him word, That he and the Britains had not learned as yet to live in servitude; and that Caesar should find it a hard matter to bring them to it: whereupon Caesar being in wrath, came to Britain with all his Power; but he found Britain so hot, that he was forced to go back into France from whence he came; and after many returns to little pur∣pose, being half ashamed, Caesar sought to gaine the Britains by love, and at last came to an agreement
with them, that the Romans and the Britains should become one people. Thus they concluded▪ So that you may see in the Chronicles (as many more were) Constantine the Great was a Britain by the one side, and a Roman by the other; for which cause Pompey who was sent from Rome to conquer the other side of the world, sent a jeere to Caesar, for that he could not otherways overcome such a small handful of people as he judg∣ed the Britains to be: therefore Cae∣sar bore him a grudge for it to his dying day; so that before Pompey came to Rome, Caesar having many of the Britains with him, met him, and shewed him the Britains Valour in a Battel where Pompey was slain, and Caesar made Conqueror of the World. And know this also, that the Ro∣mans should never have had footing in Britain, had Britain then been uni∣ted within it self: for King Lud di∣ed,
and left behind him under age four sons: Cassibellan his Brother was made Protector; and usurping the Throne, Androgeus son and heir to Lud, being deprived of his right, agreed and sided with Caesar, and went to Rome; therefore many towns not submitting to Cassibellan, because he was not their lawful King, made much for Caesar, and brought in the Romans as abovesaid: so that Caesars report is true, saying, That Britain was divided when he invaded it: but had he come in King Luds time, he had found no entrance into Britain. Yet as the truth is, our Confedracie with the Romans did us much evil: for our men going out of the Land to maintain the Romish interest, made our number decrease, and em∣boldened our pilfring Enemies to set upon us, specially after they saw that huge host go out of Britain for the service of Christ under Constantine the Great. Thus much touching the
Romans, as being worthy of note, I thought good to shew you. And now to return where I left: The Britains, as before you see, were in great distress, from the time of Edward the first, to the time of Henry the seventh; that is to say, a∣bove two hundred years; and for all their enemies could do to them, the Britains kept their Language, Re∣cords and Prophesies: so that Hen∣ry the seventh being a Britain-promi∣sed Prince, had them Prophesies as his guide; and he observing them, came accordingly to the Throne, to the comfort of all people: for he united York and Lancaster, redeemed Wales, and was the means to bring England and Scotland under one head; and from that time to this day, the Welch British blood, according to the Welch Prophesies, hath con∣tinued on the Throne of great Bri∣tain.
Thus far God hath done for us in fulfilling our prophesies; blessed be his Name for ever: and more is yet to be fulfilled of the said Prophe∣sies, which will infallibly come to pass as the rest did; for God is come in his promises, therefore now it is time for you English-men to consi∣der it, (and not henceforth to de∣spise, deride and scorn the Welch) that ye may as Britains be made par∣takers of the blessing with us, deny∣ing your English or Saxon interest; for surely the Saxons shall vanish, as God hath determined it by our Pro∣phesies. The mystery of our Prophesies and Knowledge was delivered to us of old, by Samothea, or, as Moses calls him, Gen. 10. 2. Meshech, that is, a Messenger or Angel of God: others call him, Diese, that is, God; they at∣tributing the Godhead to him, in re∣gard of the light come from him to the world: but we call him Samothea,
that is▪ a man endued with wisdome or sapience above others; who in∣deed at first laid the platform of true Knowledge among us; by which Evangelical Divine Rules, our Bards were guided to prophesie: and spe∣cially having the mystery opened by the coming of Jesus Christ, they were the more informed by his Spi∣rit; so that they became undoubtful and certain in what they said and delivered to the Britains. And there is a Book of one Mr. Thomas Pugh, called, British and Out∣landish Prophesies, printed 1658, for Lodowick Lloyd at the Castle in Gorn∣hil in London; In which Book you shall finde much of our Welch Pro∣phesies, (though mis-applyed by the Author) to which Book I re∣fer you: for in that Book you are to look upon a thing done according to the pattern, Heb. 8. 5. that is, a thing in form like the old Testament, and beginning the 540 year of Christ, page 1.
First of all, you shall finde there a second Moses, or an Angelical Child taken out of the water, called Taliesin, whom many our Nati∣on much honour: for the said Ta∣liesin tells you many things that were in the beginning, as Moses doth; pro∣nounceth woes against all sorts of sinners; sheweth you his belief in Jesus Christ; warns you of the Ro∣mish Faction; and tells you a fore∣hand of the Britain Captivity being overcome by the Saxons, and of their Restoration in due time by the seed of the woman, whom he calls by name Angharad, many hundred years before she was born, pag. 13. and pag. 20. and that out of the said woman should come a valiant Con∣querour called Kar, that is, Karolus or Charles, pag. 24. This Taliesin, and the Prophets or wise men that followed, do foretel you the death of King Charles, the place of it, the manner of it, and shew you by whom
it is done, pag. 43. and who for a time shall enjoy his Territories, pag. 37. Secondly, you shall finde that Charles the King, and Oliver that en∣joys his Kingdoms, are both the seed of the same Angharad, as Jacob and Esau were, Gen. 25. See for this, pag. 151, and 252, and 168. Thirdly, you shall find that these Prophets do agree, and testifie that the said Charles, called by them Ko∣ronog vaban; in English, the crown∣ed son of Anne, shall rise again, and not onely conquer Britain, or recover his own, but also shall conquer the whole world: that is, the Line and Race of the said Charles, shall do it: for you must understand it in a rea∣sonable way: See for this, pag. 37, 38. and also pag. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. Fourthly, for a miraculous wit∣ness, that that Race and Line of Ko∣ronog vaban shall be raised again to
conquer, as abovesaid, you shall find, pag. 104. Taliesin's Prophesie of great stones raised from a bottom, and set on a hill (which stones are so big, that no creature can move them) when the head of Koronog Faban was to be raised; and that came to pass at the Coronation of King James in England, who had been crowned many years afore in Scotland while he was in his Cradle; which being in that regard a crow∣ned baby, is also upon that account Coronog Faban: for Koronog Vaban in English, is either the crowned ba∣by, or the crowned son of Anne; both are included in the word. And the Author confesseth it to be a word of a double signification, 47. neither durst he put out such prophesies, had he not seemed to be exceedingly for Oliver: therefore he wresteth the prophesies to speak for him; and it was GOD's Providence that brought them forth: for Oliver was
rather more angry then pleased with the Author for such a discove∣ry. Fifthly, you shall find that after Ta∣liesin had set forth Olivers deeds, p. 22. he termineth and limiteth his time; and then pag. 23. he saluteth Charles the second by name, though mystically; and there the Author is at a stand, not daring to interpret it, nor knowing what to say: but pag. 149. he seemeth to shew the time of the beginning of the depar∣ting of Oliver and coming of Charles, and of his deeds, as followeth, pag. 50. This is the whole substance of Pughs Book, and it is agreeable to the Scripture; it is agreeable to the Jews Expectation, and agreeable to our Christian Religion. And these prophesies did never fail hitherto, as our Countrey-men know; but at one time our Country-men and Bards were amazed, and
thought they had failed: for in 1623. the golden number being 9. the Moon also changing on Lower Sunday-Eve, there was a prophesie that pronounced a wo to Britain in that year; and moreover, bidding us beware of a fire upon the Land (that year) the second Thursday after Midsummer day; and therefore they looked for that day to be the day of Judgement: but finding nothing come to pass then, they thought all their prophesies were lies, and that no more credit was to be given to them. But, as I was informed, upon that very Thursday, in that very year, O∣liver Cromwel presented a Petition to King James touching the Fens in Lincolnshire, and about Eli, he being backt with abundance of Country-men, on stilts; and as soon as King James took the Petition, his Nose fell a bleeding, that he swore it was an ill Omen, saying, If he could tell how,
he would hang that fellow that had given him that paper. But Oliver had a strong party with him, so that the King was pacified, and thought it best to be quiet. Thus the King and Coun∣trey began to jar about the Fens, which the King had sold from the Countrey to some Dutchmen; & Oli∣ver at the first began to gain the love of the people by this means: for none durst head them then but he. Now you see how the fire began between the King and Country on that very day: so that the prophesie was ful∣filled, though our Country were ig∣norant of it: which fire burned the King and his party to nothing; so that as S. Clement saith, They shall be renewed, and rise as the Phoenix doth, out of its own ashes: and for this Nation, I believe that the generality of the people of this Land are Britains (or Welch, as now we call them) by descent: for though they lost their Language by reason of their mix∣ture
with Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, and other Nations which came to this Land from time to time; yet they did not lose their Consanguinity: and you must con∣ceive thus much, that though this Land was many times conquered by forrainers, yet none of the poor peo∣ple and Husband-men, nor any that did submit to the conquering party, were removed; and that it was al∣ways the chief Nobility, being o∣vercome, fled to Wales, or to any place where they could finde a Re∣fuge. Therefore we, whose noble descent you see, ought not to be divi∣ded: truly Wales had never been brought under England, but for its division: and now what danger are we in, being divided, and do no righteous things? we cannot stand long if we have not a King. But you will say, Who shall be King? If you go in a righteous way, I will shew you that Charles Stuart is the
man who by right should enjoy it according to our ancient custome: for he is the true heir of all; for in him runs that stream of Royal Blood that shall make glad the City of God: for all the Blood-Royal of the Britains, Scots, Saxons, Normans, is primary in him. I could make this out, and shew you his lineal descent, if I thought you would question it: I could also make it appear abun∣dantly by their prophesies in Mr. Pughs Book, that God long before this time hath determined and de∣clared his Fall and his Restorati∣on; and that word Koronog vaban, which is the Key of all our prophe∣sies, belongs to him; and that it cannot be brought to speak for Oli∣ver Cromwel, as Mr. Pugh would have it. But what should I trouble you with these things which you cannot relish? I shall shew you a more excel∣lent way; for God did not cast down Charles, to the end that he should be
set up again upon the same slipery foundation: for he had better he a step lower then he was, that he might stand surer: Therefore take this as followeth.
Men and Brethren: I Having read Histories, and seen the course of the world from time to time, I finde that from the Crea∣tion to this day, there is troubles in the world about superiority, and that much innocent blood hath been spilt by Go∣vernors to maintain their worldly Inte∣rests; yet for all that, could they never make themselves and posterity sure to hold long, nor finde a way to govern, that was not defective in the Issue: their Founda∣tion being bloody, could not stay them from falling: they would not come to judgement, nor be called to an account for what they did, and their shedding of innocent blood: but they could not shun it when Gods time came. I might prove this, not onely from Histories, but also from the holy Scripture, that it is so now, and hath been so at all times, in all the ha∣bitable
world, among all nations from the beginning: but my business is not to make great Volumes to shew all that might be said in this Case: onely I say, that all sorts of Government, yet known and establi∣shed among men, whether by Kings Here∣ditary, (counted best) or by Elective Kings, or by States, or whatsoever else is or hath been, it is nought, and destructive to men: therefore I through Gods help briefly shall shew you a Form of Govern∣ment that hath not been yet made known to the world, though figured forth in the Gospel by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, this sixteen hundred yeers: And now our necessity requireth me to hold it forth: we have had much talk of the Kingdom of Jesus-Christ, but we are ignorant of it all this while; none sheweth it, though it be time: for if the Protector, Army, and Parliament, striving about the Militia (as they did with the late King) fall to War again (as it is like they will) then wo to England, that ever the Gospel shined so bright in it, and that by it, it could not finde the way of peace: therefore take this as followeth for your direction.
1. Let not the chief of Great Britain and Ireland enter into his Power and Go∣vernment, until he be above fifty yeers of age. 2. Let him be a poor, honest, godly man; even so poor (though industrious in his calling) that he hath been forced to take Almes: and let him be chosen by lot. 3. When he is king (for that Title the Scripture gives him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and that Title is best known to England by our Law) let him have the sole power in Church and State: namely, the Militia, or whatsoever else is appointed for the good and defence of the Nation, shall be his; and let him be accountable to no man. 4. Let all Writs go, and whatsoever is done, let it be done, as heretofore in the Kings name, and let him have but a hundred pound a year to maintian him. 5. Let the Kings personall work be so little, so plain, and easie, that notwith∣standing his great power, yet so that he cannot erre in what he doth: which shall be onely to call a Parliament, and sit with them; and let there be but one house of Parliament.
6. Let the Protector, Steward, Depu∣ty, King, or whatsoever you please to call him, be hereditary in a male line, of a∣bility and stature to rule, and let him go on ruling as the Protector doth now: on∣ly he must give account before the King and Parliament every third year; for all that is done amisse in ruling, by him or his Officers under him (though done by a Constable or Corporal) shall be laid to his charge, because that upon knowledge thereof he did not punish the Offen∣dours. 7. The King every third year, upon the third week of December, shall send forth Writs to call a Parliament, and command them to meet him at the Par∣liament-house the first week in March, and they are to sit untill the first of Se∣ptember, and no longer. 8. That no man be chosen to serve in Parliament, but such as are above fifty year old, and that are judicious able men in knowledge of Law and Judgement. 9. That none be put in nomination to be chosen, but such as fear God, hate covetousnesse, love the poor, and is peaceable. Chuse none that hath not been just and honest in his dealing with
all men, good and charitable to the poor, and is full of the holy Ghost. 10. That none be chosen, which be in places of profit or preferment under the Deputy or Protector, as now ye call him, nor any Commander of the Army, who all are subjects to be judged by the Parliament, and not to sit as Judges in their own Cause: For though the Pro∣tector be liable to suffer for every fault his officers do, he not avenging the op∣pressed that made his complaint to him, or he not sitting in the seat of Judge∣ment to hear complaints thrice a week, where the poorest sort, as well as the rich, without hinderance may come, be heard, and relieved: yet shall his Offi∣cers suffer every one for his own fault ac∣cording to his desert, and the King and Parliament shall judge it; but whosoever he be that sought not to the Protector first, and is not relieved in a weeks time after his complaint made, though the wrong be done him in Parliament time, yet shall he not be heard by the King and Parliament. 11. The Deputy, or Protector, every week thrice shall sit on a throne in an open place, where every one may come
and make his complaint to him, clearing it by evidence; and after that, he must give just judgement speedily in a weeks time, or else the King and Parliament shall call him to account for it: neither is it intended that the Protector must judge all causes between man and man, but to judge the wrong done by any in autho∣rity to a private man or woman. 12. If by chance there come into the house a close hypocrite that is contenti∣ous, the Parliament speedily shall cast him out, and by their Order the Coun∣trey shall suddenly chuse another, or send him up which he out-voted at the time of Election: neither may he at any time be chosen again to sit in Parliament. Countrey and City, as one man, upon e∣very occasion, shall stand up for King and Parliament, to beat down their oppo∣sers: for in them is the safety of the Na∣tion; and whatsoever in our Law is con∣trary to this Rule, shall be made void and of none effect. Direction to chuse a King. IT is fit that London being the chief Ci∣ty of these Nations, England, Scotland,
and Ireland, who are now one body, should have the preheminence as the Royall City of all; and that the King should be chosen in London; then let the Lord Major (when a King is to be cho∣sen) take the names of all the Parishes under his command, and divide them, and cast lots untill the number be under eight: Then shall he send unto those pa∣rishes which the Lord hath taken, that every parish at such a day shall send a man to such a place; whereupon every pa∣rish of them shall call a Vestry to chuse a man that is above fifty years of age, that hath been a seeker of God, and that fears God, that is full of the Scripture and holy Ghost (not full of the Scri∣pture, yet deny it to be Gods word, as some do) that is diligent in his calling, yet his getting being so small, that he is forced to take some alms to preserve himself and family: a poor man, that is not worth five pounds, nor is five pound in debt; one that can write and read, and hath good understanding and reason, and one that is a native born in Britain or Ireland. Such men shall be chosen and sent to the Lord Major at the time appointed, and he and the Aldermen
shall question them one by one, and take out of them eight in number, two of the fittest persons among them; and after prayer, the Lord Major shall cast the lot; and he on whom the lot is fallen, always shall be proclaimed by the name of King Charles; and there shall be allowed him that is King, two hundred pound a year: one hundred for himself, to maintain him during his life; the other hundred to be divided among fifty poor old men for gowns, and the rest for them in money yearly, and to be paid out of the king∣domes treasury: and in regard of it, the old men are to pray for the King while he liveth; and when he dieth, to accom∣pany him to his grave; and his buriall shall be decent according to his means, and not costly as the former Kings buri∣alls were. 2. I thought of another way of Election: Namely, that he which is the oldest Char∣terhouse-man, shall be alwayes King (I mean not the oldest in years, but he that was longest in the house) it would save the trouble of electing the King, for there is a continuall succession or supply of poor old men coming in there conti∣nually; but that it is necessary to chuse a
King of the purest sort, and at last to let God chuse him, or decide it by lot, which is his own Ordinance that he alwayes an∣swereth by, in such matters that cannot be known or decided otherwayes; as you see in the Old Testament and New, Joshua 7. 14. Judges 1. 1. 2, 3. 1 Samuel 14. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Jonah 1. 7, 8. Acts 1. 23, 24, 25, 26. Besides, there might happen some treachery among these old men: for it is not convenient for any to know aforehand who shall be the next King: and the King being alwayes of one name Charles, there is no interregnum, notwithstanding the time of chusing a King should be somewhat long; for the King is alwayes living, though not decla∣red untill elected: Therefore the first is the best way for election. And now I shall shew you how this is our Sa∣viour Christs Institution for his Kingdome. FIrst, take notice of Matthew 20. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, Mark 10. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. 43, 44, 45. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26, 27. All which sheweth, that when the Apostles strove
for greatnesse in his Kingdome, he tells them that they must not be as the Gen∣tiles were, who did alwayes exalt their great and rich ones to reign over them; but they contrariwise, are commanded to exalt the low and poore to reign over them. And indeed, there is weighty rea∣sons why it should be so, that the great ones should be kept down: for the great ones alwayes striving to be greater, and to have more wealth and honour, they being never satisfied, was the destruction of themselves and followers; and were the disquieting and ruine of good, meek, innocent, peaceable men: and is it not so to this day among us, and all them who would be accounted Christians? 2. The holy Apostle Saint Paul fur∣ther expounding the abovesaid words of our Saviour Jesus Christ, saith, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the Weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty: And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen: Yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. And further he sheweth, who
are those chosen ones; and that they are not them whom the world onely count base, but also such as the Church do de∣spise and undervalue: even such men as is above mentioned in the Election, poor, yet wise men; as you see 1 Cor. 6. 4, 5. say∣ing, If then ye have judgement of things per∣taining to this life, set them to judge which are least esteemed in the Church: So that it is clear, the holy Apostle would have the Christians (according to Christs words) to make them Judges, or Kings, of poor weak old men, which never had any state in the world, nor look for any thing of the world, but food and raiment. And 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23, 24. he there tells you, that there is a necessity of such men for this purpose; and that upon such ye should put the greatest honour, they be∣ing godly and wise in a just way. 3. The holy Apostle Saint James clears it further, shewing you, that such poor men are the Royall seed of Christs king∣dome, James 2. 5. Hearken my beloved, (saith he, regard what I say) hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs to the kingdome which he hath pro∣mised to them that love him? Christians, this is the kingdome that ye dayly pray for,
when ye say to God, Thy kingdome come, Thy will be done on earth, &c. And yet you will not have it come on earth: for (speak∣ing to the generality or middle sort of men) saith he, James 2. 6. Ye have despised the poor: Do not the rich men oppresse you, and draw you before the judgement-seat? As if he should say, I appeal to your own knowledge, whether it be not the rich ones that bring all evil upon you: ye despise the poor harmlesse men, which love God and not the world; and ye would not have them which by Gods apointment should reign over you, and ye have chosen the rich to reign over you, that love the world and not God; but what do you get by it? do they not make war among you; & to maintain their humours, draw you, drive you, yea, con∣sume you to nothing many times? this you see is true. And again, these poor must not be such poor as make them∣selves voluntarily poor; you know some of the Church of Rome do so, and glory in it; but alas, it is a vain glory. Neither are they such as become poor by prodi∣gality and evil-husbandry; but such poor as the Lord doth delight in, and which follow him, and have been indu∣strious
also: yet through crosses and temptations have been kept alwayes un∣der by the power of God, so that they could not attain to any state in the world, for they do not desire it; much being content with what God sends them: for they know riches is a tempting thing that doth cause many to forget God, and be as strangers to him; and that of this sort is the tempting love of riches, to which most mens wills are inclinable; and therefore it is a dangerous temptation, 1 Timoth. 6. 9, 10. buried in oblivion by them: for the temptation they are ac∣quainted with, is their sufferings, and their adversaries reproaching of them, because of their godlinesse and low con∣dition; and to such poor our Saviour saith, Luke 22. 28, 29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my tem∣ptations, and I appoint unto you a kingdome, as my Father hath appointed me; That ye may eat and drink at my table in my king∣dome, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel: And as Saint James saith, James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that in∣dureth temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him:
for you must understand, that these poor must be just and holy ones; and that no wicked ones shall inherit this kingdome of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Let this suffice to prove, that Christs kingdome is that which I have shewed you in the forego∣ing passage: Now I say unto you, It is in vain for any to think of setting up any o∣ther Government (as saith the Angel to Ezra, 2 Esdras 10. 54.) for in the place wherein the highest beginneth to shew his kingdome or citie, there can no mans building be able to stand; and God hath begun here to shew it this many years; therefore your buildings fall. Reasons why this kingdome should be set up among us. 1. Because it is of Christ founded: Therefore it is his kingdome, which is most perfect (though contrary to the kingdomes of men) which shall stand for ever, to his glory. 2. Because we were taught by Christ to pray, saying, Thy kingdome come: There∣fore we ought to endeavour to fulfill our prayers in setting it up, for our good.
3. Because such a King, being old, and hath not long to live here, and but a poor allowance of a hundred pound a year; one that fears God, and is chosen of God by lot; one whose integrity is known to men before he is chosen, so that he never was for the world: I say, such a one will do right, and cannot do wrong; for the fear of God, his age, weaknesse, disabi∣lity in money, and the Law, will bind him to it. There is none else can do us right, but such a one as Christ and his A∣postles, and I, do shew you: for our for∣mer Kings had mighty Revenues and power, therefore they did what they listed against Law and Reason, for which cause they came to destruction many times: Our former Parliaments being up, were worse then our Kings, laying heavier bur∣thens on us: Therefore the Generall of our Army pulls them down, and he sets up himself under the name of Protector: but nothing is mended; therefore the Army pulls him down, and are in confusi∣on, not knowing what to do; and no∣thing shall stand but this kingdome that I shew you, because it is of God: it is in vain for you to set up any other form of Government; for it shall fall, it shall be pull'd down by others.
4. This Kingdom is not any way against the Kings of the earth, but of much advan∣tage to secure both great and smal in their just Rights: for whereas now, they, through their corrupt and boundlesse resolution, hazard souls, bodies, & States, to maintain their prodigall unjust deeds, untill they lose all for it; this kingdome and King will keep them in safety and sure possession: for understanding that they are to give account every third year, they will take heed what they do, and not run in such extravagant, unjust courses, and ungodly wayes, and have much more comfort by it then now they have: for God & the people will blesse them, and there is no other way to establish and confirm every one in his just right but this: for Christ is the Prince of peace, and will not disinherit any line, yet will punish offenders, and preserve their seed that amend. 5. It prevents all treason: for to what end should any conspire against this King, that hath but a hundred pound a year, which they shall not enjoy, if they kill, him? the Law goes on, another is chosen, and they are to suffer the most infamous and cruel death as can be devised, and none can come that way to reign in this
kingdome. It shall not be here as for∣merly it was, or as the saying is, Treason never prospereth: for if it prosper, who dare call it treason? They shall not ad∣vance themselves thereby: all treason aims at some good advantage and prefer∣ment; but here is nothing to be had; if any do it, death and damnation is their reward, which none living can desire: therefore this King needs no guard, God and his innocency is sufficient for his guard; and let not his Deputy have any guard to encourage him in wickednesse, but let him have officers, persons to keep order about him, as the Lord Major of London hath now about him. 6. Because in such a King Christ comes to reign upon earth; for Christs coming must be as the coming of Eliah was in John Baptist, for Eliah was taken up to heaven, 2 Kings 2. 10, 11. as Christ was, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. and it was as hard a thing to see him ascend, as it was to see Eliah ascend; and as there was a promise that Eliah should come on earth again, Malachi 4. 5. So he came in John Baptist, Luke 1. 17. and Christ saith, that John was that Eliah, Matth. 11. 14, 15. Therefore Christ comes not as men imagine, but ac∣cording
to the Scripture, as I shew you here; and they that look for his coming in this way, shall see him, Heb. 9. 28, and the rest shall never see him, but shall be shut up in darknesse. There is abundance more reasons that I could give you, to shew the beauty and excellency of this kingdome: which I o∣mit for the present; because I intend to be brief, and the time doth require it: Therefore now I shall shew you some rea∣sons to shew why this kingdome was not set up afore this time. 1. Because our Saviour Christ foresaw, that the Kings of the Gentiles would not have suffered the Gospel to be preach∣ed in their kingdomes, if so be that the Apostles had gone then to put them down, and set up of the poor to be kings over them. 2. Because the Gospel of this king∣dome, was first to be preached in all the world for a witnesse to all Nations; and then (which is now) comes the end of their kingdomes, and Christs kingdome takes place, Matth. 24. 14, 30. and the Princes of the Gentiles shall mourn, be∣cause they must bow to this kingdome, and become servants to the poor.
3. Because the Gentiles have their times limited, Luke 21. 24. and though known then to none but the Father, Acts 1. 6, 7. So that the Apostle then speak∣ing of it, puts a certain time for an uncer∣tain, Revel. 11. 2. but now the tokens are come, the time is manifested, Matth. 24. 32, 33. that all may see it. 4. Because the Scripture was ingrossed heretofore in the great mens hands, so that they might do as they pleased with the people that knew little or nothing of Scri∣pture; but when the Art of Printing was found, and they had liberty to have the Scripture, knowledge is increased among the People, and shall increase: So that they will not be ruled by the Kings set up after the manner of the Gentiles any more. Here is the Good Old Cause that God raised our Army to stand for; and if they will not stand for this kingdome and government of Christs own institution, which I do shew here, they shall fall: and those that take up this Interest shall prevail. Here you see the Reasons why this kingdome ought to be set up, and Reasons why it was not set up before this time. And if you ask me the reason why King Charles is so unfortunate, since I make
him to be the best of all Kings: truely I answer, Because his resolution is not right, for he would come in and settle all things as formerly we had them, there∣fore he cannot prosper; but let him leave that resolution, and resolve to stand for this way, surely he shall find better for∣tune, and be more glorious, and more surer in his throne then any of his Prede∣cessors, though he seem to be a step lower then they were: For I say to him that shall be King, and to him that is Deputy and King also, for a Deputy was King, 1 Kings 22. 47. Let the brother of low de∣gree rejoice in that he is exalted: But the rich, in that he is made low, James 1. 9, 10. Here is matter of joy for both. Mens Good Old Cause shall fall: indeed Mr. Prin doth shew the right cause of this War, as at first it was declared, and that was but a pretence, for they quickly rout∣ed such as stuck to that: their Cause was to get all from the King, Countrey, and Church, and to keep it; and this they call the Good Old Cause, and they that stand for this, are counted the good people and well-affected; but I am sure their Cause is neither good nor old: and if the long Parliament come together, and sit to
maintain it, according to their invitation; let them beware of John, lest they also be served as Baal's worshippers were, 2 Kings 10. 25. and it was a wise saying of the Philistines to their King, 1 Sam. 29. 4. Wherewith should he reconcile him∣self unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men? Thus you see mens Cause, and Gods Cause; mens end, and Gods end and intention. Therefore let the Parliament at their next meeting settle this government, for none else will stand: for if the long Par∣liament go settle themselves as hereto∣fore, their Generall in time will break them, and set up himself, so that there shall be nothing but tossing the Nations to and fro in bloud, until this way of Christ be setled. And if you desire to know who hath wrote these lines, you may come to know me by my face, and form of my visage, which of late hath been changed: I nor any other can give a reason for it, but this, that it's a Sign of God, and a Seal to this work of God, that should stop the Kings of the Gentiles mouths, Isaiah 52. 13, 14, 15. But methinks I hear some say, The Jews will have no such poor
King as you set forth; they refused King Jesus, because he was outwardly poor. I say, God hath provided one that is so noble in birth and parentage for them, that none is equall to him upon that ac∣count; yet he and all such shall be ser∣vants to our poor Kings: and the Jews shall be satisfied in my next that follow∣eth, both in English and Latine, that was a long while ago given to the great Jewish Rabby, Manasseh Ben Israel.
A word to the Souldiery, and the people in general. ANd truely the people are now in such amazement, that they know not who to obey with safety: for Lenthals Parliament sits, though few in number, to maintain (as they call it) a Free State; but the main end of it is to hugge and make sure to themselves the unrighteous Mam∣mon gotten by deceit. Chiefly, Church and Crown-Lands; and this is a matter of joy to their party: Bampfields Parliament, as report goes, look upon themselves as yet not dis∣solved, but rejourned, and have in their meetings more members then Lenthal: But Prins Parliament ex∣ceeds both, in regard of its Mem∣bers and Right Cause; which truth
the Records of the times, and all ho∣nest people can witnesse, that the Army was raised for the defence of the King and Parliament, as Mr. Prin maintains. These Parliaments signi∣fie nothing, no nor the head-Officers of the Army; but the noble spirits of the under-Officers and Agitators doth all: Therefore you brave Bri∣tains, stand up for Christs kingdom, let not self-interest blinde your eyes; the glory is yours, for you are Christs chief Instruments; Kings or Parlia∣ments are as nothing before you: yea, you Souldiers can take down your head-Officers, if they stand between you and Christ: O go on as ye are Christians, and go on as ye are bold Britains of a noble stock (as ye have it in the introducti∣on of this Book) to set up Christs Kingdom. Was it not a bold Bri∣tish Souldier, under King Belinus the Britain, that struck one of the grave Senators of Romes beard, while
yet they were Gentiles? for when Belinus King of the Britains had con∣quered all so far as Rome, the Roman Senators said, and sent to him, say∣ing, That he must not come there, for it was the seat of the Gods: and when Belinus boldly resolved to try whether they were Gods or no, he marched to them, and found no re∣sistance, because they were not able to fight him: for the Senators thought, they being set on Thrones in a gallant posture, to daunt & per∣swade the Souldiers, that they were Gods that could destroy the Soul∣diers in a moment; but the undaunt∣ed British Souldiers being not afraid of their presence, came to see them; and a bold Souldier, to try their Dei∣ty, taking one of them by the beard, made them all flee, and be glad to give of their gold to serve the Soul∣diers need. Here were gallant spi∣rits; and much more gallant were the Britains that went with Constantine
the great to raise up Christs Church, and make it famous in the World; but your work is more eminent then both the others. O fail not to do it, set up Christs kingdome. And because none shall disgrace me, saying, He set a time for the Kings coming in 1653. and it came not to passe: I did not conclude so, but made a doubtfull case of it, as you may see in my Book called The Eccho, pag. 134. and printed 1652.
And now I shall shew you a seasonable Ʋision that I had in 1634. I Saw my self standing on a pool of water in Merionithshire, at the pa∣rish of Talyllun; the pool is called in our Welch language Llunniamgyl; the honourable Colonel John Jones, one of your House, knows the place: and as I stood upon the water, I saw a company of black Foxes pursuing a young Lion; and as they followed the Lion, they ran round about me, sometimes on the water, and some∣times on the high way, that is on the North-side of the pool: I pitied the Lion, and cast stones at the Foxes with all my might: but as I was throwing stones at the Foxes, immediately they appeared to be young children, that stood still a
while on the way, the North side of the pool; and a voice said to me, Why dost thou cast stones at the children? and as I came to land, immediately they turned to be black Foxes, pur∣suing the Lion again: but on a sud∣den, the Foxes being on the water, became white Lambs, stood still; and the Lion being on the water turned to them; and they, as it seemed to me, kissed each other: Thus the Vi∣sion ended. The Interpretation, as I humbly conceive, is this. CHarles is the Lion, and you are the Foxes, the stones are the words of my former Books against you, for which I was reproved: your becoming children was your dissolution, or interru∣ption, which made you repent that you did not before make your peace with Charles:
your turning to black Foxes again, signi∣fieth that you are the same now as ye were before your dissolution; your turning to be white Lambs, is, that you shall pro∣pound this way of peace to Charles;and your kissing each other, signifieth that you will effect it, and settle peace in a glorious manner. This is the summe of all in few lines to you: consider it; and know, that these words are faith∣full and true. This Vision I had quite forgot, untill within this twelve-moneth: I told it many, but I could not tell how to apply it right, untill this time of your second meeting: I pray God it be rightly interpreted, so that there may be no more inno∣cent blood spilt in this Cause; and that this word become not unprofit∣able to you, through the deceitful∣nesse of riches gotten in these times, & that you do not lose the immortal glory set before you here: and take notice, that this word I present you withall, is the word of the king∣dom,
Matth. 13. 19. And I know nothing more against it, then seem∣ing godly mens self-interest in the world: which Interest will ruine them, if they go on in holding for it as they do.
The Postscript. ANd to shew you all in a word: First, you see that Jesus Christ is for a Single person, and not for a Free State (as you call it:) He that is chief, Luke 22. 26. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign, Luk. 19. 27. So that Jesus when he speaks of these things, he is for a King, and a kingdome; as you may see through∣out the Gospel. Secondly, you see that he would not have the great and rich to be his Kings (like as the Gentiles have) but would have the poor and low exalted to the Throne, Lu. 22. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Thirdly, you see, that (as I said before) there must be two exalted in his kingdom, yet one above the other must be the Chief: for when the mother of Ze∣bedees children petitioned our Savi∣our Jesus Christ, for her two sonnes James and John, saying, Grant that
these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, the other on thy left, in thy kingdome; he doth not answer her, saying, There is no such thing to be in my kingdome; but saith, To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father, Matth. 20. 21, 22, 23. Here you see that two are to be exalted, yet differ in power one above the other, as the right hand is above the left: and if you consider this word, prepared and promised, you shall find the harmo∣ny of it touching this kingdome, and admire it: for, saith the King, Inherit the kingdome prepared for you, Matth. 25. 34. and Saint James calls it, The crown of life, and kingdome promi∣sed of God to them that love him, James 1. 12. James 2. 7. And to you, I say, the Parliament that now sit (for I have not addressed my self to any other power before, though I had this knowledge long before now) Do
you set up this kingdome, for you are those like Zorobabel that began the work, do you also finish it, Zachar. 4. 9. Do you make an agreement with Charles Stuart, and call him in (if you think fit) to rule, and inherit his own, and set a King above him ac∣cording to this discovery: for I do believe, seeing things going on since as they did, many of you repented that you did not agree with him be∣fore you were dissolved; but then you had not this way to propound to him, which being observed, will secure every man in his right, after the agreement, so that none shall wrong another: for Christ in the poor man being exalted to the right hand, having the sole power, will keep all in order and subjection. And as God hath been preparing this kingdome for us, from the foundati∣on of the world: So you, after your late repulse, are better prepared to set it up, then you were before: and
do it: let no self-interest hinder it; for you may secure all ye have thus in peace, better then to keep up your free State (as ye call it) by war and fear, untill at last you lose all: and it is necessary that ye are now in such a state, else you could never have power to make agreement, and to set up Christs kingdom; but have a care that ye lose it not again before you do the work: for our noble Army, whose wisdome and valour you know, whose descent I shew from the Original, may have a design which ye cannot apprehend. FINIS.
