F1614 11798190 49331
THE COPY OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARLE OF FORTH'S LETTER TO THE EARLE OF ESSEX: AND THE COPY OF HIS MAIESTIES LETTER TO THE LORDS and COMMONS OF PARLIAMENT Assembled at Westminster: Sent enclosed in the same 3, March 1643. OXFORD March 7. Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversity 1643.
The Copy of His Excellency the Earle of FORTH'S Letter to the Earle of Essex. MY LORD, I Have received your Letter of the 19th of the last Month, which according to my duty, I shewed to His MAjESTY, who, observing in it your Ex∣pressions concerning Peace, (that whensoever you shall receive any dire∣ctions to those that have entrusted you, you shall use your best endeavours) is gratiously pleased to send this enclosed, which is desired may be delivered according to the directions. Your Lordships humble Servant FORTH. Oxon. March 3. 1643.
C. R. OƲt of Our most tender and pious senfe of the sad and bleeding condition of this Our Kingdom, and Our unwearied desires to apply all remedies, which by the blessing of Al∣mighty God, may recover it from an utter ruine; By the advice of the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Oxford, We doe Propound and Desire, that a convenient number of fit Persons, may be appoynted and authorized by you
to meet with all convenient speed, at such Place as you shall nominate, with an equall number of fit Persons, whom We shall ap∣poynt and authorize to treat of the Wayes and Meanes to settle the present distra∣ctions of this Our Kingdom, and to procure a happy Peace. And Particularly, how all the Members of both Houses, may securely meet in a full and free Convention of Parliament, there to Treat, consult and agree upon such things, as may conduce to the maintenance and defence of the true reformed Protestant Religion, with due consideration to all just, and reasonable ease of tender Consciences; to the setling and maintaining of Our just Rights and Priviledges; of the Rights and Priviled∣ges of Parliament, the Lawes of the Land, the Liberty and Property of the Subject; and all other expedients that may conduce
to that blessed end of a firme and Lasting Peace, both Church aud State, and a per∣fect understanding betwixt Vs and Our People, wherein no endeavours or Concur∣rency of Ours shall be wanting. And God direct your hearts in the wayes of Peace. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the third day of March. 1643. Superscribed, To the Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at Westminster.
