f2240 99831728 36195
From our Womens Yearly Meeting held at York the 19th. and 20th. days of the Fourth month. 1700. WE being Mett together to wait upon the Lord, to feel his Heavenly Power to inable us to per∣form our Christian duties we owe unto the Lord, and one unto another: for he hath been pleased to regard the low estates of his hand-Maids, and in his wonted kind∣ness hath accompanied our meeting with his Heavenly pres∣ence, and visited our Souls with his unchangeable Love to the gladding of our hearts to-gether. And here hath been severall Testimonies born amongst us to our great comfort and Confirmation. And we have received Testimonies in writing from the most of our monthly meetings, of the care and Concern of friends. And Some have given a-good account of the prosperity, and Increase of Truth, and Condescention of friends to a Reformation in severall things that are wanting, and we hope in future time will be amended. And now friends, we could well do no less, then give in this short account of the Concerns of this our Solemn Assembly, desiring your due Care in the wisdom of God to man∣age the Affaires of Truth in every monthly meeting. For we being vnder a weighty Concern of the great Love of God in Seperating of us, from the worlds vaine Customs, foolish Fashions, and traditions: And by his power mak∣ing a Remnant willing to lose the favour of Relations,
and acquaintance for denying customary Feastings, at mar∣riages, births and burialls, at feast times, mas-times, fast dayes, and all other vaine Sportings, and pastimes: And some for testifying against them have been deep Sufferers. Therefore we desire Friends care in every particular Meet∣ing, that none professing the same Truth, may practice those things which others suffered for denying: And that the Antients keep to their plainness, and the Simplicity of the Truth which is unchangeable in it-self; and admits not of any change in us, neither doth it suffer our children, or servants to mix with the world in any of these things. And we desire our queries from our last Quarterly Meet¦ing may be put in practice, which is needful, not onely so, but where any thing is wanting, that may be as weighty: For we desire in all things, we may do to others, as we would they should do to us, and give no accasion to Jew nor Gentile; but keep a Conscience void of offence both towards God and Man; and as much as in us lyes, live peaceably with all, and do good unto all, especially un∣to the househould of faith: For surely, friends, a blame∣less life, and righteous conversation reaches the witness in others, and stops the mouths of Gain-sayers. And where any go into any thing of disorder, which cause∣es the way of Truth to be evill spoken of, as in the dayes of old: Such may be dealt with, according to order now established. Many admonitions such have had from this place: much we could write, but we would be short. For there are more Meetings now erected, and Friends have the opportunity of inquiring one of another, the oftner, and hearing one from another, how the affairs of Truth are car∣ryed on in every monthly Meeeing, which we hope may be of good service; as Friends are freely given up in the wisdom
of God to attend these Meetings, and in his counsell to manage Truths Concerns. And we also desire, there may be no backwardness in Friends in helping in this service, for if wo was pronounc∣ed against those that wrought the Lords worke carelesly, or with negligent minds, what will it be for those that will not worke it at all, nor lend a hand to help it on. Jael was comended for putting her hand to the worke, and her right hand to the work-Mans hammer: Deborah, Dorcas, and Lidia with many others, who were Co-workers, and Fellow labourers, whose Testimonies are lest upon Record, that have been a Comfort and Incouragement to us. And truly Friends, great Incouragement we have had from the Lord, and cause to Incourage one another, as living members of one body, which cannot say to each other we have no need of thee; For there is need of all, and service for all, in building the walls of Jerusalem, repairing her wastes, and making up the breaches in Sion. And take heed of letting in hard thoughts, one against another and be not too hard one upon another about things serviceable, which gives no occasion, but be carefull to preserve vnity. But things needless, and Superfluous, that give occasion, those testify against: And do not reflect one upon another, saying the worke hath been long in hand, and little done, There is a great deal to do yet, And truly Friends, we believe, there will be woke for the People of the Lord in all Ages: We could be glad, if through our travell, future Ages might have more ease. And now young Women, who feel a Concern upon you for the Honour of the Lord in your day: We desire your faithfullness, and your help, and care for good Order, and Church discipline: For you are very near, and dear to us, and we are comforted in you, and incouraged, that when
we shall be dissovled, and gone to our rest; Our Heavenly Father (whose tender care hath been over us to this very day living praises to him for ever) we believe will enable you to carry on his worke, to his Honour, your Souls Comfort, and his Peoples good. Now Friends, we know we have hinted at these things in our former Testimonies from this place, so that we have no new thing to write, yet we hope we may be born in stirring up the pure minde one in another, and puting one another in remem∣berance of performing these things. And we desire this Testimony may be accepted, and received in the same love in which it is given forth: And we al∣so desire, that our former Testimonyes given from this place may not be lost, but be gathered up in every month∣ly Meeting, and kept in some particular hand, if happily there may be service for them in future time. Also we desire, that care be taken that some weighty Friends of every monthly Meeting do attend the next Quarterly Meeting. Signed on the behalfe of the Meeting by us Elizabeth Taylor. Katharine Win. Mary Whte. Deborah Win. Alice Ellis. Elizabeth Yeall. Rachel Linskill. Margaret Smith. Mary Burgess. Elizabeth Broadhead. Mary Oddy.
