F2331 15714473 104499
A Full and True Relation of the Taking CORK, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Malborough, Lieut: Gen. of their Majesties Forces: Together with the Articles of their Surrender. LAst Night we received the joyful News of a Surrender of Cork, and the Perticulars of that Seige, which were as followeth. On the 20th of September 169. the whole Fleet sent with the Earl of Malborough having made the Coast of Ireland towards Night, lay by, and next Morning by break of day they stood in for the Harbours Mouth. There were on each side two Block-houses, on each of which were 4. peices of Cannon, and which plai'd very warmly; but as soon as 2 of our Friggots had plai'd a Broaside, they quitted those Forts and run away. About 12 at Noon the Ships came as high as Passage, where was also another Redoubt: But as soon as the Enemy espied our Men landing in Boats, they scoured as hard as they could drive. Here part of our Men landed that Night, and encamped. The next Morning being the 22d, the rest were debarqued, and began to march up towards the Town, which was 6 Miles thence, they arrived at Night within a Mile of it, and there encamped. The 23d. the Earl of Malborough sent a Summons to the Governour to Surrender, which he very peremp∣torily answer'd, and hung out a Bloody Flag; firing several Guns. But there being an Outwork which the Enemy had lately made to secure a Hill, which commanded the Castle. My Lord Mal∣borough resolved to attack it, it giving him so advantagious a Post; accordingly a 1000 Musqueteers were detached out of the whole Body, and about 3 in the afternoon they marched to attack it. The Enemy that were in it, as soon as they spied our Men approaching fired one Volley, and then ran into the Town. The Great Guns fired mightily, however our Men took Possession hereof, and of the Hil, and that Night made a very good Lodgment. The 24th they prepared Batterys on this Hill; also took Possession of several Out-posts, which were very necessary to annoy the Enemy. There was great firing with Musquets all that day. Several Deserters came to us out of the Town, giving an account, that on the 20th 2 Regiments came into them from Kinsale: That the Garrison was 400 strong, and that they seem'd resolved to defend it. We were also inform'd, that General Scravenmore was 5 Miles on the other side of the Town, with 1500 Horse and Dragoons. That Night our Battery was finish'd and 6 Cannon plac'd thereon. On the 25th about one in the Morning, the Enemy made a little Sally, but our Men were so watchful that they were presently beat in again, and about 20 kill'd of them. About break of day our Guns began to play against the Castle: And by the advantage of this Hill our Mus∣quets annoyed them very much; and about 12 at Noon our small Friggots came up to the Key with Tide of Flood, and battred the Castle. Towards Night we could see some of the Stones of the Wall begin to shake down. That Night several Deserters came to us▪ and informed us our Cannon had done great execution that Day; had kill'd several, and put them into great consternation. The 26th by break of day our Guns began to batter again; and the Wall began to tumble down, so that by Night there was a pretty good breach. That day 500 Horse joyned us, and brought in with them a great Prey of Cattle. They left Monsieur Seravenmoore on the otherside with the rest, to prevent any releif that might come. That day also arrived the Duke of Wirtemberg with 2 Danish Regiments of Foot. On the 27th our Cannon contined battering, so that by about 4 in the afternoon it had made a very fair Breach fit to enter. Therfore at Night it was resolved that next Moning our Men should Storm the Town: the de∣sign being laid that 200 Grenadiers, with Hand Grenades should lead the Van; and these to be second∣ed with 300 Fusileers, and then 2 Battalions of Foot to sustain all in Case of Necessity. The 28th at 8 in the Morning, all these things being disposed, and the Signal upon point of giving: The Ene∣my perceiving our design hung out a White-Flag, and beat a Parlee: Which being agreed to they sent an Officer to My Lord Malborough to treat of Conditions; and that they might march out with Colours flying and Ball in Mouth: But that being refus'd they surrendred at Mercy, as by the Capitulation appears. On the 29th my Lord Malborough entred the Town, and all things being performed according to the Articles, the Irish were made Prisoners of War; and put under a strong Guard into the Castle. And immeditely 500 Horse were detached to Kinsale, which we do not doubt but is surrendred, since they had weakned themselves by sending two Regiments to Corke. Never was such Joy seen in a Place, when all the Protestants were released, the Bells were immediately set a ringing, and all other demonstrations of Joy. There were very great Magazines and Stores found, but as yet we have not the Particulars. Capitulations given to the Garrison in Corke, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Mal∣borough, Lievtenant General of their Majesties Forces in Ireland. I. To receive them Prisoners of War, giving my Word that there shall be no Prejudice done either to Officers, Soldiers, Inhabitants or Clergy of the said Garrison, and will use my Endeavours to obtain his Majesty's Clemency towards the said Garrison. II. They shall deliver up the Old Fort within an Hour at farthest; and to-morrow, at 8 a Clock in the Morn∣ing, the two Gates of the City, to those whom he shall order. III. They shall put at Liberty immediately all the Protestants that are in Prison, without any pretence whatsoe∣ver to the contrary. IV. They shall put in a secure place all the Arms, as well of the Garrison as of the Inhabitants, of what Condi∣tion or Religion whatsoever. V. They shall give a just Account of the Magazines as well Ammunition as Provisions: And the Governour of the City shall make a List of them, signed with his Hand; which shall be put into the Hands of our Commander of the Artillery. MALBOROƲGH TERRON RYCOT. Dated at the Camp before Cork this 28th of Septemb.  1690. Licensed Octob. 4. 1690. J. F.
