G555 18431586 107649
The FIRST LECTURE being an Introduction to the Military Architecture, or Fortifications. Read Publiquely at Sr. Balthazar Gerbiers ACADEMY. PSALM. 144. ver. 1. O de Davidis, Benedictus fit Jehova rupes mea; qui do∣cet manus meas praelium, digitos meos bellum. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. Imprimatur, Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti. Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield neer Hosier Lane, 1650.
TO HIS Excellency, the Lord Generall THOMAS LORD FAIREFAX. May it please your Excellency. SHould I not proceed Methodically in the De∣dication of the Lectures which are read in my Academy, for Languages, Sciences, and Noble Exercises (as in all affaires and Sci∣ences, seemes most requisite I should neither remaine blamelesse, nor be freed from Your Excellencies just censure, and Dis-favour, if what concernes Military Architecture or Fortifications, should appeare to the Publique View under any other notion then your high Protection. And therefore it is, that I doe now presume, to expose and submit to your Excellency this first Lecture con∣cerning Military Architecture, with intent to proceed up∣on all the following parts, which as it makes its entrance by the Properties belonging to a Governour of a Frontier Town, describing how that the maine consequence is in the choyce of the Person, so that he must neither be of too greaters,
to my Academy, which  the glory of God, as well as the Honour of this Nation, the Incouragement and Improvement of all Lovers of Ver∣tue, are interested. Cannot but promise to it selfe, that so great and eminent a person (as Your selfe) will not onely countenance and promote the same, for the compleating of all those who practice in Warres, but also for the benefit of all such as strive to be endowed with any other laudable Vertues. Such a Publick good, serving for example to (strangers,) and not to boast, that they only possesse, or are capable of those qua∣lities, when the English Nation is every whit as able in bo∣dy and minde as they can be. And this being Truth, I shall with the more confidence indeavour to continue in this un∣dertaking, on the hopes that truth will make good what is and ever shall be my aime, by the settlement of such an A∣cademy; so that your Excellency may please to take to Your selfe the due Title, not only of its Mars, but of its Mecenas, since all the Vertues in Your Excellency so fitly occurring, make you both in generall, and in particular, a true Lover of all what is honourable, generous, usefull, and necessary: And as my selfe to remaine Your Excellencies most humble and most obedient Servant, Balthazar Gerbier. From the Academy this 28 of Decemb. 1649.
THE FIRST LECTURE TOUCHING FORTIFICATIONS Read Publiquely at Sir Balthazar Gerbiers Academy: The Introduction AS by the holy Writ it appears that God, who is the Creator of Heaven and Earth is likewise termed the Lord of Hoasts, and Battels, so the Royal Prophet David sought him, that he might teach his hands to warre, and his fingers to fight. God per∣mits men to finde out inventions, and engines to wage war withall: And that ever since Caine brake the league of amity and brother-hood with Abell. Experience is onely gotten by length of time, and not by birth, nor courage: For if so bee the first Ra∣bins were wel grounded in what they affirme of Caines death, Lamech slew him with an Arrow, which time had taught men to make. The severall pretences of waging War are various: Nature warrants the first, which is Selfe-defence; Reli∣gion
the second, Lawes and Liberties the third. The Germans rose against the Romans, for the defence of their Liberty; the Thebans against Alexander; Char∣lemaine for Religion, warred on the Saxons for the space of thirty and three yeares; Pippin King of France took up Armes against Adolph King of Lombeardy for the point of Religion: King Lewis the second, for Pope John the third: Geffery of Bullon for Religion warred on the Turke. But it would require too long a discourse to insist on the rediculous slight pretences which have been made use of to wage War: That betweene the Suisses, and the Earle of Burgandy, proceeded from the taking away of a Cart loade of Skinnes, which the Lord of Romond tooke from a Suisse Alcibiades his ambition was but a pretence to per∣swade the Athenians for to attach Sicilly. Scilla and Marias only warred out of an ambition to reign: And as Cyrus and Alexander, so did Caesar and Pompey. But Theseus he purged the land of Robbers, and Hercules of Monsters. Abominable warriours there have been, who made their Wars detestable (as the Switsers did in the Ro∣mans time; when they wasted the land by fiering) and the Campanians were no lesse to be abhorred, when Agatotles fighting in Cicilly being entred Messina, un∣der pretence of friendship, he caused the greatest part of the Citizens to be put to death, onely to get their meanes. Nor was it lesse odious in Hanniball, when after he had given his word to Gerion a Towne neare Misena, that afterwards he put all the Inhabitants to the Sword. My glory said a great Captaine is to vanquish, and
to pardon. As it is one of the most glorious and neces¦sariest parts of a great Captain to have the like hands, as the Italian famous Poet Marino describes those of Emanuel Duke of Savoy to have been: Mani che si strin∣gianno al Ferro, e si oprano al Oro, Hands that cling to the Iron, and open unto the gold. Let a Souldier fight well, and let the Generalls hand distribute gold, and reward. Let mee have gold said a Captain to King Phillip the second, and no fortresse shal hinder me its entrance. All such places into the which an Asse loaden with gold can enter, are pregnable said Phillip King of Macedone. But Marcus Curtius his ambition was to command those that had gold, for thereby hee commanded all, and such a General, or Commander, is like a Lyon that commands an Army of Stagges, since nothing runnes swifter then gold. Yet better is it, said a great Captain, to have an Army of Stagges commanded by a Lyon, then an Army of Lyons commanded by a Stagge. But before we enter into the field, display colours, and draw forth our Armies: as we finde God to be the Lord of Hoasts and Battells, preservation, the first law of Man; the defence of Religion, the next strong tye; Lawes and Liberties the third grand interest and greatest concerment of Nations. Let us then take along with us the prescriptions of the Scrip∣ture concerning wars, Deut. 20.11,12. When thou com∣mest nigh a City to fight against it, then proclaime a peace unto it, and it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that are found therein shall be tributary unto thee, and they shall serve thee: But if they will make war against thee, then thou
shalt besiege it. Neither was this Commandement with∣out a restriction, as we read in the 19. v. of the said Chapter of Deut. When thou shalt besiege a City a long time, in making war against it, for to take it; Thou shalt not destroy the Trees thereof by forcing an Axe against them, for thou maist eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them downe, for the tree of the Field is mans life, to imploy them in the siege; onely the trees which thou knowest that they be not Trees for meat, those thou shalt destroy, and cut them down. Thus duty fitly appearing in the Front, its most pro∣per to begin with that duty proper to those, who are to command both in the Field, and within the Towns; and so proceeding with the duty of those that are to be commanded: We shall afterwards treat of all the particulars appertaining to the Military Architecture, or Fortifications; as likewise of the Divisions of the se∣verall parts belonging unto the same. Of the explain∣ing of such termes and words as are proper to Fortifi∣cation; of the maximes or generall rules to be observed in Fortifications, what we are to consider before we begin to Fortifie; of the severall seats, or scituations of places, of the qualities, and properties of the soyle: and lastly, how to Flanke, and secure ones selfe. All which consisting in demonstrations, it will bee necessary to proceed with the names and termes pro∣per in Fortifying, as well in the Scenography, as Orthography; The manner to finde out the Angles ne∣cessary in all Fortresses, and that by foure severall wayes, according to the foure most famous Authors that have written on that Subject; to wit, Merolois, Fritach, Errard, and Deville. How to divide a circumference, and therein to mark
the severall Polygones of all regular figures: The man∣ner how to stake out, or trace the principall parts as well within, as without any place; and so forth: For that it will availe but little to know what is to be don, when the maine is unknown, and the way how to performe it, which ought to be learned by any man who desires to be a perfect Souldier both for his ho∣nour and use; for as ignorance is despicable, so its pre∣judiciall: Let not any Souldier then perswade him∣selfe, that it can any wayes suffice him to goe but just as far as the pronunciation of the Alphabet; for that it will availe them no more, when they shall come to be put to the practicall part, then it will to any Auditory when they shall onely be told, what followeth, viz. That the Orthography, or Purfile of a Fortresse, is a section, or a perpendicular line, running eaven with the Horizon, and that which representeth unto our view the severall parts of a Fortresse. That the Scenography, it an explaining of the Names and Termes properly used in the Art of Fortifying. That a walled place, where store of houses are seated together, whose inhabitants are governed by a Civill Magistrate, may properly be termed a Towne. That a Fort, is a place, environed with Motes, Ram∣parts, and with Bulwarks, wherein a few Men, may de∣fend themselves against a greater number, and the as∣sault of many. That a Cittadell is a Fortresse of foure, five, six, or more Bastions, which is joyned to a Town for to com∣mand, and keep it in awe. That a Castle is an ancient kinde of building, with se∣verall Towers or Turrets, and a Mote or Ditch about it, either dry, or full of water.
That the Hold is the Block-house, or Redout in a Castle, unto which usually the last Retreat is made. That a place of Armes, is an empty space within the walls, whereunto the principall streets do lead, and where the Souldiers doe assemble to receive orders for the Guards or any other Commands, and likewise there to be exercised. That a peculiar place of Armes, is a certaine space near unto every Bastion, or at the foot of the Rampart whither the Souldiers are sent from the maine guard, to repaire unto their severall Posts, as well to relieve those on the Guards, as to refresh, and relieve them that fight. That the Rampart is an elevated earth, which inclo∣ses the place, and is capable to resist the Canon shot. That a Panapet, is a banke of Earth raised on the Rampart, behinde which the Souldiers may give fire in safety. That the Banquet, or Foot-banke, is a little height of Earth, on which the Souldiers stand when they give fire. That the Maine breadth, or walk, is that part of the Rampart which is made eaven, and sollid, for the recoil of the Cannon, and on which the Souldiers march in a body. That the way for the Rounds, or false bray, is the space between the Rampart, and the List or Berme, where an Enemy is to be resisted when he draws near the Town, and when the shot from the Rampart can do no more execution on the Assailants. That its Pa∣napet, is like to that of the main Rampart, with its Foot-banke.
That the Listor Berme, is the support of the False-bray, next adjoyning to the Mote. That the Mote or Ditch, is an empty depth, or full of water, environing the Town, or Fortresse. That the little Ditch or Cave, is a small overture in the midst of the great Mote, dee∣per then the said Mote. That the Conidor, or covered way, is raised on the Counterscarp, and secured by its Panapet, its foot-bank and the sloape. That its Panapet is the outmost Breast-work beyond the Mote; and that it termineth it selfe, slantingly, or shelvingly with the plaine Field. That Cavalliers or Platformes, are raised eminen∣cies, or rather naturallones, either on the Curtaine or Bulwarks, over-topping the rest of the workes as a Horse-man, may be said to do one on foot. That Half-Moons are small Works advanced to∣wards the Fields, and are usually placed before the points of the Bastions for their re-inforcement, having small Flanks. That a Ravelin is a peece of Fortification consisting onely of two Faces, usually placed in the Mote, before the Curtains, and Gates. That Flatformes are all kinde of Fortifications built on outward Angles. That Horne works, are advanced towards the Fields, having halfe Bastions at their heads, and are usually placed on the weakest parts of a Fortresse, to hinder and retard the approaches of an Enemy towards the maine Works of the place. That Crown works are advanced into the Fields, much like the Horne works, broad before, and narrow behinde, with one, two, or more Bastions, in the midst,
and on each side a halfe Bastion; and they are placed on such Eminencies as chance to over-top any For∣tresse. That Tenalies are much like Horn-works, save that they have no Bulwarks. That Star Sconces, have onely flanking sides, either of foure, five, or six Angles, and derive their name from the resemblance of a Star, being usually placed on the Trenches. That Redouts are little square workes, placed here and there in Trenches and approaches, for the strength∣ning of them, and are also sometimes advanced on the advenues in the Fields. That Trenches are Works containing and inclosing the whole Camp, by a continued line, called the line of Circumvalation: As also they serve to environ and fortifie the whole Army, or any part thereof. That approaches are lanes digged through the Earth, by the which an assailant may with security advance unto a Fortresse, without being endangered by the Ene∣mies shot. That Counter approaches are such like lines which the besieged make, to crosse and interrupt by their Sallyes the Enemies approaches. That a Gallery, is a covered way made over the Mote, it being filled with Bavens, and Earth, whereon Gabents are placed at certaine distances to uphold the Gallery; which being lined on the sides with good Oken Planks, and likewise boarded on the top, is se∣cured from the Enemies shot, and Granadoes, and thereby the Souldiers are safely conducted over the Mote, to storme a breach, or for the Miners to open a Mine. That a breach is a Rupture, which either by Canon
shot, or by the springing of a Mine, is made in some one part of the Bulwark or Curtain, and by the which the assailants may enter the Fortresse. That a Mine is a Trench or secret hidden Alley, sunck under the face of a Bastion, Curtain, or any out∣worke, wherein a Chamber being made, and pow∣der placed, it serves to ruine and blow up an enemies work, and so to facilitate an entrance, Which art of undermining hath been made use of both in the Greeks and Romans time. That Gabions are defences made of Baskets, filled with earth, and they are of severall heights, and thicknesses, as to resist Cannon shot on batteries, mus∣ket shot in approaches, or Sconces. That there are other Countermines or Cavernes, Vaulted lanes, or Allies, called Trenches, which are usually made under the foote bancke, running along the rampart, with many vents, reaching from the bottome to the top of the Rampart, for to hinder and breake the force of the powder, and also to swal∣low up the ruines of the Mine, which otherwayes would render the breach more large, and its accesse more easie. That re-Intrenchments are fresh works, made to de∣fend the ruined rampart, being separated from the same within the place, and such like are to be provided in time, to sustain an enemies assault, and make good the place, till the capitulations can be made. That all eminencies or places commanding each o∣ther in a Fortresse, are only heights of nine foot, or there abouts, over-topping the rest of the workes, that
these eminencies may be made either simple or com∣posed, steep and precipitated, flanking the breach, ei∣ther in front, sidewayes, or backwards. That Candlestickes, or blindes, are high peeces of timber stakes, which serve to uphold either branches of Trees, Rice bushes or Planks, and by the which, blinds are made to hinder the enemies viewing or discover∣ing of the Assailants, Approaches, or Sappings. That Pallisadoes are a defence of high stakes of Tim∣ber, set together like pales, shod on the top with I∣ron forked heads, which are for the most part placed on the outsides of the Fortresse, as also at the foote of the Curtaines, Rampart, and oftentimes of the le∣velled outworke, or Esplanade, some two or three foote distant from the Conidor or covered way. That Baracadoes on Turn-Pikes are to be bodies of trees cut in severall squares; and are fortified with se∣verall staves of an halfe Pikes length shod with Iron, which are passed through the said bodies of trees, fa∣cing to all sides on which they were severally placed, as on passages, advenues, or breaches, both for to hinder the advance of Horse or foot That there is also another kind of defence, or Palli∣sadoe, called a Ruffe, consisting of wooden stakes, shod with Iron pegges, and that they are placed sloaping wise, on the middle height of the faces of any For∣tresse, as also on the out-workes. That these defences are very necessary to discover an Enemies intended surprize, or suddaine attalke, as also to hinder any Souldiers from running out of the place, or stealing away by night. And therefore to proceed methodically, we shall
begin with the Governour of a place, and with those qualities which he ought to possesse. Of the Governour. AS the Governour in a place, represents either the State or the Sovereign, so of his Fidelity, Diligence, and Courage, depends questionlesse the preservation of the Inhabitants of the land, as well as of the place, and it is therefore one of the most importantest charges to a State, for that in effect the preservation of a shire, nay, of the whole Country is often concerned in that of one particular Towne, as the losse of such places prove oftentimes no lesse prejudiciable then that of an Army: After a battle is fought men may be rallied, and an Army may be made up againe, by a retreate unto an adjacent strong place, which when once fal∣len into the possession of an enemy, is neither so easie, nor so soone recovered againe, therefore great care must be taken in the election of Governours, for such places of importance: And that a State may not be deceived, their persons must bee well knowne to bee men of godlinesse, and that they may possesse as much as possible can be, all the most necessary qualities requisite in a Governour. Men of two great power and credit must not be put into strong frontier Townes, for that a Soveraigne or a State would otherwayes be constrained to yeeld unto them in all that they may demand, for if they should but seem to displease them, its then to be feared that on the least occasion, suspition, or discontent; they would be apt to revolt.
Those of a low ranke, except they have some no∣table vertue which makes them commendable, as their long since knowne honesty, and tryed fidelity, are worse then the former; for that being men who have little to loose, are not to bee relyed on in that they may be soone wrought upon by the proffers of an enemy. Those of a meane or indifferent condition between both are the fittest for such a trust, since they are not subject to the foresaid faults; being not powerful enough to make a party for to revolt, and though they should do so, yet can they not make their party good, besides that, divers considerations will hinder them to render themselves to an Enemy: having their friends, their kindred, their familie, their meanes, their houses, in regard of which they will not so soon venture to loose all those certainties, for a doubtfull hope. When they must (by the betraying that trust reposed in them) submit themselves to the mercy of an Enemy, who is apt enough to imbrace that treason which brings him profit, and honour, but ever dispiseth, nay hateth the Traytour. King Henry the fourth of France, among many great actions, is to be remembred eternally in this particu∣lar, that he sent notice to the Duke of Joyeuse of a Tray∣tor, who came to the said King with an offer to kil that Duke, and many such like examples may be alledged to confirme that Traytors are alwayes to bee had in abo∣mination. And it is altogether necessary to consider how those persons, who are to be chosen for Governours, have lived, Nature cannot be forced, for a long time will
scarce serve to discover mens inclinations, and those who have all their life time lived honorably, wil hardly commit a base action, when they shall be put into such a place of trust; but such as are of an ill dis∣position will soon fall into relapses, and shake off that constraint which made them to disguise their vices: Nature alwayes comes to its selfe, neither can dissi∣mulations last long. Such as have alwayes approved themselves true, and who have had severall imployments whereby they have given a testimony of themselves, are to be pre∣ferred unto all others. And many have been found, who at first could so well counterfeit their humours as they have made themselves to bee esteemed brave men, and by their impudence in forging lyes, have ob∣tained the Government of most important places, which they have most miserably lost so soone as they were set upon, and though their heads were taken off, yet the Townes were not thereby re-gained. And if any Government bee conferred by way of reward for services done by aged men, its not fit to put them into Frontier Townes, for that instead of procuring rest unto them, they would be put unto tur∣moyles and labours. They must bee men of vigour, and such as may bestirre themselves, and are able to indure hardnesse, paines, and take care both for the preservation of the place, and of the land, and for its defence in case it bee attacht: He that will acquit himselfe well of this charge, ought not to sleepe in the nights, but must keepe both the Souldiers and the Inhabitants in a perpetuall feare, hee must take a continuall care of
them, and often visit the Walls and Rounds. Those that are old, are fittest for such places as are in the maine body of the Land, wherein the cares and paines are not so requisite. And besides these naturall qualities they ought to have others, partly acquired by study, and partly by exercise and experience, they ought above all things to know their charge and duty, for its altogether absurd, to give Government to such persons as know not what they are to govern, and how they are to command, nei∣ther is it then time to learn, since it proves of too dan∣gerous a consequence, for that the faults then commit∣ted are of too great consequence, and cannot be redrest. Neither will it justifie, that they have read or heard say: they must have seene divers sieges, and especi∣ally they must have seene how Townes are set upon, whereupon they will have discovered and observed both the offence and defence of places, for that such a one who hath not been in the like occasions, findes himselfe pusled, and knows not what to resolve unto, for that all events surprize him, and all that an ene∣my doth affrightens him, a potent Army that sum∣mons him, so many Canons that incessantly batters him, Trenches so suddenly comming upon him (at least the first) all which makes him apprehend, that his Towne is set upon by some other way then ordi∣nary, and that its impossible to hold out against such on-sets: Then they easily beleeve they have done their duty, and that they may render themselves up, when they ought but to begin to defend themselves in good earnest. To the contrary, a man that hath seene divers sieges
perswades himselfe, that he shall in a little space see the great part of that Army perish, and all the con∣tinuall shooting of the enemies Canon, can doe him but little harme, that the first workes are easily ad∣vanced, and so never is astonished at any event, for that he well knowes what an Enemy can doe, and in case any thing should happen contrary to his expecta∣tion, yet his expereince and judgement affords him meanes to remedy the same. Hee well knowes how the Enemy must advance, what they can attempt, and how he can oppose them, as also to what extre∣mity or passe he ought, or can hold out, so that he ne∣ver yeelds untill he hath done all what a man of honor is capable of. Neither shall we need to speake of courage, since to tell you, that a man pretending to a Government ought to be couragious, would be as frivolous as to say, that a Souldier ought to have a Sword, for that the one and the other ought to be inseparable, so when one is said to be a Governor, its to be supposed that he is couragi∣ous, and consequently free from the two vices which are the two extreames of that vertue. Those that are to be  handed, and who must only execute, can never have too much courage, and the ex∣cesse thereof is very good in them, but such as have all the command, and are alone, must not be presumptu∣ous, especially those who defend a place: For if they go rashly to work, and if they make daily sallies, with∣out taking the advantages both of time and place, and if they continually hazzard themselves, they will soon cause the losse not onely of their best Souldiers, but of themselves, and so consequently the place wil be taken.
They must consider that they are constituted in the place, for to keep it, and to defend it as long as they can, so that if they chance to occasion the losse there∣of, either out of a vanity, to manifest that they feare nothing; or on the contrary by too much timerous∣nesse, they are then equally guilty, both in the one, and in the other particular, and so the State or the Soveraign, chanceth to lose the place by either. A Governour then ought to be prudent, of an un∣daunted mind, who starts at nothing; who gives cou∣rage to others; who when its requisite for him, to prove a bold man, must at the same time remember his owne preservation, as well as that of the place, to de∣fend it as long as hee can, and in case will perish in the same, rather then survive its losse, That it be at the last on-set, and utmost resistance. What Vices a Governour ought to shunne. There are certaine Vices of which all honest men ought to be free: Ungodlinesse the first, since those cannot expect Gods assistance, who doe not acknow∣ledge him, and that place is guarded in vain, if God doe not guard the same. Covetousnesse in a Goveour is unsupportable, for that he will racke the Country, hee will not pay his Souldiers, he will acquire the hatred of the inhabitants and so be odious to all men, and be abandoned of all his Garrison, and moreover such a one is likewise sub∣ject to be corrupted. Drunkennesse is no lesse to be abhorred, for that a drunken man is void of reason, and if in that moment a place should be set upon, it must be lost of necessity for want of Orders, besides that, all other do easily follow
his example; and so give an Enemy just cause to watch for, and take their advantage at their usuall times of Meriments; for that no place ought to be entrusted to a man that cannot conserve himself. A Governour ought to be versed in the Military Lawes, for to order, and punish according to the Soul∣diers misdemeanour; he ought likewise to understand the Civill Law to order all fit establishments, and to cause them to be observed; as likewise to decide such differences as may chance to arise between the Souldi∣ers themselves; or between the Souldiers, and the In∣habitants. The first, its true, are ready framed; to that its onely needfull to reform them according to the exe∣gency of times, and occasions; and for the other, a man may remit himselfe to Jurists, since neither the one, nor the other do properly belong to the preservation, or defence of the place. A Governour ought to esteem his place as the most dearest thing in the world to him, and whereon his ho∣nor, and life depends: And at his entrance therein, he ought to represent unto himselfe, that he deserves not to live after its losse, so that he ought to have as much care of it, as of his own preservation; and he is bound in duty continually to thinke on the bettering of his place, how it may be best guarded, best provided; and to thinke in peacefull times, what he might stand in need of when the Wars should be renewed, and so to provide for all; for that no man of sense, or reason will leave any thing at a venter; nor ever say, who would have thought this, or that.
The greatest honour for a Governour. To conclude, I shall say, that there is no place in the Wars, wherein more honour is to be gotten, then in a Governour, when he is set upon, and defends him∣self well in a good place. For that in Combats, Fortune hath the greatest share; parties are oft equall, the cour∣ses are not regular; so he that besiegeth hath alwayes a divided command, for that divers onsets are to bee made, which are to be performed by sundry Comman∣ders; and it is to be presupposed that the besieger comes with sufficient forces to take the place. And finally, that all besieged places must be taken; so that he that takes it not, deserves more blame, then honour, when he shall have taken it. For that the one is directly contrary to that which was expected, and supposeth a default; and the other was a thing which was sure to come to passe. The great advantages in standing out a Siege. Now he that defends a place; first he is alone in power, and all what he doth, is attributed directly un∣to him, be it well or ill done; the defence depends of his person, and of his carriage, and but very little of Fortune; so that if he defends himselfe in such a man∣ner, as he constrains his enemies to raise the siege, it must needs be admirable; since it was against the opini∣on of all men, in that he held longer then it was ex∣pected he could; all which is attributed unto the per∣son that commandeth in the place. Lastly, it may truly be said, that he who stands out a Siege, gets more honour, then he that wins a Battle; for that by his gallant resisting, he destroyes an Ene∣mies Army, saves his owne men and place, and secures the State, &c.
In the next ensuing Lectures on the Military Art, there shall bee treated, of that which a Governour ought to doe at his entrance into a place where he is to command. Of the orders he is to give concerning the Civill Government, unto what duties the Souldiers are to be kept; his forecast to discover the disposition of his Souldiers, and their Officers. What number of men he ought to have; how they are to be armed, and what spare Arms he ought to be furnisht with, what care he ought to have for the pre∣servation of his spare Arms. Of the necessary Am∣munitions of War, as well as those of Victualls, and the like. How he may discover the defects of his places. What he ought to know of Fortifications, and wherein its perfection doth consist. Of its construction, and its defensive Lines; and con∣sequently on all the necessary parts thereof; all which by the grace of God, shall be declared at large. So that for the present, wee will close this with a short Meditation fit for all good Christians; That if so be it be necessary, to have so many qualities, and to take so much care for the preservation of a small com∣passe and parcell of clay, loam, and of a few houses within the circumference of a Wall or Bulwark: What care ought we then to have (but meer dust and ashes) for the preservation of our soules, placed in an habitation, continually beset by an Army, compassed by legions of Princes of the Ayre, by Spirits of darknesse and destruction, who are never to be tyred, who need neither to borrow or buy any Victualls, for their sub∣sistance, who have numberlesse engines at hand, who
have placed their Petards and murdering peeces at all the gates of our Senses, and never run any danger themselves of being surprised, though they have mil∣lions of deceits, to ensnare the onely two Sentinels of our body, our Eies, by giving a world of false alarm; To surprise our Hearing; and who at the very first, strike at the maine Fortresse, the Heart, and the Minde of Men: And if so be the gaining of all the world, be no∣thing, in comparison unto the losse of one soule; O what a precious task must the preservation of that Soul be against the grand and common Enemy to mankinde; and what an honour is the preserving thereof! as it ought to be Mans sole blisse; who can never miscarry therein, so long as he fixeth on his strong Tower, and Fortresse of defence; and that he doth continually watch, pray, and manfully fight the good combate of Faith; hereby the greatest honour is to be acquired, for that by so doing, the grand Enemy will be forc't to break up his siege, and retire. It was the servent, zealous, and most pious prayers of the Royall Prophet David, That Gods enemies might bee confounded and be put to flight; And what can we desire more, then that by his unspeakable mercies (we that are the precious gems for the which Christ Jesus hath spilt his most precious blood) have made the grand Enemy of our souls to retire, &c. The end of the first Lecture of FORTIFICATION
