G62 13044930 96909
An ENCOMIUM, OR Congratulatory POEM Occasionally Written, upon the Happy Successes of Capt. Thomas Harman, Commander Of his MAJESTIE'S Friggate, the TIGER. With an Exact Relation of His late Signal Victory Off Cadis. I shall, no Heathen Deity Implore: Be those Idollaters who need it more. The Subject will my Pen with Wit Infuse; And of a Barren, — make a fruitfull Muse. BRAVE SIR John Harman, his great Name will be, A sacred Relique to Posterity: Which as a Favor each large Soul shall bind Upon his Arm, and so fresh Courage find. His Actions with thy Actions, shine so clear, Though but one Living, plainly both appear. Go on bold Youth inspir'd with his great Soul, Who cou'd his Passions, as his Men, Controul; Thou wantest nothing to attain that height Which he injoy'd—But to be made a—Knight. Shou'd we look back, and trace him from his Youth, Our highest Praises wou'd fall short of Truth. His early Rays like a red Sun did break, Man-hood shone through him, e're he well cou'd speak. If in his East he promised so much, Why shou'd we wonder that his Acts are such. The rest—and this his Southern !—scarce make good His promises, though with expence of Blood. He for his King and Country Nobly Fought, And gain'd that Honor which the Other sought. But stay quick Muse, You in a little Room Wou'd crow'd up all—You quite forget the Boom.At Bogee where the seven Capital Ships of Ar∣gier were destroy'd After so many Men in Beats destroy'd, As Death with conquering, seem'd almost cloy'd: When Deaths more swift then Lightning flew ith' Air, And turn'd all hopes of Conquest, to dispair! When the Proud Turks defied us from their VVall, Then Honor did, to Noble Harman, call: Come Gallant Spark of Valour, now come forth, And with thy Native Courage, shew thy VVorth; Give me thy Hand—when this great work is done, I'le bring thee off—as now I lead thee on. So, bravely Fought, fear not the thundring Showers, Know I Protect thy Life from all their Powers. 'Tis done!—The Turks are shaken with the English—shout An universal Joy flyes round about. VVhich gave a Shock to the poor trembling Town, As if the Fabrick had been tumbling down. Now now begins the dreadful Scene of Fate, Try phing Death, set open wide Hell-gate; And drove the Tawny-souls by hundreds in A just Reward for all their horrid Sin. Their best of Ships in sultry Flames appear, O, cou'd we make such Bon-fires all the year? How many Christian Captives, now set Free, So many Christian Captives, may thank Thee; Thou, thou the only Instrumental Cause Of giving Captives Freedom; Pagans, Laws. When he was Convoy to a Mighty Fleet, And many Capers at one time did meet. His discreet Conduct to secure his own, Appear'd, when of so many, Lost not one. When through all Dangers he had them Convay'd, (And not as some, their Countrymen Betray'd.) A greater Action call's him now away, To give out Precepts how they shou'd Obey. He a new Method took, and taught 'em how They must, and theirs; to Brittains Monarch bow.To Sally. And though they'r always exercis'd in War, He made them know we can Surpass 'um far? Witness, those Ships He took, and forc'd a Shoar, And thirty Slaves by him condemn'd to th' Oar.Five Salli men of War burnt and taken with thirty Slaves. In Barbary, what part so e're he came, They fright their Children with his very Name. From thence my Muse, shall Tack about, and stand For Cat'z, the Magazine of every Land. Vice-Admiral de Wit, Cruceing about, But all in Vain, could find no Purchase out; In three days space, for Cat'z agen did Steer, But after him the Tiger came too near, For suddenly a strange Report was spread, That he for Safety into Harbor fled. Bold Evertson carreening in the Bay, Hearing in what a Case their Honor lay. Advis'd de Wit immediately to send A Challenge, and so the Difference end: Hoping to gain Opinion from the Town, And by this Act, their former Actions Crown. De Wit resolv'd the next days Tryal, shou'd Decide the Quarrel, though through streams of Blood. Harman obleidged now by Honors Laws, Cou'd do no less then Fight his Countrys cause; And now both sides in hast preparing be, Although the Dutch not question'd, Victory, Depending on his numbers, swoln with Pride, Since Evertson has him so well supply'd, With sevenscore Men, above his complement, Whose courages all Resolutely bent, And if in Looks, some certainty might be, Their manly-faces promis'd Victory. Cou'd Strength have carried it, th' Ingagement had Gone, on the Weaker-side but very bad, From such an Act, what Honor cou'd he gain, Though he had Sunk Her, and the Captain Slain: Unequal Numbers make a Conquest, none, For what's a Conquest when the Glory's gone. But now for Both, the Time to Action calls, While Multitudes are placed on the Walls, And on the Sandy Beach appear such Crowds, Their very shadows seem to darken Clouds! All gazing at the Champions going out, And of a suddain gave a lofty Shout; Although they had but little Wind before, Their Acclamations blow 'um from the Shoar. A pleasant Gale: and now two Leagues at Sea: (Both in their swelling Pride and Gallantry.) Both made a stand: when from the Shoar they cry'd; Some for the English; most oth' Flemmings side. The Weather-gage, the Tiger having got, And both so near, within a Pistolls shot, Did ring such peals of Thunder in his ear, As made him Curse he ever came so near, This first Broad-side, his Men and Ship so Toar: She like a Rack, They, weltring in their Gore. Those bravely Fought, which did a Live remain, As if they had the spirits of the Slain Fighting in them the Battail o're agen, For more like Devils they appear'd, then Men: Inrag'd, as Furies, in Confusion Fought; Grown Desprate, rather Death, then Conquest, sought. But He, (as other good Commanders shou'd) Esteem'd One sav'd, more then a stream of Blood Drawn from the Foe: Such was his Noble care, Though he Destroy'd—Yet he had rather spare. But to be short; he laid her soon Aboard Upon the Bough; and then the Tiger Roard; The fierceness of her Nature, now is shown: They, Enter shouting: But the other groan; Which from the shoar the sound Reverberates; And so they Ecco back their adverse Fates. Here give Me Leave, a little to Digress, And briefly show our Nations Happiness: In having such Commanders in the Fleet, Whose equal Judgements, with their Valours meet. At last She's forc'd to yield unto his Power: (The miserable Effects of one short Hour!) For n less time, the Battails wone and lost, Whch so much Honor gain'd, with little Cost; Read that word; the Cost was very great, Er' we injoy'd the Victory Compleat. But if he well recovers of the Wound; Actve, with passive Valour, shall be Crown'd, And so erect his Fame, on such a Base, As either Time, nor Envy, shall deface, And if one Unexperienc'd can Devine, His Glories ne'r shall Set, but always Shine In Honors Orb, there fixt, our Friends to chear: Bu Meteor-like; possess our Foes with fear. Suh powerfull Influence upon thy Foes, Seures thy Friends, a joyful, sweet, Repose. Infreta dum fluvij current, dum montibus Ʋmbra. Lstrabunt, connexa Polus dum Sydera posect: Sper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque Manebunt. Vergil. lib: I. AEneid. T. G. with Allowance. LONDON Printed by H. Bruges, 1674.
