H1279 16949220 105424
ARCANA PHILOSOPHIA OR, Chymical Secrets, CONTAINING The noted and useful Chymical Medicines of Dr. Wil. and Rich. Russel Chymists, viz. I. Species Vitae, alias Universalis. II. Tinctura Regalis, call'd Scorbutick, &c. III. Species Coroborativa, alias Pleuretica. IV. Species Proprietatis. V. Species Minor. VI. A Pestilential Cordial, call'd his White Cor∣dial. AS ALSO Several Curious Chymical Processes and Spagerick Pre∣paratio of Natural things for the use of Medicin, and many other things of great use and vertue in Eradicating the most Stubborn Diseases; Likewise Four curious small Treatises, viz. the I. of Fevers, the II. of the Jaundies, the III. of Madness, and the IV. of Diarrhaeas, Lientries, &c. By the Re∣nowned and most Approved Dr. Aurelius Philipus Theophrastus Paracelsus, of Hoheneim. Publish'd by John Headrich, Philo-Chymicus, and for∣merly Operator to Dr. Richard Russel. LONDON, Printed and Sold by Henry Hills in Black-Fryers, the Publisher, at the Blew Ball in Hogsden, over against the Crooked Billet, near Shoreditch Church, and the Booksellers of London, &c. 1697.
To his Worthy Friends, Mr. Gabr. Hubart. M. D. and Mr. Tho. Tryon, Marchant. . Gentlemen, WHen first I design'd to Publish this small Treatise, I thought no Per∣sons so fit to dedicate it to, as such, on whose Judgment and Capacities the World might rely; upon which account it is that I make no scruple to prefix your names here. I cannot likewise but promise to my self encouragment from Others, acquainted with this Art, in that not only your selves, but many besides, of the most Ingenious, seem to desie an Essay of this Nature· For as for the Modern preparations I know their usefulness cannot but be inviting; in that they have been made use of by diverse of the greatest Persons of the times; and One in Particular, by that discerning Monarch K. Charles the II. Gentlemen, I know Experimentally the unvaluable good producible from our Art;
and I need not blush to say, that were it brought to perfection, (of which I cannot but despair upon the Grounds that some Chymists proceed) it would prove of the Greatest and most Noble benefit to Mankind. I am satisfi'd that the Ordinary Methods of Physick cannot cure so expeditiously, as some Medicines I have heard off, that were produced from the Noble Art of Pyrotech∣ny, and I may without boast aver, that my Modern discovery contains some of that Nature. And this I Assert to a Physician, who himself has given me encouragment suf∣ficient for this Publication; who as he was Physician to the Prince above mention'd, so he may well be presum'd to be a Consi∣derable Judge in the matter. Nor can I imagin, but that a Person, who wants only the name and practice of a Phy∣sician, does likewise approve of this asser∣tion; because he well knows, all Arts and Sciences, (how ever inprov'd by the Pre∣sent Age) are as yet impart imperfect; and I believe, we may take his Judgment in a greater matter, then either what I Publish, or what I assert in relation to the excellency of our Art.
I cannot indeed assert a possibility of finding out such Compendious ways, as would cure all kinds of Diseases, which were much to be wish∣ed, but I verily think, if any humane Art or Science could work such Miracles, Chymistry would Effect it: But as for several Distempers, which the Common Method of Physick are slow in, Chymistry has done More than is yet Publick. I cannot hope ever to see those of this Art to be Incorporated, for were they so, and a due encouragement added to it, as likewise due care taken of them and their Medicines, I cannot but think, it would be the greatest blessing to Mankind. But I shall not insist on this Topick here, tho' I suppose all good Men; and particular the most ingenious Physicians, will joyn issue with me; because 'tis the most desirable of all others. All that can be objected is, that I have added Paracelsus, which makes up so conciderable apart of the Book; but no ingenious Man can dislike that Author, as here Methodiz'd; since were he duely followed by other Chymists of this Age, it would much better the Art. You will excuse me, Gentlemen, for this harangue for our Art, & veniam prolaude peto; tho' I know not, whether you will think it necessary, since it may prove a defensatory preven∣tion against all Cavils, that may be made to this Essay: How∣ever it will justify my design for the Publick good in this Publication, and You in accepting of it from, Gentlemen, Your most Effectionate and humble Servant John Headrich.
TO THE READER. AS to the Title of these Chymical Pre∣parations, none can question its proper∣ty, as being so well adapted to those uncom∣mon and compendious ways of Cure, discover'd in this Treatise; in which Artful Methods the great Hermes Trmegistus and Paracel∣sus lead the way, of whom, because no Man can doubt of their Merits, I shall say little of in this Preface. And as to the excellency of the Modern Preparations, Discover'd to the World in the first part, I need not say much; because the Names of those two Famous Chymists Mr. Wil. Russel (of the Little Minories, but lastly of Goodmans Fields) and his brother Richard Russel are deservedly known to most Ingenious Men; such Persons knowing their usefulness to the Publick, can spare me the labour of an Encomium, either on the Au∣thors, or their incomparable inventa, in
somuch that the World must own, they have gained themselves a lasting memory among all ingenious Artists of both kinds, as well as with the Chymists. That which I find most Necessary in their Case is, to vindicate their Medicines from Scandal occasioned by pretenders after their Death; for which end I have produced these Genuine Ones, as invented by Themselves; in doing which I promise to my self to be useful to the World, and do Justice to the Authors at once: For should I not do so, who would not see these two inconveni∣encies to follow? First, the World is by such pretenders really bubled, both as to their expectations in the Cures, and as to the expences bestowed on them. Secondly, The Authors are thereby much debased, as well as the Art, in that the World does expect that real Benefit, as formerly they had, and still might, were it not for the Art of Counterfiting; which indeed hath much hindered the use of these Medicines. Now to Obviate both these Errors, and free both the Physician and Patient from them, I found it necessary to publish this Treatise,
as being the alone means to prevent these abuses. And as I do freely own that these Medicines are not mine but theirs, yet I again presume to have the alone true Origi∣nal method of preparing them. And how I came by the knowledg of them, the World will soon disern upon telling them, that I practised their Operations, with one of the Brothers and for his Widdow, and my self about Twelve years past; and have taken great Care, and still do, to give them there true and due preparation, according to the Original Method; which none can do so ex∣actly as my self, because I have been so Conversant in their Operations. I need not, I presume, make any Apology for this plainess, because I reckon the ablest and most Ingenious Artists will count them∣selves Obliged; for since these Medicines seem to be much desired, I have therein gra∣tified the World, and given them the true Key of these Secrets; in which I do assure all, that I aim not so much at my own private in∣terest, as that of the Publick; partly that these most Noble and Compendious Medicines, might not dye with the Authors, and partly to avoid the above mention'd inconveniencies.
And here at last I declare to the World the satisfaction I receive from this Publication because I cannot in the least doubt of the de∣sir'd event; by reason, that all Men have here that real Method of these Preparations, as I learned them my self: But if any one should be so obstinate as to proceed in any other manner of preparing them, under pre∣tence of bettering them, I cannot but declare them Counterfits. It cannot but be an honour, to the memory of Mr. William Russel, That that discerning Monarch King Charles the Second to whom he was Chymist in Ordinary made frequent Use of his Tincture; whereby His Majesty found such singular Benifit, that he was pleased to stile it the Royal Tincture: And I doe Assure the World that our Chymist was much valued by that Prince, insomuch, that he was often in his Conversation, upon such grounds, as His Royal Prudence thought rea∣sonable: According to which Example, Per∣sons of the highest quality in the Kingdom esteemed his prepared Medicines, the Coun∣tesses of Darby and Ossery, and no small number of Considerable Rank and Figure ne∣ver being without them.
That I have added some Treatises of Pa∣racelsus to our Modern ones, I shall not make any Apology for it, for I find them so fit to bear one another Company, that I thought best to make a Triumvirate of them. Lastly, I question not, but this small Tract will have its Enemies, as well as others of this Nature have had, but knowing it to be an usual thing with upstarts, &c. not with solid Ingenious Men, it will the less Trouble me; only I would desire such ersons to let it alone, and endeavour to mend it; and to be so kind to the World, as to let them partake of some of their Curiosities which they have gain'd by their profound knowledge, &c. But according as this small Treatise shall be Accepted by the Ingenious, I may present the World with several curious things of this Nature. In the mean while I Remain Your Real Friend and Servant John Headrich. From my House in Hogsden Town, at the Blew Ball, over against the Crooked Billet, near Shoreditch Church.
A TABLE of Diseases Men∣tioned in this Book. A ABortion to prevent Page. 10.17. Acute Diseases to cure Page. 77. After birth bringing away Page. 10 After pains cur'd Page. 10.15.17. Alopecia Page. 69. Analeny Page. 63. Apoplexia Page. 12. Asthma Page. 13.51. B BE ound Page. 9. Birth to hasten Page. 10.17. Black aundis  Page. 105. Bloody Flue to cure Page. 9. Blood Stagnized Page. 13. Bone splinterd Page. 5. Brain pain'd Page. 78. Breath hort to help Page. 13. Brests sore or Ulcerted Page. 11. Bunches to cure Page. 33. C CAncers Page. 25.28.35.48.49. Cancers to close Page. 84.85. Catalency Page. 63 Child in the Womb to stay Page. 17. Colk passion to cure Page. 8.19. Ctilla's Page. 71. Conception to strengthen Page. 14. Conservation of Sanity Page. 51. Consumptions to cure Page. 14. Convulsions Page. 9.14. Coughs to cure Page. 13 Cruent Page. 40. D DEprav'd Tentigo Page. 26.27. Diarrhaea Page. 31.32.41.42.85. Diarrhaea how caus'd Page. 123. Diarrhaea of Urin Page. Idem. Diarrhaea of Vomiteing Page. Id. Diarrhaea its signs Page. 126. Diarrhaea cur'd Page. 125.125. Dropsy Page. 72.88. Dycentry how caus'd Page. 122. Dycentry Page. 31.32.52.59 85.127 E EPilepsy to cure Page. 12.4.49.63, 64. Esthiomenes cur'd Page. 25.28.35.41.47.49. Ethica Page. 77.80. Eyes blemish'd Page. 33. Eyes pore blnd Page. 59. Eyes pain'd Externally. Page. 66. Eyes white and Cloudy Page. 33. F FEvers of the Blood Page. 92. Fevers acute, Epidemick,
Intermitting, or Putrid Page. 8.16.60 77.80.89. Fevers of the Reins Page. 92. Fevers of the Reins cur'd Page. 95. Fevers of the Stomach Page. 89. Fe. Ibid their Sign Page. 90. Fevers of the Liver Page. Ibid Fevers of the Liver cur'd Page. 95. Fevers of the Blood cur'd Page. 96. Fevers their cure Page. 94. Fevers of the Reins their de∣scription whether Quoti∣dion, Tertian or Quar∣ten Page. 96. Fistulas Page. 48, 49.70.71. Fistulas to close & dry Page. 84, 85. Flesh to create Page. 86, 87. Floudings to stop Page. 10. Freckles in the Face Page. 13. G GOut cur'd Page. 12 Green sickness Page. 10.13. Gravil Page. 12. Griping in the Guts Page. 9, 19. Gutta Page. 63. H HEad heavy or pain'd Page. 14. Heart Tremb. Page. 59.60.76. Hemrrhoides Page. 10.30 31.70. Herpes Running Page. 41.40. Hypocondraical Malencho. Page. 13. Heat of the Reins Page. 92. Heat of the Reins cur'd Page. 95. Heat of the Reins describ. Page. 96. I JAundies Page. 9.15.26.28.38.72.80, 81.98. Jaundies black Page. 99. Jaundies blew or pallid Page. 99. Jaundies Red Page. Ibid Jaundies Yellow Page. Ibid Jaundies their Signs Page. 100. Jaundies of the back bone Page. 111. Jaundies of the brain Page. 113. Jaundies of the Gall Page. 114. Jaundies of the Heart Page. Ibid Jaundies of the Lungs Page. Ibid Jaundies of the Reins Page. Ibid Jaundies of the Spleen Page. Ibid Ja. Principle member Page. 110. Ja. External member Page. Ibid Imposthumes acute Page. 51. Imp. Internal or External Page. 9. L LEggs pain'd Page. 75. Leprosy Page. 21.23.88. Lethargies Page. 14.69. Lientery Page. 32.85.122. Lientry of the Urin Page. 123. Liver Obstructed Page. 13. Liver pained Page. 78. Lost Complexion restore Page. 13. Loosness to stay Page. 8.52. Lungs Diseased Page. 7.80. M MAdness Page. 113. Matrix pain'd Page. 77.80. Matrix precipitated Page. 112. Mat. suffocated Page. 63.65.11. Men. stop Page. 13.30.40, 41.54.70. Menstrues to bring down Page. 79. Milk to increase Page. 57, 58, 59. Mouth sore Page. 13. Morphew Page. 13.2223. Muscels pain'd and Numb'd Page. 8.
N NOses, &c. Page. 55. Neuth Page. 66· O OBstructions Page. 10.13.15. Overflowing of the Menstrues, see Menstr. to stop. P PAlsies Page. 12.64.69.76.88. Palpitation of the heart See hearts Trimbling. Pallid Jaundies, See Jaun∣dies Blew or Pallid. Persian Fire Page. 27.29.38. Piles Page. 10. Plague a preservative Page. 19. Pleurisys Page. 9.16.75. Pox Page. 13. Precipitation of the Matrix, see Maitrix precipitated. Pusles Page. 88. Q QUalms of the Stomach Page. 19. R REd Jaundies, see Jaundies Red. Rein to Open and cleanse Page. 13. Restriction of the Blood Page. 30. Rheumatisms Page. 12. Ring Worms Page. 13. Runing Herpes, see Herpes Runing. S SCabs, Scales, Spots Page. 13.37. Scrophulas Page. 72. Secrets to cure the Jaundies, &c Page. 109. Scurvy Page. 8.12. Sides pain'd Page. 8. Siphita Stricta Page. 63. Small Pox Page. 9.19. Spleen to clanse and open. Page. 13. Spleen pained Page. 78. Splinters to draw forth Page. 57. Stomach Concern'd Page. 7. Stomach pain'd Page. 8. Stomach to strengthen Page. 11.14. Stone, Stranguary Page. 12. Surfits Page. 11.13.18. Synthena Page. 59.76. T TErms Obstructed Page. 10.13. Tetters Page. 13. Tumors to asswage Page. 18. Tympany Page. 55. U VEnome Page. 55. Vertigoes Page. 8.12. Vomitting to stop Page. 8.17.19. Ulcers Page. 23.24, 35.37.47.69.82.83. Ulcers Cavernous Page. 68.75. Ulcers in the mouth Page. 83, 84. Urin to provoke Page. 14.75. Urin sharp Page. 14. Urin to stop Page. 52. Usnea Page. 43, 44. W WItchraft Page. 54. Wolf Page. 40. Womens labour hasten Page. 10.17. Womb diseased Page. 10. Womb to Cleanse Page. 17. Womb to strengthen Page. 10. Worm Page. 9, 81.83, 84.
Wounds Page. 22.24.26.28.35.40.47.82.83.84 86. Y YEllow Jaundis Page. 108. A TABLE of Medicines and Preparations contain'd in this Book. Note, ✚ signifies Russels Arcanums which I have added. A Chap. I. ANtimony Page 21. Ant. pre. in Leprosy Page Ibid in Morphew Page 22. in Wounds Page Ibid in Ulcers Page 23. Addition of Antimony in the Leprosy Page Ibid in the Morphew Page Ibid in Wounds Page 24. in Ulcers Page Ibid Chap. III. Arsnick prepar'd into Mum∣my Page 45. into Balsam Page 46. into Liquor Page Ibid Addition for Arsincal Mum∣my Page Ibid of the Balsam Page 47. of the quor Page Ibid Chp. IV. Auripgment pre. for ist. Page 48. for Cancers Page Ibid for the Esthomenes Page 49. Addition for estulas Page Ibid in Cancers Page Ibid in the Esthomene Page Ibid Chap. V. Aqua Pstilentialis ✚ Page 5. Aqua Regis Page 79. B BAlam of Arsni Page vide Asnial . Page 47. C Chap. VII. CAlaminaris prepar'd for Players Page 36. for Unguents Page Ibid for the Eyes Page 37 for the Persian fire Page Ibid Addition in Ungnts Page Ibid in Colliriums of the Eyes Page Ibid Chap. I. Treat. III. Corals prepar'd for restrening the Menstrues Page 52, 53. against Venom Page Ibid against Noyses Page Ibid against Witchcraft Page 54. Addition in the Menstruse Page Ibid against Venom Page 55. in Noyses Page Ibid in the other 4 SpeCies Page Ibid Chap. III. Treat. III. Crystals Reverberated Page 58.
Crystals Calcin'd Page Ibid Sublimed Page Ibid Distil'd Page Ibid Chap. IV. Treat. V. Copper prepar'd in Ulcers Page 82. in Wounds Page Ibid in Worms Page 83. in Ulcers of the mouth Page Ib. Addition in Ulcers Page Ibid in Wounds Page 83.84. in Worms Page Ibid in Ulcers of the Mouth Page Ibid E Chap. V. Treat. IV.Entali prep. in Fluxes Page Ibid G. Chap. I. Treat. V. GOld prep. in the Palsy Page 76. in Fevers Page 77. in Dolours of the Matrix Page Ib. Addition in the Palsy Page Ibid in Fevers Page Ibid in Dolours of the Matrix Page Ib. Gold purged Page 78 H Chap. I. Treat. II. HEmatis prep. in Sangui∣nolent Ulcers Page 39. in immature Fluxs of the Menstrues Page 40. in the Lxate Diarrhaea Page Ib. in the Diarrhaea Page 41. Addition in Sanguinolent Ul∣cers Page Ibid in the Menstrues Page Ibid in immature Fluxes Page 42. in the Dysentery Page Ibid in the Diarrhaea Page Ibid I Chap. V. Treat. V. IRon prepar'd in Stiptick virtue Page 84. in Constrictive Page 85. in Exiccative vertue Page Ib. Addition in Stiptick vertue Page Ib. in Constrictive Page 86. in Exiccative Page Ibid K Chap. IV. KAkimia prepar'd in the Dyscentery Page 31. in the Diarrhaea Page Ibid in the Lyentery Page 32. Addition in che Dysentery Page Ib. in the Diarrhoea Page Ibid in the Lyentery Page Ibid. L Chap. V. LEthargary prepar'd in the Cancer Page 25. in the Esthiomenes Page Ibid in the Red Jaundies Page 26. in Wounds Page Ibid in deprav'd Tentigo Page Ibid in the Persian fire Page 27. Addition in the Tentigo Page Ibid in the Esthiomenes Page 28. in Wounds Page Ibid in the Cancer Page Ibid in the red Jaundies Page Ibid in the Persian fire Page Ibid Chap. VI. Lead pre. for incarnative Page 86. M MArcasite prepar'd Page 29. in restriction Page 30.
Marcasites pre. in Hemrrhoide Page 30. Addition in restricton of Blood Page Ib. in the Menstrues Page Ibid in the Hemrrhoides Page 31. Chap. II. Treat III. Magnet prepar'd in Juged Wounds and Ulcers. Page 56. Addition in aforesaid Wounds and Ulcers Page 57. Chap. VII. Treat. I. Mercury prep. for Incarnatives Page 87. in Laxatives Page Ibid P Chap. IV. Treat. IV. PLumose Allom prep. in Palsy Page 69. Addition in the Palsy and Le∣thargick Diseases Page Ibid Pills of Laudanum Page 95. R Chap. I. REmarks on the Species Vitae Page 2. Regulus ♁ cum ♂ tis Page 3. Roch Allom prepar'd n Ulcers Page 68. S Chap. II. Treat. II. SAifra prep. for Gravil Page 43.44. Additions for the same Page Ibid. Chap. V. Treat. II. Sulphur prep. in acute Diseases Page 50. in Asthma Page Ibid in Conservation of Sanity Page 51. Addition in acute imposthums Page Ibid in the Asthma Page Ibid in Conservation of Sanity Page Ib. Chap. VI· Treat. IV. Sal· Anatron prepar'd in Fistula, Cintilla and Scrofulas Page 71. Chap. VII.Salt Gm prepar'd for the Drpsy and other preparations Page 72, 73. Chap. IX. Salt Nitre prep. in the Pleurisy Page 75. in Cavernous Ulcers Page Ibid Additions in the same Page 75. Chap. II. Silver prep in Dolours of Brain Page 7. in rtion of Fluxes Page 79. in all the aforesaid Effects Page 80. Species Vitae ✚ Page 1. Croborativa ✚ Page 5. Proprietates ✚ Page 5. Minor ✚ Page 6. T TInctura Regalis Page 3. Tutia prep for Blemishes Page 3. in the Albgo Page Ibid in Bunches Page Ibid Additions in the same Page 34. Chap. VI. Talk prep. in Wounds Page 35. Additi for the same Page Ibid Tin prep. in the Jaundies Page 8· in the Asies Page Ibib in Worms Page 8 Additions for the same Page Ibid U USe, Dose of the Species Vit Page 1 Vitriol Treat IV. Chap. I. Page 62. Viriol prep. in Species of the Fal∣ling Evil, as in the Analer▪ Page Ib. Viriol prep. in Suffocation of the Matrix Page 63 Viriol prepar'd in the Guta. &c. Page Ibid W Chap. II. WHite Vitriol prepar'd in  Dolours of the Eyes Page 6. White Viriol prepar'd in the Neu∣tha Page 6· Additins for the same Page Ibid Errata. Page 3 line 12. read throw. P. 16. l. 1. r. Pleure∣tica. P. 18. l. 17. r. Dose from 6. gr. to 8. gr. P. 18. l. 26. r. and in a shorter time. P. 59. l. 16. r. Hemopt or Poreblind.
Species Vitae, &c. CHAP. I. ℞ THE best and purest Crude Plati∣ophthalmon, Q. S. melt it in a large Crucible with a strong fire till it bols, then take it out, and cast it into a Tub fil'd with fair Water, there will happen a great denotation; do thus seve∣ral times until you have melted a sufficient quantity of it: Now is your Mineral divided into four Principles or Substances. The first Substance is a Red volitile Sulphur, that swims on the Superficies of the Water, which must be taken clean off, filthered, dri∣ed, sifted and preserved for use. Having thus far proceeded, and your Wa∣ter quiet and clear, draw it out with a Tap placed within four or five Inches of the bottom of the Tub; otherwise you may take it out with Pans: Now you will find the true Species or Sulphur, which is the second Substance lying spread all over the Superficies of your Plati∣ophthalmon, which seperate, S. A. wash clean your Granulated Mineral with fair water, then mix it with your other which you separated
before, filther it, dry it, sift it through a fine Sarce and keep it for use: So do you leave your washed Mineral as a third Substance. But your fourth Principle or Substance is that which flieth away in a Fume, (that is so hurtful to the Artist) which might be ga∣thered into Flowers, if the Artist would be at the charge of making along Machine, in form of Alludels or Subliming Pots, with a Cover to his Tub, and a hole in the midst thereof to fix his Machine, not forgitting a hole to be made in the Cover as Reason will direct, to cast in your melted Minerel. Remarks. You must be sure to avoid the Fumes as much as you can, they being very Hurtful and Injurious to the Operator: In melting of a hundred weight of the Platiophthalmon you will find your true Sulphur of a very Red Co∣lour, after you have washed and dryed your Granulated Minerel, melt it a second time, you will find your Sulphur not much alterd in Colour, do thus five, six or seven times, and you will see your Species considerably al∣ter'd, it being of a blacker or darker Colour, litle in quantity, and not so strong in quality; having thus far proceeded mix all your quan∣tities of Species which you gained in each melt∣ing together, to bring it to its true Colour; which Colour cannot be discribed, but a sam∣ple
must be had of it: The Red Volitile Sul∣phur is mixt sometimes to make your dark Species of a more brighter Colour; or to make it to work more stronger, which may be given in a lesser Dose if the Physitian thinks conve∣nient. CHAP. II. Tinctura Regalis (Alis) Mettalorum. ℞. OF ♂ lbj. put it into a Crucible, place your Crucible in a Wind-furnace, make a good Fire about it, when the ♂ is red-hot, throw into it lbij. of ♁ in powder; cover your Crucible, and continue a great Fire; when the ♁ shall be in perfect fusion, through into it gradually six ounces of Salt Peter, a denotation will follow, and the ♂ will melt, and when there do rise no more sparkles, pour out your matter into an Iron Morter, warm'd and greas'd with Suit before hand, then strike the sides of the Mortar with a hammer, to make the Re∣gulus fall to the bottom; when it is cold sepe∣rate it from the Dross with a Hammer; melt it again, and cast into it by little and little, three Ounces of Salt Peter; when the denotation is over, pour it out into your Morter warm'd and greas'd, as before, strike the sides to make the Regulus fall to the bottom, and when it is
cool, separate it from the Dross; repeat melt∣ing the Regulus twice more, each time casting Salt Peter into it, you must observe to melt it well, before you cast the Salt Peter into it, that the Star may appear, which is a sign of its purity. Take of this Regulus ℥ix. powder it very fine, mix with it ℥v. of Venus and lbij. of Salt Peter pulveriz'd; put it into a large Crucible, which must be red-hot with a cover upon it beforehand, but you must mind to put it in, one Ladleful after another (i. e.) after the denotation of one Ladleful is over you may put in the other, and so Continue until it is all in; shut up your Furnaces mouth, and let there be an indiferent strong Fire about your Crucible, and it will ly and flux heaving up and falling down for the space of one hour, and when you see it fall to the bottom of the Pot, and will rise no more, augment your Fire to the last degree: When it is melted, and the Net appears upon it, pour it out into an Iron Morter warm'd and greas'd, and when it is cool beat it grosly, and put it into a Bottle which you must stop close; so have you your matter prepar'd. ℞. Of this matter, what quantity you please, put it into a Glass body, pour thereon of the best Spiritus Vini enough to cover it two or three Inches above, close the mouth of your Glass very firm, then shake it about a quarter of an hour afterwards, place it in your Athanor, and
in the space of two or three Days your Tin∣ture will be Extracted, which keep for use. CHAP. III. Species Coroborativa alias Pleuretica. ℞. SUlphuris lbj. Mummiae ℥ij. Olibani ℥ij· Myrrhae elect ℥j. Mastick ℥ss. Sublima omnia Simul, & Gummis remanentibus adde Sulphuris lbj. & Iterum Sublima, Tunc quibus duodecim uncijs, adde ℥ij. Mummiae pulverisat, & Cribrat & ad usum serva. CHAP. IV. Species Propietatis. ℞. CInabrium (alias) Vermilion, Cristallos Tartari pulverise it, also ℞. Scam∣mony and Powder it, when your Cinaber and Cristols of Tartar is sifted, mix about one hun∣dred drops of Oderiferis oyl, then add Scam∣mony ana lbss. CHAP. V. Aqua Pstilentiales. ℞ BUtter-bur, Virginia stake root, Ele∣ampane, Zedoary, Scorzonara, Cinnamon, Bayberries, Myrrh, Gentian, Ve∣lerian, Dittay roots ana ℥ij. Scabious, Devils-Bitt,
Plantain, Marygoulds, Bawm, Rose∣mary, Rue, Sage, Cardus Benidictus, wild Camomil, Pimpernal, Germander, Scordium, Celendine, Wormwood, Red Roses, Marum, St. John's-wort ana Mij. Juniper-berries, Jug-berries or Leaves, Sem. Lovage, Sorrel, Ba∣sil, Citron, Annis ana ℥iss. Spiritus Vini two Gallons, Infuse all in it for twelve hours, then distil in Baln. Mariae to a dryness; keep your Spirit to mix with a Cordial, S. A. CHAP. VI. Species Minor. ℞. ANtimony and Sal. Armoniack ana, mix them and sublime them S.A. Ga∣ther your Flowers, wash them with fair Water several times until you have taken all the A∣grymony off it, then dry it, sift it and preserve it for use. CHAP. VII. His other Cordial. ℞. SEmen frigid Maior & Minor ana ℥j. Rad. Aristolochiae, long. rotund. ana ℥j. Cas∣sia Lign. Cor Winterani. ana ℥ij. Sem. Annis. Carvi Cardamum ana ℥ij. Sem. feneculi Mill.
Solis Saxifrage ana ℥j. Sem. Cymini ℥iv. Sasa∣fras Santal omn. ana ℥j. Sem. Dauci ℥j. Infuse them twelve hours in two Gallons of Brandy, then distil from them one Gallon; to each quart add six quarts of Postern Water, one pint of Tincture Mettallorum, and one pint of spi∣rit of Tansy with Saccha. lbij. to dulcify it. The vse of the Species Vitae. IN the beginning of every Disease (known or unknown) where the Stomach is con∣cern'd, 'tis Expedient to give the Powder first, which, tho' it may not cure (as in Apoplexies) yet 'tis more safe than any other Common known Remedy, either of the Shops, or of any modern Physitians; because it is not only sub∣servient to Nature in preventing the formation of Diseases, but is also (if timely taken) suffi∣cient to Enervate, or Nullify there Existance when formed. For in the Primary assaults of any Disease (that is upon the firt perceivance of Illness) being once or twice taken, it ether wholly prevents the growth and Increase of that Disease, or renders it fit to be more easily cur'd with other Medicines. In Diseases arrived to some height, as of two or three Days or longer continuance, espe∣cially if undeterminate: This Powder some∣times solely and alone works (being taken at first twice or thrice a Day, and afterwards Mor∣ning
and Evening) unto perfect Recovery; but in Intermitting Fevers I always give it an hour before the Fit, in every Epidemic, Putrid or acute Fever, it answers the Regular Inten∣tion of Nature, because it sometime Vomiteth, Purgeth, and provokes Sweats (without the help of Cloaths more than usual) and other while stayeth Vomiting and Looseness arising from Natures Errour, or Debility of Parts, or Organs rectifying her Errour and strengthen∣ing the Parts. Also it stops those Morbifick Sweats that arise from Languishment, or alters such Sweats, as are forced by Diaphoreticks, unseasonably used contrary to the Intent of Nature. In Vertigoes and all Dolour of the Head, Stomach, Back, or Sides; 'tis a Medine of ge∣neral use and service. In the Iliack and Collic Passions, in Num∣ness and all pains in the Muscles, that happen from the Scurvy, or in any other congealed Distemper, or what may be Comprehended under the name of Congelation; this Powder proves it self a power ll Remedy; because if taken in hot Posset drink, Sweats usually fol∣low the taking thereof. Also in every Scor∣butick Distemper it is very available, and acts as variously as the Scorbutick form is various  for in all Fluctuations, or Diseases of Resolu∣tion, it is no less serviseable, then in congeal'd Distempers; because being a Medicine truly Natural, Nature can use it either way to her own benifit.
In Pleurisies, Bruises, and all Imposthumes inward or outward, it will compleatly answer the Desire of a good Phisitian▪ for it power∣fully resists Putrefaction and tho' it cannot al∣ways prevent Impostution, or hinder Pu∣trefaction when begun, yet it ripens the mat∣ter begun to be Putrefi'd, and afterwards expels it when perfectly digested. In the Bloody-Flux 'tis a certain and speedy Cure even to admiration: Also in the Griping of the Guts, attended with vehement Vomit∣ings and a continual Loosness, it effects so much beyond the power of other Medicines, as is scarcely credible; yet the same Powder, in extream Costiveness accomplisheth the work by loosening the Belly. In the small Pox, taken in the beginning of the Disease: It causeth Vomiting, Purging▪ or Sweats, and then binds the Body (as is fit) and brings out the small Pox; fortifying the life as far as it is gifted for that work. In the Jaundice no Medicine exceeds this, for it extirpates the Diseases Root and Branch. This Powder frequently taken, prevents the Formation of Worms in the Body, where matter of Worms is made, it expels that; and if Worms be really formed, enableth Nature to cast them out Alive or Dead In Convulsions it is highly serviceable; for if it be given to Children new born, and for sometime used, it prevents such fits, by carry∣ing of those Crudities Children bring with them into the World.
In all highly Malignant and Pestilential Di∣seases, it proves it self a true succour to Nature, if taken every four hours, for in such cases it acts vigorously towards expelling all Venomes. In Femenine Diseases, all Intemperancies, Inordinancies, and Distemparatures of the Womb, 'tis a certain and speedy Remedy. If Women with Child take the Powder up∣on any sense of Illness; or where a Tendency to Abortion is, it prevents the Danger thereof by strengthening the Womb. In the Birth it brings on Pains, and hastens the Labour with safety, but if the Natural time of Delivery be not near, it restrains Pains until that time comes. It stops Floudings, facilitates the Birth and Cleanseth as is fit, curing the after Pains; and in Women Lying in, answereth the Ne∣cessities of the Patient either in Cleansing or Strengthening. Likewise, the Monthly Flux is by this Re∣medy brought into due Order; i ordinate, it Checks that Inordinancy; if too little or not at all, it brings down the same in due time and order, being taken at certain times of the Moon, with respect had to the Age of Wo∣men or Maids, therefore in the Latter (with other small helps) it sometimes cures the Green sickness alters the Inordinacy of the Ap∣petite, and brings them to a due state of Health and right Colour of Complexion. In the Piles and Hemorrhoids it is a Medi∣cine of singular Use; for it opens the Piles or
Dissolves them, it opens also the Hemrrhoids and cures them when open'd preventing Ulcers in the Parts. Also in the Sore or Ulcerated Breast of Wo∣men, this Powder is of great service. It strengthens a week Stomach enabling it to retain the Food and digest it; especially if taken so soon as the party have Eaten. And in all weakness of old Age so far as the first Digestion is concern'd, it is of great Use. In Surfeits contracted from excesses of Meats, Drinks, or over great Labour it is singularly useful, because it either causeth Vomitings, Stools, or provokes Sweats powerfully, there∣by to clear the first Digestion, or resolve the congelation caus'd by those Excesses. The Dose to a Man or Woman full grown is ʒj. to a Child newly born 7 or 10 Grains, and so proportionably to all Ages between the Birth and full groth, it is to be repeated once in 4, 6, 8, or 12 hours according to the man∣ner of its Operation, and the necesity of the Sick. The Vehicle may be taken in Beer, Ale, Wine, or Mace-Ale as the Patients best like, or the Necessity of the Disease require. Note, In the use of this Powder let the fol∣lowing General Rule be always observ'd, whe∣ther it worketh by Vomiting, Purging, Sweat∣ing, or Urin, so long as any such Operation lasteth it ought to be continued; so likewise in restraining diseasy Sweats, Contra-natural Vo∣miting, or Purging continue the Use of the
same, until it be clearly seen, that Nature hath no further need thereof in that Exigency. The Vse and Dose of the Tinctura Regalis. IN Apoplexies, Palsies, Vertigoes and Epi∣lepsis, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Stone, Stran∣guries (too frequent issues of the Scurvy) and other Distempers, that have there Propagation from things Congealing or too much Acrimo∣nious, infering Pains or Numness, &c. It hath been by Experience found, this Tincture to be of General use and service, if taken in the following order, considering most of the Di∣seases above nam'd, are either Hereditary or of long continuance, or both: It is Necessary in all the aforesaid Cases, that this Tincture be taken daily four times a Day (in Beer, Ale, or Wine) Twenty Drops at a time when the Sto∣mach is most Empty; but Especially, let it be taken in the Morning fasting, and at Night go∣ing to Bed, without mixing the same with any Specific, or direct-working Medicine; tho it must be understood, that the Tincture must never be taken but in some Liquor or another. In Scorbutick Affects, appearing in other forms than above describ'd, use the Tincture in the same manner, until the Disease be abat∣ed, never using any other Medicine with it (Except my Powder) only the Dose must som∣times be encreased, as it must also in tendencie
to Stagnization, whereof Chilness, and Cold∣ness are forerunners. In all Impurities of the Blood of what kind soever, whether Pox, Surfets, Scabs, Tetters, Scales, Ringworms, Spots, Freckles, Morphews, Sores in the Mouth or other parts, if constant∣ly taken (in manner aforesaid) for a month together, viz. fourtimes a Day' or as often as the Afflicted Party drinks, and the External parts wash'd, with his or her Urin every Morning and Evening▪ it will prove it self a very Effectual Remedy. In the Green sickness and Femenine obstruc∣tions, this Tincture is of singular Use, if taken three or four times a Day in drink; for it re∣stores their lost Complexion, and opens all obstructions of the Spleen and Liver: Also it cleanseth the Spleen and Reins, easeth the Do∣lours of the same; and is of admirable service, in Hypocondraical Melencholly. But in these Distempers it must be takn in all Drinks, or Liquid Meats the Patients Use, viz. fifteen Drops at a time, and constantly every Day un∣til their Afflictions are alter'd. In the Distempers of old Age or declining Age, as Asthma's, Coughs, &c. that arise from the debility of the Transpirative faculties; by reason of which, they Labour under shortness of Breath, and troublesome Phlegm, it is beni∣ficial: For altho' this Tincture cannot wholly take of these Distempers from Aged Persons, yet it doth much alleviate them; provided it
be frequently taken, and that in a large quan∣ty, viz. Forty drops at Night going to Bed, and also every Morning fasting. In Suppression, Difficulty or sharpness of U∣rin it is an Effectual Remedy, if twenty drops be taken Morning and Evening in Mace-Ale, or in a decoction of Mallows if they design Ease, or Parsly roots if they intend Expulsion. In Convulsions, Lethargies, great Pains, Weights in the Head it is profitable if taken four times a Day twenty Drops at a time. Against Pains in the Stomach, and Weak∣nesses thereof, 'tis very Efficatious if thirty or forty Drops be taken at a time, twice or four times a Day in drink, when the Pains begin to invade, and the use thereof continu'd till the Dolour ceases. Only in this case let the Partys so griev'd be sure to take care, never to Eat or Drink, until they are assured, that what they Eat and Drank before be well Digested. In imbecility of the Generative faculty, or in Weakness, Coldness, and unaptness to Con∣ceive, this Tincture is very profitable if twenty Drops at a time be taken in Sack, three times a Day, viz. in the Morning fasting, one hour before Dinner, at four a Clock after noon, and the fourth time at Night going to Bed, in mace-Ale, especially if the Powder be used with it. This method must be continu'd for a Month together. For Recovery of Srength in Consumptions, where the Lungs are not Ulcerated, this Me∣dicine
ought to be given, by ten Drops at a time, as often as the Patient takes any thing Li∣quid (whether Broth, Milk, Gellies, or E∣mulsions of any kind) as also in all his or her Drink. In the Jaundies 'tis no less Effectual; if thir∣ty or Forty Drops be taken at a time in what drink the Afflicted party best liketh, in the same manner as before, and the use thereof continued, till the Urin be clear as it was be∣fore the Disease invaded. Against after pains in Child bed, and to open Obstructions, this Medicine yields Relief, if ten Drops be given to Women in that condi∣tion (in their usual Candle) every time they drink it. A Child of a year old may take two drops in two spoonfuls of Brest milk, and so pro∣portionably. Note, In taking or administring this Tinc∣ture, 'tis very convenient not to suffer your Selves, Friends or Patients, to be over perswaded by any Arguments whatsoever, to take Purg∣ing or Solutive Medicines. altho' your Friends or Patients Bodies seem to be somewhat Cos∣tive: For so doing you will much retard the benifit which would naturally accrew from this Tincture, by its Transpirative vertue. And let this be a caution to All, in every kind of Distemper where this Medicine is used, not to take or intermix any other things (except as is above in this Treatise described) with the same.
The Vse and Vertue of the Species Pleu∣reticum. IN the Pleurisy 'tis a speedy Remedy, for if one Paper of it be given at first, and ano∣ther twelve hours after, or at Night, and a third in the Morning fasting, it totally carries off the Pleurisy let it be never so violent, with out Phlebotomy. In all old Bruises where the blood is Coagu∣lated or Clotted, this Powder is an excellent Remedy, being taken Night and Morning for five or six Days together, it dissolves those Clots, and gives the blood its true Circulation, puts the Body into a fine breathing Sweat. It preserves from Pestilential Aire, if half a Paper be taken in a Morning fasting. In Fevers it is of great Use, if half a Paper (which is ʒss) be taken Night and Morning in such Liquor as the Patient best liketh. The full Dose to a Man or Woman is ʒj. The Vse and Vertue of the Species Pro∣pietatis. THe use of this I have not my self experi∣enc'd, but as I learnt from one that hath used it, 'tis a gentle Purge, rarely Vomiting and Gripes not. The Dose from twenty to thirty Grains.
The Use and Vertue of his Cordial. WHatsoever (almost) can be said of the Powder, may also be truely averred of this Medicine, which is as general as that. In Distempers of Women (because pleasant to take) it proves more serviceable than that, by reason of the nice Palats of most Women: It prevents Abortion, stays the Child in the Womb (if the Ligiments happen not by some Accident to be broken) unto the full time of Delivery, when that is come it hastens the Birth as is fit, and after the Birth cleanseth well, and either prevents or cures the After∣pains; but more readily if the Powder be taken in it so soon as the Woman is laid. This I have very often prov'd by my proper Expe∣rience. In Womens Distempers the Powder cannot be taken in a more proper Vehicle than this Cordial. To Men also where Wine is ab∣horred, I give it both as a Vehicle for the Powder, and also to comfort them. If a Vo∣miting Potion, or a common Cathartic be gi∣ven to the prejudice of the Patient, this Cor∣dial either stays the Vomiting, or makes the matter move upward with much more ease. Also, if the Purg cause urgent Pains and works not, this given (if not too late) with the Pow∣der produceth a Laudable Evacuation to the
saving of Life, as I have sometimes seen, &c. The Dose from one Spoonful to three or four as need shall be. The Vse and Dose of the Species Minor. THis Powder is very serviceable and Effec∣tual in the King's Evil (as I know by ex∣perience) for in all Tumors arising from the Evil it certainly asswageth, or else bringeth them to Suppuration and breaks them, and all other Tumors of what kind soever, it will either Break or Dissolve them: 'Tis also a so∣veraign Medecine in all manner of Surfits; if a Dose be taken in the Morning fasting in any Liquor as the Patient best liketh, for it frees the Body (both upwards and downwards) of the matter offending, and causeth a good Ap∣petite. The Dose about ten or twelve for a Man; much more might be written of this Powder, but let the Ingenious find them out. Headrich] If it be so benificial in the curing of Tumors, it would be very serviceable to Chirurgeons that have stubborn Tumors in hand: For being such a Potent Medicine of it self inwardly given, What would it be when Asistance is also applied outwardly? It must certainly facilitate the Cure with more ease in a shorter time.
A Medicine for the Collick aded by the Publisher. ℞. AQua Milissae, Aqua Vitae, Suc Cheli∣donum ana ℥iij. flos ♁ alb. ℥iss. mix and digest them for twelve Days, Dose ℥ss. The vertue of the Aqu Pestilentiales. IT is not only good in the Plague, but a great preservative against Malign and Epidemical Distempers. It is a very good Cordial to prevent any sick∣ness coming from Cold if two or three Spoon∣fuls be given at Night going to Bed, for it will expel the Malignity by Sweat; if a Sponful be taken in the Morning fasting it preserves from ill Air and causeth a good Apetite. It driveth forth the small Pox, if two Spoon∣fuls be taken at the assault of the Disease. It is good to allay Qualms of the Stomach if a Spoonful be taken Morning and Evening, and stayeth Vomiting. It is a present Remedy in the griping of the Gutts.
Theophrastus of Preparations. CHAP. I. Of Antimony, Silver Marchasite. Of White, and Red Cachymia. Of Talck fluid, and Thick. Of Tutia Calaminaris, Lythargiry. Of Antimony. The Virtues of Antimony are in Morphew. Leprosie. Elephantia. Wounds. Ulcers. The Preparation of Antimony in Species of the Leprosie, is thus. ℞. OF Antimony very well beaten lbj. of Distillate lbiv. of Crude white Tartar lbss. reduce all to a very subtile Powder, which distil by Retort, and a red Oyl will come forth.
Antimony hath also another process, for i it be used for the Cure of another Disease, ano∣ther Preparation is also requir'd; viz. One in Wounds, another in the Leprosie, and so of the residue. For you would exceedingly Err, if you should use Antimony in Wounds, as in the Leprosie. The Preparation of Antimony in the Ele∣phantia, is as in the Leprosie. The Preparation of Antimony in the Morphew. ℞. Antimony well beaten, lbss. Tartar cal∣cin'd, Allom, of each as much; make Lay upon Lay, put them in Fire of Reverberation heightned to the fourth Degree; then distil, and and a Red thick Oyl will come forth par se. Lay upon Lay, or S. S. S. is, when there is one Lay of Allom and Tartar mixt, and then upon that another Lay of Antimony, up∣on which Allom and Tartar &c. The third Preparation in Wounds. ℞. Antimony, Tartar calcin'd, of each lbss. Alcohol of Wine one Kist. make a mixture, which distil by Alembeck to the resolution of the matter. Of this dissolved matter, ℞. ʒj of Alcohol of Wine, ʒiv. dry the mixture by Coagulation, then reduce it to an Oyl upon a Porphirie.
There is not a more excellent Cure in Wounds (excep wounds of the Head) then is from Antimony. The Preparation of Antimony in Ulcers, is this. ℞. Antimony, Colcothar, Flowers of Brass of each what quantity you please, make S.S.S. and Reverberate them according to the degree of Reverberation. Then Extract with Red Wine, and reduce into an Alcali. Reduce this Alcali to an Unguent with Oyl of Olive, and therewith anoint round about the Ulcers, Additions of Antimony in the Leprosie. ℞. Of this Antimony ℥j. Oyle of the feces of Wine ʒj. Oyl of bitter Almonds to the weight of all; make a mixture. If there be no Hoarsness of the Voice, anoint with this once, or twice a Week. But if Hoarsness be, this Unguent will be ineffectual. Addition in the Morphew. ℞. Of this Antimony ℥j. Alcohol of Wine 1 Kist. Tragacant ʒij. Mucilaginy of Regal Confound, Seed of Flea-wort, Gum Arabick, of each ʒij. make it up like an Unguent. In the Alopecia, and Morphew, one Pro∣cess is thus. The Patient must be anointed with this Unguent once, or twice a Week in
an Hott house. So, a Crust will arise, which being fallen off, you must absolve the Cure with the foollowing Unguent. ℞. Of Sperniola, Campher of each ʒi.ss. Oyl of Ceruss ʒiij. make an Unguent. After the Crust is fallen off, anoint the place with this Unguent for eight Days. Addition in Wounds. ℞. Of this prepar'd Antimony ʒvij. of the Juice of Tartar candid, of Oyl of Mirtils of each ʒv. make a mixture, use this once every other Day, and no Accidents will be to be feared. Note, In the Summer you may add what Campher you please. Addition in Ulcers. ℞. Of this prepar'd Antimony ℥iij. of Col∣cotharine Oyle ℥ss. Lentiscine Oyle ℥iij.ss. make an Unguent. With this anoint round a∣bout the Ulcer. So it cures both the Cancer, Elephantia, and Estiomenes. Oyle of the rindes of mountain Siler, is Lentiscine Oyle.
CHAP. II. Of Lithargiry. The Virtues of Li∣thargiry are, in Cancer, and Fistula. Deparaved Tentigo. Estiomenes. Red Jaundies. Persian Fire. Wounds. The Preparation of Lithargiry in the Can∣cer. ℞. LIthargiry beaten lbss. Water of Salt, Al∣lom of each lbj. White Vineger lbiv. mix all, and over Coals evaporate to the Con∣sumption of these Waters. Of this Lithargiry ℞. what you please, and with a like quantity of Fountain Water, extract the Colours for a Night, then dry the Extract. Lithargiry after this manner prepar'd, is al∣so profitable for Fistula's. The Preparation in the Esthiomenes. ℞. Lithargiry lbj. Tartar Calcin'd lbss. of Aquafortis, or Water of Soot of each q s. com∣mon
Salt melted, Roch-Allom of each ℥vj. In fire of the fourth degree Reverberate these, with the aforesaid Water, and reduce in man∣ner of an Alcali. Water of Soot, is a Water distilling from Sooty Tiles in a rainy Season. The Preparation in the Red Jaundies. ℞. Myrrh, Frankincense of each ℥j. Li∣thargiry ℥iv. most strong Vineger lbss. make a Decoction. The Preparation in Wounds. ℞. Lithargiry four times whitened with Vi∣neger lbss. Juice of Featherfew, of the Lesser Comphry, of Round Aristolochy of each a like quantity; make a mixture with Mucila∣giny of Earthwormes. The Preparation of Lithargiry for the depraved Tentigo. ℞. Lithargiry washed lbj. Roch-Allom lb.ss. make a mixture, which being perfectly well ground, Reverberate in Fire of the ourth degree, for four hours space, then Eract the Alcali with Fountain  remain∣ing Lithargiry, and a  of Roch-Allom, proceed as  the Lithargiry be all extracted.
The preparation is made, when the Lithar∣giry is put in Roch Allom for four hours. Then ℞. of this disti'd Alcali, of the Waters, of the Fountain, and of Soot of each lbss. mix altogether. The Preparation in the Persian Fire. ℞. OF Lithargiry lbj. of Red Realgar ℥ij. Sal Armoniack lbss. mix them, and put the Mixture into a Sublimatory; from which sublime it ten or twelve times, then pour on hot Water, and the Lithargiry will be separated. An Addition in the depraved Tentigo. ℞. Of this Lithargiry ℥j. of common Real∣ger ʒj. of the Juice, or Water of Celandine, q. s. make it up in manner of an Unguent. With this anoint a Cloath very thin, and apply it four or five times. So the Skin will wax Red, and the Stink begon. Afterwards use this Receipt. ℞. Of this Lithargiry ℥j.ss. Mucilaginy of Fenugree, Earthworms of Nitree of each q. s. make an Unguent. Note, Earthworms of Nitre, are Worms found in Dung.
An Addition in Wounds. ℞ Of this Lithargiry ℥iv. Oyle of Cam∣pher ℈j. Crocus Martis ℈iv. Reduce all to the form of an Unguent. This must be used in Wounds, every Day anointing them very well, once or twice there with. An Addition in the Estiomenes. ℞. Of this Lithargiry ℥iv. Oyle of Cam∣pher ℈j. Powder of Celandine, and Galls of each ℥ij. make a Powder. ℞. of this Lithar∣giry ʒiij. Mucilaginy of Comphry, Mucilagi∣ny of Earthworms of Nitre, Oyle of Myrtles of each q. s. This in the form of an Unguent, Cures. An Addition in the Cancer. ℞. Of the Juce of Horehound, and Ar∣smart of each ℥j. Lithargiry prepar'd ℥ij. Oyle of the Yolks of Eggs q. s. reduce those to an Unguent. An Addition in the Red Jaundies. ℞. Of this Lithargiry prepar'd ℥ss. Roch-Allom ℥ij. Water of Salt ℥j.ss.
An Addition in the Persian Fire. ℞. Choice Vitriol, ℥iv. Galls ℥ss. Frankin∣sense ℥j. Lithargiry prepar'd, the weight of all in Wine, and Vineger q. s. While any burning is, so long must this be used. And the more the Foot Burns, the bet∣ter it is. CHAP. III. Of Marcasite. Gold or Silver Marchasite, is angular like a Dye. The Virtues of Mar∣chasite are, in Restriction of the Blood, of the Menstrues, and Hemroides. Preparation of Marchasite. ℞. OF Marchasite ℥iv. Pitch, Colophony of each ℥vj. Rosin of the Firr, the weight of all: Reduce these to a Calx. Note, This reduction into Calx is made, by burning the matter in a Crucible, that it may flow as Wax, two or three times until it be ve∣ry Hot, &c.
The Preparation in Restriction. ℞. Of Marchasite very well beaten ℥ij. Oyl of Linum ℥vij. when these two are conjoyn'd, you must set the mixture on fire, then what remains is the true matter. Preparation in the Hemroides. ℞. Marchasite ℥ss the most pure Alchol of Wine lbj. mix them, &c. An Addition in Restriction of Blood. ℞. Of this Marchasite ʒj. Corals ʒss. Plan∣tane seed ℥ss. make a subtile Powder. This must be streued on, and into Wounds, or mixed with Vineger, bound below the Wound, so it will cohibit the same. They who by a fall Spit Blood, must drink the same Powder. Addition in the Menstrues. ℞. Of this Marchasite ℥ss. Oyle of Sanda∣rach q. s. reduce it to the form of an Unguent. In the immoderate Flux of the Menses, the Navel must be anointed twice or thrice.
Addition in the Hemroides. ℞. Of this Marchasite ℥iij. Salt Gemme, Mummy of each ʒj. make a Powder. The swelling Hemroides being first cut, this Powder must be strewed in. CHAP. IV. Of Kakimia. The Virtues of Ca∣kimia are, in Dysentery. Diarrhaea. Lientery. The Preparation in the Dysentery. ℞. OF Kakamia well beaten ℥vj. the Rust of Iron ℥ss. keep them in the second degree of Fire, for six or seven hours, After∣wards reduce the matter to an Alcali. The Preparation in the Diarrhaea. ℞. Of Kakimia prepar'd as above, Oyl of Nutmegs enough to incorporate it, reduce it to the second degree in form of a Bolus, [or, reduce it to the form of a Bolus, by Fire of the second degree.]
Tte Preparation in the Lientry. ℞. Kakimia prepar'd as before, and Gum Arabick dissolv'd in Plantane Water; make a Bolus as before. Addition in the Dysentery. ℞. Of this Kakimia ʒss. of Pidgeon assat q. s. Addition in the Dyarrhaea. ℞. Of this Kakimia ʒj. Treacle ʒiij. Ter∣ra Sigillata ʒss. make a Bolus. The Dose from ʒj to ʒij.ss. give it Morning, Noon, and Night. Every third Day abstein; afterwards repeat it, so doing thrice. Addition in the Lyentery. ℞. Of Kakimia prepar'd ʒj. Crocus Martis ʒij. Red Corals ʒss. Treacle q. s. make a Bo∣lus. Dose from ʒij. to ʒiij. or ʒiv. Morning and Evening every Day.
CHAP. V. Of Tutia. The virtues of Tutia are, in Blemishes of the Eyes. Whiteness, and Nodes of the Eyes. Bunches, or Crookedness. The Preparation for Blemishes of the Eyes. ℞. OF Tutia ℥j. white Vitriol, Juice of Eye∣bright of each a like quantity; make it in manner of a Bolus, by the second degree of Fire. Hence is made an Unguent profitable for the Eyes. The Preparation in the Albugo, or Whiteness of the Eyes. This preparation is made, by extinguishing Tutia in Milk, and afterward infusing it in Rosewater for a Night. This Water put into the Eye, takes away the white Cloudiness. In Bunches. ℞. Of Tutia ℥iv. Salt fuse, Calx vive of each ℥vj. make, S. S. S. and reduce the matter to
an Alkali, by Fire of the fourth degree. Addition in Blemishes of the Eyes ℞. Of this Tutia ʒss. Viscosity of Frogs ʒij. Oyl of Tyles ℈ss. make a Collyrium. If blemishes, or spotts in the Eyes appear yellowish, and shine, they are reverted. Addition in the Albugo. ℞. Of this Tutia ʒj. white Vitriol ʒvij. Campher beaten ℈jss. make a mixture with water of Roses, or Fennel. All Animals that have Feet are obnoxiaus to this Disease. The Albugo invades the Eyes in Goats, and other Animals as well as in Man. In Men this Water must be adhibited with Campher, to prevent Inflamation. Addition in Bunches. ℞. Of this Tutia ℥j Salt Anatron, or ae Vitri, Salt fuse of each ℥j. Distil'd Urin ℥xij. make a mixture. The Process is, to give this mixture to be drank by the strumose Persons, Morning, and Evening, for three or four weeks together. This Medicine takes away all Bunches except of the Aged.
CHAP. VI. Of Talk. The vertues of Talk are, in Ulcers. Humid Wounds. The Preparation in Wounds. ℞. TAlk, Ashes of Bones, Oats, of each equal weight; Reverberate them for a day and a Night in Fire of the fourth degree, then wash and dry the Calx. Talk dryeth the bottom, or Basis of a Wound, that it cannot pass into a Fistula: So also in Ulcers it dryes powerfully: It must not be used above three days. Addition in Wounds and Ulcers. ℞. Of this Talk ℥j. Liquor of Mummy, and Turpentine wash'd, of each enough to deduce it to the form of an Unguent. It cures the Esthiomenous, Cancrous, and o∣ther running Ulcers.
CHAP. VII. Of Calaminaris. The vertues of Cala∣minaris are, for Plaisters. Colliriums, & The Persian . Both in Ulcers, and in Wounds add Cala∣minaris; in Plaisters where incarnating is need∣ful. For Colliriums, i neither the Albugo, nor Blemishes of the Eyes be, as in Red, or Blood-shot Eyes, it is a Principal Experiment. The Preparation of Calaminaris for Plaisters. ℞. OF Calaminaris wash'd (that is pure) ℥j. Colcothar, Sulphur vive of each, ℥j.ss. make S. S. S. give to it Fire of the fourth de∣gree for one Day and Night, then wash the Calx. Preparations for Unguents. ℞. Of this Calaminaris prepar'd ℥iij. Oyl of the Yolks of Eggs ʒj. make a Bolus with Gum Arabick, administring Fire of the se∣cond degree; then wash the matter.
Preparation for the Eyes. ℞. Of this prepar'd Calaminaris ℥j. distill'd Vineger ℥vj. make an Extraction then dry it. Preparation for the Persian Fire. ℞. Of crude Calaminaris lbss. Water of Water Lilly ℥vj Plumose Allom ℥ss. digest these in a Glass for a Weeks space, then distil the digested matter. This is the description of Geber; but Peter de Argillata errs in thi description; for it is a Medicament for the Panaition, and not to Combustions. Preparation for the Persian Fire. ℞. Of the Apostolicon Plaister ℥vj. Cala∣minaris ℥ss. Campher ʒj. make a Plaister. In Unguents. ℞. Of the Agrippine Unguent ℥iv. Un∣guent of Flos Aeris ℥ss Calaminaris ʒx. make a mixture; this is excellent in Ulcers, Itch, and in the Scab. Addition in Colliriums of the Eyes. ℞. Of Calaminaris ℥j. Waters of Eyebright, Fennel, Roses of each ʒiij. make a Collirium, &c.
Addition in the Persian Fire. ℞. Of Calaminaris ℥vJ. Water of Vitriol, and of Galls, some use Atramentum Sutorium, both in the Persian Fire, and in the Jaundies.
Treatise the second. CHAP. I. Of the Stone Haematis. Of Saxifrage. Of Arsenick. Of Auripigment, and Sulphur. Of Haematis. The virtues or more principal Arcanums of the Stone Haema∣tis are these, in Sanguinolent Ulcers. Resolved Menstrues. Unripe profluxes of the Matrix▪ Laxate Disenteri, & Diarrhaea. Preparation in Sanguinolent Vlcers. ℞. OF Haematis ℥iij. Lephanteous Clay (that is such Argilla, as small Cucur∣bits are made of) Bole Armeni of each ℥iij. make a Bolus with Tragacant dissolved in Vi∣neger, Reverberate it in Fire of the fourth de∣gree; afterward extract an Alcali.
In Wounds, in the Wolfe, in the Cruent, and running Herpes, this Stone is exceeding profitable: It constringeth the Veins, that the Blood can no more flow out; being strewed upon, and in them, or the affected parts. Preparation in the Menstrues. ℞ Of the Haematis ℥iv. Mastick dissolved ℥x. Amber ℥jss. make a mixture, and ablu∣tion with the decoction of Water of Allom. Those Menstrues are to be stopped, by which the Countenance is made pale; in which the use of this is safe, and intirely heals. After the decoction hath continued for seven hours, of the Haematis, a Clay is made; of which Troches are formed for the Menstrues. Preparation, in immature Fluxes of the Matrix. ℞. Of the Haematis, ℥j. Oyl of Nutmegs, Oyl of the graines of Actes, Oyl of Peter of each ℥iij. make a composition, Dose ℈j. This must be administred in Rose Water boyled with Plantain Roots, or with Plantain Water only: It stayes the immature Flux, where no Torsions, or Collick is; but if they be present, it is the Generation of the Stone. Preparation in the Laxate Diarrhoea. ℞ Haematis Red Corals, Spodium of each ʒvss. Tansey, to the weight of all, make Tro∣ches
with Mucilaginy of the Viscosity of Bo∣tin, Dose ʒss. Preparation in the Diarrhaea. ℞. Of Icy Allom, Haematis, Crocus Mar∣tis of each a like quantity; make Troches with Gum Arabick dissolv'd in Plaintain Water: Dose from ʒj to ʒjss. The Plantain Water is extracted from the Rootes and Herbs. The Stone Carniolus held in the hand stops the Flux of Blood, so doth not the Stone Hae∣matis. Addition in Sanguinolent Ulcers. ℞. Of this prepared Haematis ʒss. Galls ℈ss▪ Seraphinum ℈jss. Oyl of Cheyry or Kerva, flowers of Violets, q. s. for incorporating; make an Unguent in acute Ulcers. Add Liquor of Mummy instead of Oyl of Cheyry, so it will be in use of the Herpes, Esti∣omenes, and Cancrena's. Addition in the Menstrues. ℞. Of this Haematis ℥j. Long Pepper, Nut∣megs of each ʒss. Ases of Frogs folicul. ℈iv. make Troches with Mint Water; Dose from ℈j. to ℈ij.
Addition in immature Fluxes of the Matrix. ℞. Of this Haematis ℥j. Tragina [one] Kist, Water of Horehound, Juice of Baum of each ℥j. make a mixture: Dose from ℥ss. to ℥jss. Addition in the Disentery. This is effected by Haematis prepar'd in Red Wine, and in it Iron is extinguished; or it is given in Treacle. Addition in the Diarrhaea. ℞. Of this Haematis ʒiij. Pearls ℈ss. Mum∣my liquefied, to the weight of all, make a mix∣ture, Dose from ℈ij. to ℈iij. or ℈iv.
CHAP. II. Of Saxifrage. It is a Stone expelling all Tartar, Usnea, Gravel, and Pruina. The virtues of Saxifrage take away, Gravel. Usnea. Pruina. Grandines, and o∣ther Tartareous kinds. Saxifrage is properly a pale Crystal; and is call'd Citrinolus, or the Citrine Stone: The Citrine Stone is a medium, between a Cristal, and a yellow Beril; it makes a Liquor like Alcali: Dose ℈ss. in good Wine. The Preparation, for Gravel, Vsnea, &c. ℞. SAxifrage ℥j. Borax ʒij. Salt Gem ʒvj. Salt-fuse ℥j. make S. S. S. and Reverberate the whole in Fire of the fourth degree, from Sun-rise to Sun-sett, that it may be reduced to an Alcali; Dose ʒss. with white Wine.
The second Preparation, for Gravel, &c. ℞. Of this Saxifrage Reverberate it per se, in Fire of the fourth degree, of this Reverbe∣rate ℞. ℥j. Ashes of the Roots of the greater Radish ʒj. Alcali of the Roots of Stone Parsly ℈j. make a mixture per se, Dose from ℈j. to ℈iij. or ℈iv. The first Addition. ℞. Of this Saxifrage ʒj. Milium Solis ʒij white Wine ℥x. Dose from ℥iv. to ℥vj. The second Addition. ℞. Of this Saxifrage ʒjss. Seed of Parsly, Rocket of each ʒj. Medon. clarifi'd ℥x. Dose from ℥iv. to ℥vj. or ℥vij. It is to be administred against the Tartar so long, as until the Urin flow out freely. CHAP. III. Of Arsenick. The virtues of Arse∣nick are, in Wounds. Ulcers, and other Aper∣tions.
Arsenick is a Soot slowing from Metals, and especially from Lead; and it is the Re∣algar, or Fulgor of Metals. The first Preparation is the Reduction of Arsenick into Mummy: In Preparation the Venome is to be taken away: No∣thing heals Ulcers, and Wounds more perfectly, than Arsenick preparld: Also it cures Syreons, and all Ulcers, Can∣crena's, and Fistula's. Arsenick of Lead is the Best, Silver next, and in goodness next to it is Arsenick of Tinn; after these, that which fumes from on and is like to Copper. The second Preparation of Arsenick, is the reduction of it into Balsam. The third into Liquor. Thus Arsenick hath three Preparations, viz. into Mummy. Balsame, and Liquor. The first Preparation into Mummy. ℞. WHite Arsenick ℥vj. Salt fuse, Col∣cothar of each ℥jss. make a mix∣ture Reverberate it in Fire of the second degree for three or four Hours; which expired take
it from the Fire; grind the upper part of it▪ and again prepare it as above, so doing five or six times. The Preporation into Balsam. ℞. White Arsenick ℥x. Talk iv. Calx vive, ℥xv. make a Subtile mixture, which Reverbe∣rate in Fire of the fourth degree for twenty four hours. The Best is to be removed, (which is like Glass) from the Venome which adheres to the bottom of the Calx. Therefore what is taken from the Top must be ground, put into a glass and set in a Celler, where it will produce an Oyl or Balsam. Preparation into Liquor. ℞. Crude or White Arsenick lbss. Salt Ni∣tre lbj. Salt Gem. ℥ss. make a Subtile powder, which Reverberate in an open Reverberatory for twenty four hours. These so mixed may be put in Fire of Re∣verberation, and the Arsenick burnt for three hours; afterwards melted when Liquefied, pour it into Water, and then Coagulated in manner of an Alkali. Addition for Arsenical Mummy. ℞. Of this Mummy ℥j. Liquor of Mirrh, Botin of each ℥ij. Reduce all to the form of Oyl.
This Oyl is excellent in Ulcers, and in Wounds: For, whether they be Estiomenes, or other Ulcers; this in them, is an admirable Mundificative, and noble Incarnative. Addition of the Balsam. ℞. Of this Balsam ʒiij. Oyl of the Yolks of Eggs ʒx. Turpentine distil'd ʒj. make a mix∣ture. Both the Mummy and Balsam are to be used every twelve hours. Addition of the Liquor. ℞. Of this Liquor ʒxv. Rinds of Granates ʒvj. Bark of Frankincense ʒij. Mucilaginy of Botin, to the weight of all; make a mixture.
CHAP. IV. Of Auripigment. Auripigment is a Minera, Yellow as Gold. The virtues of Auripigment are, in Fistula's. Canceres, and Esthiomenes. The Preparation for Fistula's. ℞. OF Auripigment ℥j. Tartar Calcin'd ℥iij. make S. S. S. then Reverberate them for twenty four hours in Fire of the fourth de∣gree. This so decocted will flow; wherefore it must be taken out and ground, afterward pour'd into Water, so will a White Powder settle to the bottom: This is Auripigment prepar'd, which if you put into a Glass, &c. will be con∣verted into Oyl. This Oyl you must inject into the Fistula, or else apply a Cloth moistn'd in it: But the Powder must be strewed upon Ulcers. The Preparation for the Cancer. ℞. Of Auripigment ℥v. Soot ℥ss. Salt Ar∣moniack
℥iij. Reverberate the mixture for one day and nigt in Fire of Reverberation, and re∣duce it to an Alcali. This Alcali is a principal Arcanum in the Cancer. Preparation for the Esthiomenes. ℞. Of Auripigment ℥iij. Allom calcined ℥vj. Administer Fire as above, with Extrac∣tion of Alcali. Addition for Fistula's. ℞. Of this prepared Auripigment ʒss. Ro∣sin of the Pine ℥j. Wax to the wait of both; make a Cerote. This is to be put into Fistula's. Addition in the Cancer. ℞. Of this prepared Auripigment ʒv. Ashes of Pidgeons Dung, Oyl of the Yolks of Eggs, q. s. to make an Unguent; which use for the Cancer. Addition in the Esthiomenes. ℞. Of this Auripigment ʒv. Liquor of Mum∣my ʒij. Oyl of Roses ℥jss. Mucilaginy of the Seed of Fleawort, to the wait of all: Reduce the whole to the form of an Unguent or Cata∣plasm.
If the Sick complain of violent heat, you must first anoint with of Campher, then ap∣ply the Remedy. CHAP. V. Of Sulphur. The virtues of Sulphur are, in Very acute Imposthumes. The Asthma. Conservation of Sanity. Very acute Imposthumes are, the Pleurisy, Pest, and such like. The Preparation for acute Imposthumes. ℞. SUlphur vive lbj. Colcothar, Salt fuse of each lbss. make a subtile Powder, which sublime. After it is once sublimed, take the Sublimate, and with a new addition, as above, sublime it thrice. Sulphur vive is that which co-heres in Frag∣ments, but not when it is dissolved. Preparation for the Asthma. ℞. Of Sulphur fuse lbj. Raspings of Red-Sanders,
Cypress, and Pine of each lbj. make S. S. S. first Reverberating, and then reducing to an Alcali. Of this Alcali ℞. ℥x. Myrrh ℥v. Sublime these as other Sublimates. Preparation in Conservation of Sanity. ℞. Of Sulphur ℥iv. Oriental Saffron, Che∣bul Myrabolans, and Bellirican Myrabolans of each ℥j. Oyl of Juniper berries enough to in∣corporate. Sublime these with a most gentle Fire. Addition in acute Imposthumes. ℞. Of this prepared Sulphur ℥ss. Oyl of Nutmegs ʒj. Water of Speedwel prepar'd, to the weight of all; make a Potion. Addition in the Asthma. ℞. Of this Sulphur ℥ss. Thebanum (alias Thebaick Opium) corrected ʒiij. Treacle e∣nough to make them up in form of a Bolus; Dose from ℈j. to ℈ij. or ℈iij. Addition in Conservation of Sanity. ℞. Of this Sulphur ℥ss. Red Myrrh, Ori∣ental Saffron of each ʒss. and ℈j. Hepatick A∣loes, to the weight of all; Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j.
Treatise the Third. CHAP. I. Of Perspicuous, and not Perspicuous Gemms. Of Corals. Of Crystal. Of Saphyres, Of the Magnet. Rubes, and Granates. Emralds, Jacinths, &c. Of Coralls. The virtues of Corals are, for The Menstrues, and Fluxes thereof. Venome inwardly taken. Noyse, or Rumbling of the Belly. Witchcraft, if any one be bewitched. Dumpishness, if one be Maniack, or Brainsick. Fear, if one be Timerous. Melancholy, when any seem to them∣selves to be Wise, and are Fools. The virtue and substance of this, is one and the same. Corals simple, without preparation, re∣strein the inordinacy of Urine, and Seidg;
and of the Menstrues also in a long time; But being prepar'd they ope∣rate sweetly, and without danger. Preparation of Coralls for restraining the Menstrues, &c. ℞. OF Corals ℥ss. Oyl of Myrtles ʒj. Oli∣banum ℥jss. Salt fuse ℥ij. Calcine them in Fire of Reverberation for twelve Hours, or longer; afterwards wash the Calx with Plantain Water. Corals (as is said) restrain the Urine, but not the Menstrues. Preparation of Corals against Venome taken. ℞. Of Corals well broken ℥ij. Water of Masterwort lbss. Salt Gemme, white Vitriol of each ℥ij. digest them for a month in Fire of the second degree; take the Redness and Coa∣gulate it. In Venoms, the Medicament must be with∣out a Body; because Venom is incorporeal: The redness which settles to the Bottom, is the Medicine for Venoms. Preparation in Noises, or Rumblings of the Intestins. ℞. Of Corals ʒvj. Ashes of Roman Cumin, and Beans of each ʒiij. Allom prepar'd, as
much as the weight of all; make a mixture, which digest with lbss. of Alcohol of Wine dryed for the space of two or three days; then dry the matter. This is all over yellow. This preparation of Corals must be used with Diacumin: And the Bloody Colour proceeding from the pre∣pared Corals, Separated and dryed. Preparation of Corals against Witchcraft, Dumpish∣ness, Fear, and Melancholy. ℞. Of Corals ℥iij. Viscus Quercinus (or Missletoe of the Oak) St. Johnswort of each ℥iv. Storax Calamita, Laudanum, Gumme of each ʒjss. Urin distil'd lbij. make decoction in a close Vessel for one Day and Night; then distil, and cohobate, afterwards dry as above. Corals thus prepar'd wax Red and very hard; therefore they must be first pulveris'd before adhibited for use. Addition in the Menstrues. ℞. Of these prepar'd Corals, ʒjss. Tansey, Plantain of each ℈jss. Long Pepper, Nut∣megs of each ℈ss. Make a Powder; Dose ℈j. in a rere Egg. It must be Injected into the Egg with Salt, and so Eaten, otherwise it helps not.
Addition against Venomes. ℞. Of the prepar'd Corals ℈v. Treacle, ℥ss. the greater Dock the weight of all, Alcohol of Wine dry'd lbss. digest them for a Week; Dose from xv grains to ℈ij. The party that has drank Venome, must drink this in ʒjj. of Water of Prunella, or Roses, Reiterating his draughts often, until he Sweet and have no more sense of the Evil. Addition in Noyses, &c. ℞. Of the same Corals ʒij. Species of Dia∣cumin ℥iv. the prepared Blood of an Hircus, the weight of all, make Tablets with Sugar; Dose as you please. Hircus with Spagyricks, is a Young Buck Cony castrate, and brought up with Diapho∣retick Herbs; then he is fit for use. Addition in the other four Species. ℞. Of this prepared Coral ʒix. Ostrutium transplanted, that is, Angelica ʒv. Viscus Quer∣cinus ℥jss. make a mixture with Water of St. Johns wort; Dose from ℥ss. This is also an excellent Medicament in the beginning of a Tympany.
CHAP. II. Of the Magnet. The vertue of the Magnet, is in Wounds. Ulcers. with Rases, or Jaggs, & Splin∣ters remaining The Preparation in such Jagged Wounds, and Vlcers. ℞. OF the Magnet ℥i. Calx of Eggs ʒij. make S. S. S. and Reverberate it for one Day and Night, in Fire of the fourth de∣gree: Then remove the Calx of Eggs. Another Preparation. ℞. Of the Magnet ℥j. Calx of Eggs ℥vj. make S. S. S. in a Crucible; and Reverbe∣rate for one Day and Night in Fire of the fourth degree; then Extract and it will be prepar'd. Otherwise not being prepar'd, it in bruising looseth the true Efficacy of Extracting. But being first prepar'd, and afterwards beaten, and mixed with an Appodeltoch, it egregious∣ly operates.
Addition in the aforesaid Wounds and Ulcers. ℞. Of this Magnet ℥ss. Amber ℥ij. make a subtile Powder, which incorporate with an Oppodeltoch, or Apostolicon Plaister, stiring it strongly. This Plaister apply'd, extracts Splinters of Bones, and Bullets out of Wounds and other Ulcers. If you beat the Magnet before it is prepar'd, the virtues thereof will be Lost, (as we above mention) for without preparation it is of no effect. CHAP. III. Of Gemms. The Cristial hath this nature, viz. being drunk by Women, it generates Milk in them a∣boundantly. The Preparation of Gemms is fourfold; the First by Reverberation; the Second by Calcination; the Third by Elevation; and the Fourth by Distillation. One Woman hath need of more then a pound of Crystal (unprepar'd) before she can per∣ceive the encrease of her Milk: Therefore it will be very expedient to prepare Cristal before it be exhibited.
Reverberation of Crystal. ℞. OF Crystial lbj. Water of Entali lbi make a mixture by Imbibitions; the Reverberate the whole for twenty four hours so, of lbj.℥iv. will be left; Dose ʒij. Calcination of Crystal. ℞. Of Crystal ℥iv. Mastick, Colophony, Sulphur of each ℥ij. Calcine the whole in Fir of Athanar; Dose ʒj. Elevation of Crystal. ℞. Of Crystal ℥j. Salt Armoniack ℥iij. re∣duce them to Powder, which put into a sub∣liming Vessel, and give Fire of sublimation. This Sublimation must be reiterated five or six times, and the Crystal always taken out then, ℞. Of this elevated Crystal ℥ss. Common Water distil'd ℥iv. reduce it to an Alcali▪ Dose ʒss. Distillation of Crystal. ℞. Of the elevated Crystal ℥j. Water o Nitre and Allom (made) without distillation of each ℥ij. digest all together for three or four Days; then distil, and what shall be distil'd Coagulate; the Coagulum resolve.
Coagulation must be made over a gentle and small Fire: I this Coagulate be set in a Cellar, it will resolve into Water, which is the Ulti∣mate preparation of Crystal; Dose ℈j. After this manner as is now shewed in Co∣rals, all other pretious Gemms, are to be pre∣pared. The greatest virtue of the Rubie is in the Dysentery, and its dose is ℥j. it be crude; But if Reverberated; then its dose is ʒij. If Calcin'd, the dose is ʒj. If Sublimed ʒss. And if distil'd but ℈j. Also Granates so distil'd make the most powerful Collyrium for the Eyes. Emralds, if prepar'd by distillation, profit or Pore-blind Haemoptoicks. Saphyres if prepar'd according to the Third, or Forth preparation; takes away Trembling of the Heart, especially, if distil'd (Dose, grans v.) they remove the Synthena, and Palpita∣tion. The like is to be judged of other Gemms. Bartholomeus Anlicus, hath writ more touching Gemms, and Pretious Stones. Additions, for encreasing Milk by Crystals. ℞. Of this prepared Crystal ʒij. Sperma Cae∣ti, seeds of Lettice of each ʒivss. make a Pou∣der, which administer with Water of Al∣monds.
Addition of Granates, in the Haemoptoick passion, and Trembling of the Heart. ℞. Of Granates ℥ss. Epatick Aloes ʒiij. Sul∣phur prepar'd ʒjss. make a mixture with cla∣rified Sugar; Dose ʒij. This Medicine must be used continually unto the Fifth Day, least the trembling of the Heart return again. Addition of the Saphyre. ℞. Of the Saphyre ʒiij. Amber dissolv'd ʒjss. Storax Calamita ℈j. make a mixture; Dose from ℈j. to ℈jss. The Emrald Comforts Women in their do∣lours; and is in those Distempers a principal Arcanum; if prepared by distillation, as is shewed of Crystal. Its Addition is thus. ℞. Of this prepar'd Emrald ℈j. Liquor of Bawm ʒj. Sothernwood ʒij. make a mixture, Dose from three to six drops. Addition in the Prepared Jacinth. ℞. Of Jacinth prepar'd ℈jss. Laudanum, that is, Gum ℈jss. make a mixture. This is an excellent Arcanum in Fevers arising from putrefaction of Water and Earth.
If Fevers of this kind be familiar; let the Pa∣tient drink five, or four drops in the new of the Moon: Then he may be sure not to be molested with such a Fever, if he use this twice a Year, and always in the new of the Moon.
Treatise the Fourth. CHAP. I. Of Salts. Of Salt Gemme. Of Salt Entalick. Of Travellers Salt. Of Salt Nitre. Of Salt Anatron. Of Salt of the Earth. Of Alloms, Vitriols, and Alcali. All Salts are from the Element of Water, as all are from the Element of Water also. Of Vitriol. The virtues of Vitriol, are in Species of the falling Sickness. Suffocations of the Matrix. Siphita Stricta, or Nightwalkings. Gutta, and Plthorick Bodies. Preparation of Vitriol in Species of the Fal∣ling Evil, as in the Analency, Catalency, Epilency, &c. ℞. VItriol of Copper lbj. separate the Phlegm there from; then revert its own Phlem upon the proper Colcothar; di∣stil
it, and repeat the distillation in Fire of the fourth degree; Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j. before and after the Fitt. If the Disease arise from the Element of Vi∣triol, the cure must be made by Vitriol: The Falling Evil is in the Salt of Vitriol: Where∣fore in the Day of the Fitt, and before the Fitt come, the Medicine must be exhibited. The Epilepsy is a Mineral Disease, and the whole cure thereof is also Mineral, in Salts and Spirits of Vitriol, exhibited before and after the Fitt: Before the Fitt the Body is in an Ebullition: After the Fitt the Patients sleep; therefore immediatly after sleep, before that Ebulition be totally ended, the Medicine is to be given: For when the Body is sound, that will be to no Purpose. Preparation of Vitriol in Suffocation of the Matrix. ℞. Of Vitriol purged from its Phlegm, and Colcothar ℥ij. Peneroyal ℥iv. Alcohol of Wine ℥ss. distil them; Dose from ℈ss. to a scruple. This is a most powerful Medicament in Suffocation of the Matrix. Preparation in the Gutta, and Siphita stricta. In the Gutta. ℞. Of the aforesaid prepar'd Vitriol ℥ij. Alcohol of Wine ℥ij. Allom, Ja∣menum ℥ss. Mix them and reduce the Mix∣ture into Liquors by Fire of the fourth degree;
Dose Externally ʒss. but Internally, from six to nine grains. Externally is upon the place of the Syntheo∣ma; and that place is where the Disease be∣gins, that is, in the Pulse; this is the Synthe∣oma thereof: But if the Sick walk in his sleep, the Medicament must be bound to his Neck, and Wrists. In the Lesser Siphita, this truly is a Medi∣cine; but in the Siphita stricta, or Chorea vi∣ti, it is not a Medicine in the Gutta, the Medi∣cament must be administred to the forepart of the Tongue: Therefore if the Palsy be conco∣mitant, the Medicine must be applyed to the Mouth and Tongue: And this will be an effe∣ctual Remedy. Addition in the Epilency, and Species of the Falling Evil. ℞. Of this prepar'd Vitriol ʒj. Liquor of Viscus Quercinus, and of Horizon of each ℈ss. and 3 grains, make a mixture. The Syntheoma of the Falling Evil is in the Nape of the Neck: In young Men, to anoynt the Nape of the Neck after the Fitt with fatness of Castor is very profitable. Addition in Siphita strictta. ℞. Of this prepar'd Vitriol ʒj. Seed of St. Johnswort ℥ss. Amber 6 grains, make a mix∣ture.
Seed of St. Johnswort removes the Siphita Stricta. Addition in Suffocation of the Matrix. ℞. Of this Liquor of Vitriol gran. 7. Granes of Actes ʒj. Alcohol of Wine to the weight of all, make a composition. The place is the Navel, therefore it must be there applyed. If the suffocation be attended with Vomit∣ing, other Medicaments are also to be used In∣ternally, &c. The best preparation of Vitriol is, that it be separated from its Colcothar; then that Alcohol of Wine be addd to it in equal weight. This being done, put parched Bread (viz. Bread so dryed, and Hardened, as it may in a Mortar be ground to Powder) into the Liquor of Vitriol, then digest both together in Horse∣dung, for a Month Afterward by distilla∣tion seperate the Vitriol from the Bread. Last∣ly, separate the Alcohol from the Vitriol by a Baln. of the first degree. If the Vitriol have lost its acidness, it is of no effect.
CHAP. II. Of White Vitriol. The virtues of White Vitriol are, in The Exteriors of the Eyes. Neutha. This when a little Skin growes either in the Eyes, or Ears of Children in the Birth. Neutha, are little Skins in any part growing from the Birth, as in the Face, the Matrix, the Mouth, the Eyes, c. White Vitriol is a principal Medicament in the Neutha, and for the exteriors of the Eyes. The Preparation for Exterior dolours of the Eyes. ℞. OF white Vitriol ℥v. Oyl of Soot ℥ss. Oyl of Campher ʒij. putrefy these in Horsedung for a Month; then distil per descen∣sum. Oyl of Soot is made, by putting Soot upon a Red-hot Iron-plate; for then, a certain fat∣ness ariseth and is left on the Plate round about; this is the Oyl of Soot, for Exterior dolours of the Eyes very profitable. If a thin Skin from the Birth grow over all, or any part of the
Eye; then you must use, and most exactly mix it with water of Eyebright, Roses, or Fen∣nel; with these Waters that Oyl must be rarefyed. Preparation of Vitriol in the Neutha. ℞. White Vitriol ℥j. Oyl of Tartar, ʒvj. Oyl of Tiles ʒv. distil them together. Note, no Corrosion, or Erosion of the Neu∣tha must be used. Addition for Exterior dolours of the Eyes. ℞. Of the prepar'd Vitriol ℈j. Liquor of Eyebright ℈ij. Red Poppy ʒj. make a Colly∣rium. Addition in the Neutha. ℞. Of this prepar'd Vitriol ʒss. Liquor of Henbane ʒij. Oyl of Nutmegs granes vij. make a Collyrium.
CHAP. III. Of Roch Allom. The virtues of Roch Allom are, in Cavernous Ulcers. Scab, and Itch. Estiomenes. Putrid, and lascivious Ulcers. Humid Ulcers. The first Preparation of Allom for all these Ulcers. ℞. OF Roch Allom lbij. white Vineger lbss. Salt fuse, one verto (alias ℥iv.) by boyling make a mixture in form of a Coagu∣lum, which distil. If Cavernous Ulcers be wash'd with this pre∣par'd water, they are perfectly cur'd; but if by this Remedy they receive not curation, they cannot be healed by any other. Another preparation for all these Ulcers. ℞▪ Of Allom lbx. Juice of Selendine, Plan∣tain of each lbj. Featherfew lbss. distil all toge∣ther. Then ℞. of this distil'd Water lbj. and of common Water lbx. make a Lixivium.
The use of this is by washing therewith very hott the effected parts, either in the Alopecia, Tinea, or Ulcers. CHAP. IV. Of Plumose Allom. The virtues of Plu∣mose Allom are, in The Palsy. Lethargick disease. Stupefied Members. The Preparation of Plumose Allom in the Palsie. ℞. PLumose Allom ℥vj. Colcotharine re∣solv'd ℥ivss. Salt Armoniack ʒiv. Re∣solve these. An insensive virtue ariseth from Plumose Allom; therefore this is the best Medicament in the Palsie. Addition in the Palsie, Lethargick disease, and Stupefied Members. ℞. Or this prepar'd Allom ℥j. Sanguis Dra∣conis ℥iij. Liquor of Mummy ʒviJ. reduce it to the form of an Unguent. The place is in the Hinder part of the Head, in the Nape of the Neck.
CHAP. V. Of Entali. Its virtues are, in Fluxes, & Hemroides. The Preparation in Fluxes, and in Hem∣roides. ℞. COmmon Tartar, Entali of each ℥ij. Amber ℈j. Mastich ℥ijss. Reverberate them in Fire of the second degree; then reduce to an Alcal. The Place of Fluxes is in the Navel; in the Hemroides the place is in the Backbone. Addition in Womens Fluxes. ℞. Of this prepar'd Entali ʒj Bolus adust ʒiij. Haematis corrected ʒjss. make a mix∣ture. Addition in the Hemroides. ℞. Of this prepar'd Entali ʒiij. of Corals prepar'd ℈iv. Oyl of Nutmegs enough to re∣duce them to the form of an Unguent.
CHAP. VI. Of Salt Anatron. This Salt growes in Rocks, and is very like Usnea: This Usnea if decocted becomes a Salt, which is Fel Vitri, or Glasgal. Its virtues are, in Fistula's. Cintilla. (Diarrhaea.) Scrophula's Cintilla is from the Diaphragma, and the cure of it is pure Anatron. The Preparation in Fistula's, Cintilla, and Scrophula's. ℞. ANatron ℥vj. (alias ℥j.) Ashes of Beans ℥ij. Calx of Eggshells ℥iij. Reverbe∣rate these for twelve hours in Fire of the fourth degree; then extract an Alcali. Anatron mixt with the grease of an Hart, is effectually against Cintilla. Anatron hath in it self a volatil Mercury, which we ought to correct, for by that correc∣ it is rendred much more efficaciou: This rection is thus made.
Addition in Fistula's, Cintella's, and Scrophula's. ℞. Of this Anatron ℥ij. Crude Butter ʒiv· Pinguedo Murmetorum ℥iij. make an Un∣guent. There is not a better Unguent, then this, for Fistula's, Cintilla's, and Scrophula's. CHAP. VII. Of Salt Gemme. Salt Gemme by Spagyricks is called, Salt gra∣nate, and Salt Lucidum. Its virtues are Laxative of the acute Salt, that is of Coller, and tke like. Coloquintidi. Curative of the Jaundies. Curative of the Citrine Dropsy, and dolours supervenient from putrefi'd Blood. The Preparation of Salt Gemme for the Dropsy, and Jaundies. ℞. SAlt Gemme, juice of Tithymalus, that is, the lesser Spurge of each ℥j. Gumm of Cherritrees, to the weight of both; make a
Bolus, which Reverberate in Fire of the third degree for two hours: Extract an Alcali, Dose from 8 grains to 12. Instead of Diagridium, you may use and add Troches of Alhandal. An Addition. ℞. Salt Gemm ℈ss. Rebotium (that is, true Mummy) Liquor of Centory of each ℈iv. make a Composition, of which the Dose is from 4, or 5 grains to 10, or 12 in an Egg. Preparation of Salt Gemm in the other Diseases. ℞. Of this Salt Gemm ℥j. juice of the grea∣ter Spurge ℥ij. Wheat Flower ℥iij. make Bread of it, that is, Bake it, Dose from ʒj to ʒij.
CHAP. VIII. Of Travellers Salt. Its virtues are In comforting Digestion in the Sto∣mach. Against Infection of the Aire. Against future Imposthumes. The Discription of Hermes. ℞. SAlt Nitre fuse, Salt Gemm of each ʒj. Galangal, Mace, Cubebs of each ℈j. make a Powder, Dose 3 grains in the Morn∣ing. He that useth this Salt on the Sea Vomits not, Also in the Aged it is conducent to long Life The Preparation of Travellers Salt. ℞. Of this Salt ℥iij. Alcohol of Wine dryed lbss. Extract the Alcali. Of this Alcali, ℞. ℥j. Liquor of Juniper berries one Kist. Com∣pound them, Dose one grane. Thus have you the Preparation, and Addi∣tion of Travellers Salt.
CHAP. IX. Of Salt Nitre. The virtues of this Salt, are in The Pleurisy. Cavernous Ulcers. The Preparation in the Pleurisy. ℞. SAlt Nitre lbss. Crud Tartar lbj. distil them by Alembeck, Dose from ℈j. to ℈jss. in Fountain Water, or good Wine; Morning, Evening, and at Midnight. It must be given often. It purgeth by Urin. The Preparation in Cavernous Ulcers. ℞. Nitre, Allom of each lbss. Fountain Water lbij. distil it into a Water. Addition in the Pleurisy. ℞. Of this Nitre ℈ij Aqua Regis ℈ss. Alco∣hol of Wine dryed ʒv. make a mixture, Dose from ʒss. to ʒjss. Addition in Cavernous Ulcers. ℞. Water of Plantain, Selandine, Oak Leaves of each lbjss. make a Lavament for the Legs, that is, for dolours of the Leggs.
Treatise the Fift. CHAP. I. Of Metals. Of Gold, Silver, Tinn, Copper, Iron, Lead, Mercury. Of Gold. The virtues of Gold are, in The Palsy, Synthena, Fevers, Trembling of the Heart, Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, Affects of the Lungs, and Acute Diseases. The Preparation for the Palsy, Trembling of the Heart, and Synthena. ℞. GOld pure, and perfectly well purg'd ʒij. Water of Salt Gemm ℥vj. Incorporate them that they may be one, make separation with Alcohol of Wine. Then ℞. of Saffron ʒij. Alcohol corrected ʒvj. make a mixture; Dose from 3, or 4 grains to 6.
Preparation in Fevers and acute Diseases. ℞. Of leaf Gold Liquefied with Water of Hony ℥j. Alcohol of Wine ℥ij. make separa∣tion from the Hony; Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j. Preparation in Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, and Affects of the Lungs ℞. Of Gold extinct in Water of Selandine ʒxiij. Indian, and Chebul Myrabolans of each ʒj. digest them for a Week, then seperate the superfluous Wateriness; Dose from ℈j. to ʒj. Addition in the Palsy, Trembling of the Heart, and Synthena. ℞. Of this prepar'd Gold ℈j. Water of La∣vender corrected with Alcohol of Wine, and Spike of each ℥j. Dose ℈j. Addition in Fevers, and acute Diseases. ℞. Of this prepar'd Gold ℈iv. Jucies of Centory, Sage of each ℥i Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j. Addition in Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, and Af∣fects of the Lungs. ℞. Oyl of Nutmegs ℥ss. Oyl of Cloves ʒj. of this prepar'd Gold ℈j. Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j.
The Description of Water Salt Gem. ℞. Salt Gem lbss. Rain Water lbj. distil them by Retort until the whole substance of the Salt be consumed. Purgation of Gold. ℞. Gold ℥ss. Antimony ℥ij. or ℥iij. melt them to a Regulus: This way the Antimony assumes all impurity, and the Gold resides in the bottom purefi'd. CHAP. II. Of Silver. The virtues of Silver are, in Dolours of the Brain, Spleen and Liver. Retentio of Fluxes. Preparation in Dolours of the Brain, Spleen, and Liver. ℞. SIlver beat into small thin Plates ʒiij. Salt Gem ʒvj. make S. S. S. and in Fire of the fourth degree, Reverberate for 24 hours, then extract the Alcali.
This Alcaly must be infused in Wine, sub∣limate (or rich Wine) for 3, or 4 Days; in which time the Silver will be like the Wine it self: Afterwards evaporate the Wine, and the Alcoli will reside in the bottom, which be∣ing  into a Glass, and that set in a Cold place,  resolve into Liquor; Dose from 5, or 6 grains to 12. Preparation in retention of Fluxes. ℞. Silver filed ℥j. Reduce it to a Calx with Aqua Regis of this Calx, ℞. ʒij. of Crude Tartar ʒiv. then Reverberate in Fire of the fourth degree, and extract the Alcali. A Description of Aqua Regis. ℞. Nitre, Allom, Vitriol of each lbss. distil them to a sweet Water. The way of Extracting the Alcali. ℞. Of this Silver, q s. Alcohol of Wine, Water of Selandine of each ℥x. make Extracti∣on as above; Dose from ℈j. to ℈jss. If the Flux come forth Red, or with it a Redness be, it is a sign it may be reteined; wherefore then ʒj. of this Water is to be drunk by the Patient.
A Preparation of Silver, for all the Abovesaid Affects. ℞. Silver in thin Plates ℥j. Sulphur purg'd ℥iv. Rosin of the Pine ℥ij. make a Bolus, to which set fire, that it may burn, and with Fountain Water compleat the Preparation; Dose from ℈j. to ℈jss. This preparation is profitable in all the a∣foresaid: But the other is more efficatious. CHAP. III. Of Tin. The virtues of Tin, are in The Jaundies. Asclitis. Wormes. The Preparation in the Jaundies. ℞. TIn calcined lbj. Salt ℥vj. Ashes of Beans, lbss. Reduce them to a Lithargiry by Fire of Reverberation. Of this Lithargiry ℞. ℥x. Alcohol of Wine lbss. After resolution, reduce to an Alcali; Dose from 6 grains to 10, or 12. Preparation in the Asclites. Tin purged ℥j. Antimony ℥ij. Limatura Ci∣neri
℥iij. reduce to a Calx by Reverberation for 24 hours. Then of this calcined matter ℞. lbj. Alcohol of Wine lbjss. reduce to an Alcali; Dose from ʒj. to ʒjss. Preparation in Worms. ℞. Tin ℥iij. common Salt ℥iv. Asphaltum ℥j. make a Powder with adustion; Dose from ʒss. to ʒiij. Addition in the Jaundies. ℞. Of this prepar'd Tin ℈iv. Alipta Mus∣cata ℈j. Bdellium ℈ij. Dose from ℈j. to ℈ijss. Addition in Asclites. ℞. Of this prepar'd Tin ʒss. Sanguis Draco∣nis ʒij. Liquor of Mullein ℥j. make a mix∣ture; Dose ℥ss. Addition in Worms. ℞. Of this prepared Tin ℥j. Seeds of Colo∣quintida, Plantain of each ʒvj. make a Pow∣der; Dose from ℥j. to ℥jss.
CHAP. IV. Of Copper. Its virtues are, in Ulcers. Wounds. Wormes. Ulcers of the Mouth. The Preparation in Vlcers. ℞. OF Copper lbj. unripe Grapes lbv. Vi∣neger lbj. digest them in a close Vessel for a Month: Then wash the digestion, and reduce to a Salt Alcali. This is Viride Aeris in Ulcers. Preparation, in Wounds. ℞. Copper lbss. Turpentine distil'd lbj. common Salt ʒj. Vitriol ʒij. make a mixture in a close Vessel for three Months. If you take thin Plates of Copper, and thus prepare them: Thence will be made a most excellent Balsam; if afterward ʒj. of Flos aeris, and ℥j. of common Oyl be taken.
Preparation in Worms. ℞. Venus calcin'd ℥j. Water of St. Johns∣wort, Centory of each ℥vj Water of Plan∣tain, eager Wine of each ℥iv. digest them for seven or eight Days, reduce to Alcali; Dose from ℈j. to ℈iv. or ℈v. Preparation in Ulcers of the Mouth. ℞. Venus Laminate, or Cementate ℥ij. Can∣did Allom burnt, Roch Allom of each ʒvj. di∣stil'd Vineger lbj. make extraction of the Al∣cali for one Day and Night. Addition in Ulcers. ℞. Of this Flos aeris ʒj. Agrippine Unguent ℥j. Earth Worms ʒiij. make an Unguent as the manner is. Another Addition in Common Ulcers. ℞. Of this Flos ʒv. Water of Allom ℥xv. make a mixture in manner of Lavament. Addition in Wounds. ℞. Of this prepar'd Flos ℥j. Oyl of Dill ʒiij. Oyl of Yolks of Eggs ℥j. make a mixture like an Oyl.
Another in Wounds. ℞. Of this prepar'd Flos ʒss. Epatick Aloes ʒj. Liquor of Comphry ℥iv. make a viscous mixture. Addition in Wormes. ℞. Of this Flos aeris ʒj Sugar Taberzet, Juice of Liquirish of each ℥ijss. make a Pow∣der; Dose from ℈ss. to ℈j. Addition in the Ulcers of the Mouth. ℞. Of this prepar'd Flos ℥j. Water of Se∣landine ℥iij. Water of Allom ℥j. make a Gar∣garism, or Lavament for the Mouth. CHAP. V. Of Iron. The virtues of Iron are, in Stiptick. Constrictive. Exiccative. The Preparation in Stiptick virtue. ℞. FIlings of Iron lbj. common Salt lbv. A∣qua Fortis enough for Incorporating, digest all for a Months space; then by Rever∣beration
reduce it to the Form of Powder. Incorporation is made by working the Iron, and Salt with Aqua Fortis, till the whole be like a Poultis. Preparation in Constrictives. ℞. Filings of Iron lbss. Water of Allom lbjss. Vineger distil'd lbss. make digestion for a Month. Afterward, by ablution first, and then by Reverberation, reduce it to the form of a Cro∣cus. Preparation in the Exiccative virtue. ℞ Filings of Iron lbij. Water of Vitriol lbss. digest them for a Month, with Reverberation to the form of a Powder. The Stiptick virtue is that which closeth, and dryeth Fistulas, and Cancers. The constrictive virtue is in the Lientery, Dysentery, and Diarrhaea. The Exiccative is beneficial in Phlegmaticks. Addition in the Stiptick virtue. ℞ Of this Crocus ℥j. Bolus adust ℥iij. Ter∣ra sigilata ℥v. make a Powder. This Powder may be administred for incar∣nating in all Ulcers, and Wounds. If it be in∣wardly taken ℥j. thereof may be drunk.
Addition in Constrictives. ℞. Of this Crocus Martis ʒj. Myrrh ʒss. Oriental Saffron ℈j. make a Powder; Dose from ℈ij. to iij. or iv. Addition in Exiccatives. ℞. Of this Crocus ʒiij. Flowers of Pome∣granate ʒj. Juice of Acacia, to the weight of all, mix all into the form of an Electuary. CHAP. VI. Of Lead. Its virtues are, for Incarnating. The Preparation. ℞. AShes of Lead, decoct it with Vineger for three or four hours. This is the first Preparation. It heales Wounds, Incar∣nates, and generates solid Flesh. Ceruss is also made of Lead, if it be washed with Water, and set in the Sun. Likewise of Ceruss decocted Minium is made. All Medi∣caments in Wounds and Ulcers should be made, and prepar'd of Metals; for so they will be most effectual.
CHAP. VII. Of Mercury. The virtues of Mercu∣ry, or Quicksilver is Jncarnative, & Laxative. The Preparation for Incarnation. ℞. OF Mercury prepar'd into Powder ℥ij. Aqua Regis ℥x. make distillation cer∣tein times in Balu. until it be converted to an Oyl. It incarnates Wounds and Ulcers most spe∣dily. But it hath two Inconveniencies, viz. It excites Salivation, and generates Ceruss: O∣therwise, it quickly, and rightly consolidates. Preparation of Laxatives. ℞ Of Mercury coagulated with the White of Eggs ℥j. Water of Allom ℥vj. distil by Ashes, and make a Powder; Dose from 3 grains to 4 or 5.
In Distempers which arise from Leprous hu∣miidty, as in Pustles, the Palsy, species of Gutta, and in the Humid Dropsy, it is a Po∣tent Purgation. Having now done with the Preparations of Paracelsus, I thought it not amiss to add, his Judgment touching Fevers, Jaundies, &c. as also his Method of Cure. And altho' many a Learned Pen hath perfor∣med the same according to their own Oppi∣nion; Yet I hope I have not Err'd in deli∣vering the Oppinion of Paracelsus: For it will be no great detriment to a Man to Read it over, and if it doth not agree with his Judgment, and Method of Cure, he can but lay it aside, &c. But I hope not but that it will be both Axcepted, and Estee∣med amongst the Ingenious.
Of Fevers. OF Fevers there are four Kinds, Viz. in the Stomach, Liver, Reins, and Extraneus Fevers. Touching Fevers of the Stomach, it is to be noted, that by their Oppilation, and defect of Separation, occation to Putrefaction is given. This Generation is the Infection of the Aire. (of the Body) Now if the Body be infected by the same, it suffers a Trembling; for since the Aire bares not Putrefactions in it self, un∣less it attempt an Egress, by the motion of the Body. (as of the Earth) Therefore all Trimbling is from Putridness, and the motion it self by infection of the Aire. And the infection of the Aire is Cause of the Fitt. Putridness of Tartar is the Feculency thereof. Those things which pass not into Tartar, become Feces, from which the first Febrile Generation, and the first begining of all Fevers, have their existancy. Through vapours generated from the Feces of Tartar, the Aire of the Body is infected. And whilst the Aire is cleansing it self, the Fitt continues, and this is sometimes for twelve hours. But when the Aire is not so strong as to expel the Infection, it recedes and rayseth a Compres∣sion
in the Stomach. Thence it is that the Sick say: the Fitt shakes me not but oppresseth me. But it may be said a Fever trembles every day, and not every other day, &c. What is the cause? It is this, viz. because the Feces di∣gest also, as well as the Stomach, or Liver; and therefore, so soon as they begin to wax hot, a vapour ascends, infecting the Air, as is said, thence is the Trembling. And when the Fe∣ces (of the Tartar) are from Mercury, their digestion is in one day. If from Salts, after the second day. And if from Sulphur, after the third day. Accordingly is the Paroxysm. Signes of Fevers from the Stomach, are these. Compression of the Stomach, Nauseating, a Stinking breath, weakness of the Head, and discoloration of all Members; also strong trem∣bling, and raving after the hot Fitt. Fevers of the Liver. This Fever is an Oppilated Heate, gene∣rated from putrefyed Feces in the Regions of the Liver. For this Oppilation is sometimes in the whole Region, sometimes particularly according to the Place. If of the whole part, then the Tumor is great, and long, and there is Heat of those Members, Deoppilation, but after the stoppage is remo∣ved, then Heats of (the whole) body is present.
But if Locally, then the Trembling soon pas∣seth into Heat, this Oppilation causeth its own Stoppage, and by Trembling breaks and De∣oppilates, sometimes all Obstructions, and al∣so sometimes but a few of them. When it makes a general Deoppilation, then the Fever is more easie. When but in part only, the Fever is more greivous, and undoubtedly is a preparation to the generation of another Di∣sease, &c. But Oppilations are to be Consider'd: For if the Feces shall not be resolved after the cold Fitt, then is to be feared an Increase of these Oppilations, as also a Disease of long Conti∣nuance, and a future Imposthum. Likewise, Swelling of the External parts of the Body, tending inward to the Center, and pricking dolours. Signes of the Disease approaching are: De∣bility of the Members, Discoloration of the Face, Extention and Rigor of the Members; then follows a gentle cold Fitt, but the second Fitt is more strong, and the Third stronger, at no certain hour, but before, or after the for∣mer; then the Heat is long, and the dolour difficult, also the Body consumes, and in the end a Dropsy takes beginning (by reason of the Liver) from Roch-Allom resolved; or the Jaundies is Ripened, by reason of its Region and matter. It very often happens, that the generation, and disease of the first Fever, viz. of the
Stomach, is followed with a second Fever, viz. of the Liver. Now, if the matter of the Fever in the Stomach, was a Tertian, and that of the Liver a Tertian also; these two make a Quotidian. Fevers of the Reines. Fevers of the Reins have beginning from the Feces of Tartar, by reason of Digestion For their is a Trembling in the Reins like a Fever fitt, which assailes the whole Body, by reason of Oppilation. Every Oppilation is a motion of the whole Body, and a consequent corporal Heat, by reason of Vapours passing through all the Pores. The Antients called it the Passion, the Scia∣tica; others, an Erratick Fever; others▪ a Motion or fit of the Stone, &c. Extraneous Fevers, or Fevers of the Blood, &c. A Fever is a putrefied Heat, with tremblings from its own Oppilation, by reason of unse∣questred matter (in the closed Pores) with a stiptick force. These Fevers arise not from Nutriments. The Heat of a Fever is not without Cold: For every Putrefaction gives Heat, Conjoyn'd with some Cold: Such a Cold, the Blood may
also induce, when the peccant matter adheres in the Principle members, then the Fit passeth thoughout the whole Body. This is an Universal Fever; the Particular is, when one Vein only is Feverish. Also from the Flesh, there is an Universal and particu∣lar Fever. It is possible that Tertian, Quar∣tan, Quotidian, and all other Fevers, may a∣rise from the Spleen, and other Principal mem∣bers, as Heart Reins, &c. The Quartan is from Sulphur; the Tertian from Salts; the Quotidian from Allom. Before the Fit begins the Urin of the Sick is Red. Every Material Putrefaction makes its own Oppilation from the Spirit of Salt, with an ingenited Coagulation, passeth by Digestion into Trembling. By the Digestion it may be fore known, how long the Fever will dure. If the Quotidian number concur with a white Colour, six Weeks will be the Period thereof, and sooner it will not be Cur'd: But, if it be exhibited with a green Colour, it will continue 19, 20, or 21 Weeks: If it comes with a Cough, it will be protracted to 7, 8, or 9. Weeks: If it afflict with Tumors of the Feet, it will abide 15 Weeks: If it changeth the number of Fits, as when a Quotidin becomes a Tertian, it will endure a Years spase: But when the number be increased, as when a Quartan becomes a Quotidian, it will continue Ten months: If the Sick have a good appitit to Meat and Drink,
that is a sign the Fever will not be long: But if the appetite of Meat and Drink be decay'd, it more inclines to a Quartan, as is said. It sometimes happens, that (by reason of the Vehemency of the Fit) Blood issues out of the Nosthrils, and goes forth by Urin, some Vein being broak: This is not only a good sign, but is also a Cure of the Fever: But if a Fever in∣vade Diversly, now sooner, then later, that is Erratick, and the worst sign, unless in the time of the Cure, then it is a good sign: When the Fit is unequal, that is to be judged an Evil sign, because by its portended an augmen∣tation of the matter. CURE. Of Fevers of the Stomach, the Cure is two fold, viz. Purgation without Digestion, and Pills of Laudanum, which should be admini∣stred before the Fit: Touching which Purga∣tions, it is to be Noted, that every Evacuative should be disposed, not only downwards, but upwards also: These Purgations with Vomit∣ing, should be Arcanums, not Humorals: For this Tartar is a specifick subject in Arca∣nums, such are Centaury, Hellebore, Spurge, Praeciatus, Siler, Pulp of Coloquiedia, &c.
A Discription of Pills of Laudanum. ℞. Of Laudanum ʒss. Rue, Wormwood of each ʒj. the best Treacle, enough for incor∣poration; Dose v. granes and not more: Also in the beginning of these Fevers Nectar should be administred with corrected Wine. &c. Cure of Fevers in the Liver. This Cure consists in Three things, viz. First, In Deoppilating. Second, In Cleansing, that is in Purging. Thirdly, In Comforting the Member and restoring it. For a Fever of the Liver, of what Species soever. ℞. Samach, that is, Tartar, &c. Distil and make an Oyl. For Cleansing, ℞. Centaury, Leaves of Hellebore, &c. For Re∣storation, ℞. Liquor of Laudanum, q. s. Cure of Fevers of the Reins. The Fever of the Reins is most Perillous, and from the Oppilations arise Prickings in the Hip; Thence also wringings in the Belly, Dolours of the Head, and Back-bone, some∣times the feet Swell, the Spleen is affected, the the Urin is altogether Red, and usually a Quartan Fever comes from the Reins. This must be Cur'd by Purgation; but Purgation
must not be attempted, unless with Arca∣nums. A Description in all Fevers of the Reins whe∣ther Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan. ℞. ALcoli of Snailes ʒj Crystal well beaten and Calcin'd, ʒss. Mummy ℈j. make a Pouder; Dose the whole. Another. ℞. Liquor of Laudanum, ℈j. Saffron gr. iij. (alias ℈iij.) Epatick Alloes ʒiij. make Pills with Water of Wormwood; Dose gr. vij. Another. ℞. Alcoli dissolv'd from the Calx of Absin∣thium ʒss. Oyl of Colcothar, ℈j. mix these, minister all before the coming of the Fit. Cure of Fevers of the Blood, or Extraneous Fevers. FEvers arising from the Blood have their cure from themselves, viz. the Sick are cured either by the bursting of a Vein, or by cutting a Vein, therefore, when the Disease proceeds
from the Spleen, the Vein Salvatella must be Cut. When of the Heart, cut its Vein. When in the Lungs, cut the Vein of the Lungs, and so of the Liver, &c. In a Quartan, if the Urin be White, make Scarification in the Backbone, and when the Disease ariseth from the Reins, cupping Glasses must be apply'd to the Leggs. If the Veins of the Temples, and the Pulses bee anoynted with Castor, Pepper, Ginger, &c. they Cure the Fever of the Blood▪ But if the Fever be not cured by Phlebotomy, and the Patients Leggs swell, then proceed to the Following Cure. ℞. Of Alcohol of Wine dryed, and pre∣pared from the Ashes of Beans, q. s. Leaf Gold as you will; digest these for a Month; of this Liquor give 3 gr. with ℥j. of water of Endive, or Purcelane, before, ater, or in the Fit. Another. ℞. Of white Corals ℥ss. Alcohol of Wine dryed ℥x. digest these for a Month, of this Li∣quor separated, ℞. vj. or vij. gr. with the aforesaid Waters, before, in, or after the Fit. Another. ℞. Of Hony Liquifi'd ℥xv. Leaf Silver ℥ij. digest these for a Week; of this Liquor sepa∣rated from the Hony, ℞. ℈ss. with xv. gr. of Oriental Saffron before the Fit.
Another. ℞. Alcali extracted from Citrons ℥xv. wa∣ter of the White of Eggs ℥iij. Pearls not board ℥ss. digest these for a Month; then of this juice separated, give vj. gr. with water of Valerian before the Fit. Tartarous Medicaments help not in these Fevers. Alcohol of Wine dry'd, is when the super∣fluity of Wine is Removed, and the burning Wine remains, &c. Of the Jaundies. THe Jaundies (as it is commonly cal'd) in no wise draws its original from Nature, but from a Compounded matter, nor are you to think, that there is an Essential Citrine (o Yellow) colour in Nature, or in the Humain Body; but much rather, that this Commixion is borrowed from a threefold Salt, no other∣wise, then as the Aliment, which is compound∣ed, receives its Blackness from Three things, viz. from pure Vitriol, Entalick Salt, and Liquid Sulphur. Therefore, when these three agree in one, they give begining to the Jaun∣dies, and induce a new colour. Whence it highly concers a Physition to
know, that such great defilings, and discolo∣rations of the Skin, come not from Nature, according to a Local sence. For the Spearm it self, or the first constitution of Man, hath not essentially produced any such thing▪ I deny not, but that all Colours of every kind are con∣tained in the Humain Body, but so diffused, as I cannot grant, that they visibly appear in their substance: Rather say, they are dispers'd here and there throughout the whole Body, so, as in that dispersion, none is wanting, &c. We utterly disown their oppinion, who imputes this Disease to the Gall, and in their Books have dared to affirm, that in the Gall is so much purulency, as that it should disco∣lour the whole Man; For by the aforesaid it is sufficiently evident, that neither Diseases, nor Colours have existance from the Gall, but the Cause of the Disease, is rather from a Compo∣sition of the three Species (aforesaid) which Colour the Body, and this according to the subtilety of the Colour of every of them, &c. First, The Citrine or Yellow) Jaundies hath being from Vittiol, Entalick Salt, and Liquid Sulphur. Secondly, The Black Jaundies, from Enta∣lick (or Mysan Salt) Vitriol and dissolv'd Sulphur. Thirdly, The Red Jaundies, from all the six aforesaid. Fourthly, the Pallid (or Blewish) Jaundies from (Allom) Scissum, Mercurial Liquors▪ and white Vitriol.
Lastly, We believe (and it is in Natures power) that even from one Species, by the power of Transmutation, all these Colours may be made. For we know the wonders of Nature, in her Industry, and innate Artifice. Note, every Colour is Corrosive, and resolves whatsoever adheres to its Body; But the Enta∣lick Salt is sharp in the Blood. Signs of the Yellow Jaundies approaching, are these, First, a most White and Watery Urin, Then Redish, Lastly, Citrine. Signs of the Black Jaundies are; Prickings in either side, a Skinny Urin, after some days black, lastly, Totally dark. Signs of the Red Jaundies are; Pains of the Head, Swellings of the Leggs, and a Red thick Urin. Signs of the Blewish (which is most rare) are Chaps of the Body, a pallid Urin, after∣wards aqueous, then the whole Body becomes Yellow, lastly, Blewish, and this is followed with Leprosy. The Jaundies is manifold, viz. of the Flesh, Blood, Bones, Marrow, Ligaments, &c. yea of all the Principal Members. Colour of the Face is from the Liver. The Jaundies of the Liver Colours not the whole Body, but makes the Face Pallid, causeth prick∣ing in the Sides, and also inferreth thirst. The Jaundies of the Gall, burns in the Sto∣mach, and causeth frequent Vomiting. The Jaundies of the Reins, causeth pains in
the Thighs, in the Back-bone, and perpetual dolours in the Ossacrum. The Jaundies of the Heart, doth also burn in the Stomach, and the Heart both Swells and Trembles. In the Jaundies of the Brain, the Watery humidity, that drops from the Nosthrils is Yellow: also if the Head be washed with Wa∣ter, the Water becomes Yellow. The Jaundies of the Lungs causeth difficul∣ty of Breathing, Stink of the Mouth, Cough, and a Spongy, Sharp and Yellow Spitting. In the Jaundies of the Spleen, the left Side akes, and in running vehemently pants. In the Jaundies of the Blood, a particular vein Sweats, and the Sweats is Yellow, the Blood also hath Yellow spots. In the Jaundies of the Bones, the Bones are pricked within, and feel as it were the pene∣tration o rigid , &c. The Jaundies o the Marrow is the worst, but it is not a Flux o the Head, as some say, yet generates internal dolours. The Jaundies of the Ligaments, hinders the motion of that particular part, which a De∣coction of Bsilicon applyed to the Ligaments, will shew, if it Extract any ting of a Saffron Colour, or if this inge the Skin ong wise, or far about. The Jaundies of the Flesh is more subtile▪ for it ingeth the Skin, &c.
Precipitation and Suffocation of the Matrix is no other, then the Jaundies of the Matrix. If Women have not laboured with the Col∣lick, and yet be Contracted; and if they have dolours in the Back, and the Menstrues cease, that is from the Jaundies. In the begining of the Jaundies, when it is Local, to remove the Colour, use the follow∣ing. ℞. Century ℥iij. Oriental Saffron ʒj. Myrrh ʒiij (alias ʒss.) Burning Wine ℥xv. (alias ℥v.) Reduce these into an Essence; Dose from ʒj. to ʒiij. these draw the Colour to the Stomach; but Cure not the Disease. Another Description. ℞. Juices of Celandine lbj. Viticella lbiij. St. Johnswort lbss. pure Water enough to make a Bath, by which the Colour is extract∣ed, but the Disease not Cured, because the Species are not yet separated. Another. ℞. The Juices of Celandine, Vervine, So∣thernwood of each lbj. Artiplex lbss. Jassa ℥vj. make a particular Lavament, viz. for one Member as the Legg or Arm.
The following do also extract the Colour from a Member. ℞. Flowers of Celandine, Melilor, Oriental Saffron of each ℥j. Oyl of Myrtles ℥xv. make a mixture by Insolation, then with the same anoint the Member. CURE. A Description for the Jaundies of the Brain. ℞. Anthera is the Cup or Socket in which the Flo∣wer is fixed. ANthera's of Hermodactyles, white Lyllies, Dogsfoot of each ʒj. (℥j.) water of Betony lbss, reduce these into a . Fist shave the Head, then moysten a Cloath in this Essence and apply it; when the Cloth is dry, it waxeth hard, therefore the Labour must be repeated. For the Jaundies of the Heart by which the Pain is removed but not the Tumor. ℞. Anthera's of Oriental Saffron, Rosema∣ry of each ʒij. (alias ʒiij.) Oyl of Angelica ℥iv. Reduce these into an Essate Form, and with the same anoynt the Affected part.
For the Jaundies of the Spleen and Liver. ℞. Oyl of Tamar (that is Tamarine) ℥iij. Oyl of Spike ʒj. make a mixture. For the Jaundies of the Reins. ℞. Anthera's of Crowfoot, Juniper, Calieta Calieta is a Mushrum of Juniper, and is of a Clay Colour. of each ℥ss. make a mixture by Insolation, and apply it to the part affected, by a Cloath moistned in it. For the Jaundies of the Lungs. ℞. Rubarb (alias Reupontica) Iringo (ali∣as Flower deluce) Enula Campane of each q. s. Reduce these into a Liquor; Dose ℈j. and sometimes ℈jss. may be given in Drink every Morning until the Spittle be amended. Against the Jaundies of the Gall. ℞. Anthera's of Centaury, Celandine of each ℥jss. Lignum Gaiacum prepared ℥iij. Dose ʒss. Give this as long as the dolour indure.
The Cure of all the four Species, viz. Red, Black, Yellow, Pallid, or Blewish. Cure of the Red. ℞. LIquors of Myrrh, Frankincense of each ʒj. Juice of Centaury ʒvj. Are Worms breeding between Timbertrees. Assalia's Numb. x. make a mixture in manner of an Electuary; Dose from ʒij. to ʒiv. there is but one only Paroxysm, before which Phlebotomy should proceed. Narcoticks, Cold, Corro∣sive and Fat things must be absteined from, as also Baths: Yet in declination of the Disease, a Fume may be made, of Dware-Elder, Purce∣lane, and Night shade. For Extraction of the Colour of the Red Jaundies. ℞. Liquors of Frankincense, Myrrh of each ʒj. Wine lbiij. Vineger of Roses lbj Boil these to the Consumption of a fourth Part; dip Cloaths in the Decoction, and apply them hot, Repeat this Labour often, until the Swelling and Redness vanish. Cure of the Black Jaundies. ℞. Alcohol of Wine Corrected ℥j Liquors of Myrrh, Frankincense of each ʒj. Juices of
Sage, Time, Epithymon of each ʒjss. make a mixture; Dose from ʒiij. to ʒv. Another. ℞. Juices of Tithymallus, Spurge of each gr. iv. Frankincense, Myrrh of each, ℥ss. good Treacle enough to make a Bolus; Dose from ʒj. to ʒjss. before or in the Fit. For Extracting the Colour. ℞. OF Genesten (or Broom) Anthera's of Crowfoot of each ℥ss. Sejum, juice of Centaury of each ʒiij. Wine and Vineger enough for the decoction: Proceed as in the Red Jaundies. Preservatives in the Red Jaundies. ℞. Of pure Laudanum ʒss. water of Red Corals, Spodium of each ʒss. Liquoris of Frankincense, Myrrh of each ʒiij. Mace, q. s. make a Mass for Pills; Dose gr. iv. Another. ℞. Aloes Epatick, Souccotrine, Frankin∣cense, Mastick of each ʒiij. Alcohol of Wine, Vineger of Roses, Liquor of the Flowers of Mullein of each ℥ij. Dose from ℈j. to ℈iss. these preserve for a Years space, not longer; Phlebotomy must be avoided, because the Cramp Palsy, and Tetanus usually follow.
A Preservative in the Black Jaundies. ℞. OF the Lazurestone, Juice of Mountain Siler of each ʒj. Laudanum prepar'd ℈iv. Oyl of Nutmegs enough for Incorpora∣tion; Dose from ʒij. to ʒiij. Another. ℞. Sanguis Draconis, Tarra Sigilata of each Frankincense, Myrrh, of each ℈iss. Vineger distil'd ʒvj. make a draught to be taken after the Fit. A General Medicine of the Red and Black Jaundies. ℞. OF the an Earth Worm bread from Rains. Worm Tassus ℈iij. Anthera's of Saffron ℈j. of Century ℈jss. Oyl of Nutmegs ʒiij. make a draught. A General Preservative of either kind. ℞. Liquor of Frankincense, Myrrh of each ʒiij. Laudanum extracted, the Worm Tassus of each ℈ss. Oyl of Nutmegs enough to make a Bolus; Dose from ℈j. to ijss.
For the Yellow Jaundies. ℞. Locust, Poplar, Pine, and Turpentine Trees of each lbj. Reduce this into Viscosity, with Wine and Vineger, then ℞. of this Vis∣cosity ℥x. Anthera's of Saffron, Centaury of each ʒij. mix these over a Fire; Dose ʒiij. in water of Celandine. This is to be taken thrice a day, for 6 or 7 days together, until the dolour and Colour pass away. A Description of Celandine against the Yellow Jaundies. ℞. Celandine with the Roots, Anthera's of Oriental Saffron, Flowers of Horehound of each a like quanty. Reduce these into a Li∣quor by included Distilation: Of this Liquor, ℞. ℥iv. of Assalia's Numb. x (alias xv.) make a mixture; Dose one third part to be taken 3 days together; if the Disease pass not away by the use of this; Death is to be fear'd. Another. ℞. Of the Worm Tassus ℥j. choice Rubarb ʒjss. Yolks of Eggs Numb. 7. mix all into the form of a Plaister and apply it to the Place, viz. to the Pit of the Stomach.
Secrets for Cure of the Jaundies, and Fevers. A living Spider inclosed in a Nutshel, and hung about the Neck as low as the Pit of the Stomach, until the Disease pass away, which usually is in four or five days, and then the Spider dies. A Lizard inclosed in a bagg, hath the same efficacy. Also the Dung of a Lizard applied to the lower part of the Stomach in a Cotton Cloath Waxed, takes away the Fever. Likewise, Horsdung made hot in a Frying-pan, if the Patient piss thereon, and the Dung and his Urin be put together into a Bladder, and hung up in the Smoak, the Jaundies will be Cured. All Dungs, or Excrements being drunk do Cure: So doth Album Graecum. Rubarb is an Arcanum in the Jaundies, if the same be Corrected and amended diligent∣ly, in this manner reduce Rubarb (imbibed in Oyl of bitter Almonds) into a Bolus; which inclosed in a Glass, expose to the Sun for some time; then it will be turned into an Oyl, first Yellow, Afterwards purplish; which seperate from the Feces by Expression; Dose ℈j. every day once, for 3 or 4 days together. So also the Rubarb may be macerated in the Waters of Prassium, Horehound, Celandine, &c. and as before set in the Sun.
Cure of the Pallid or Blewish Jaundies. ℞. Antimony lbj. Tartar lbss. Vineger di∣stil'd lbvj. make distillation in B. M. for 6, or 7 hours; Dose from ℥j. to ℥iij. once a day. If this remove not the Jaundies, it turns to a Le∣prosy. Cure of the Jaundies of the Principal Members. ℞. Of the Worms Tassus, Assalia's of each ʒiij. Liquor of the Anthera's of Centaury ʒijss. Water of Celandine ʒiv. or ʒv. make a Potion to be drank. If Sweat be Spontane∣ously provoaked, it is well; if not, add ℈j. of Mithridate for exciting Sweats. If the Di∣sease recede not in two days, it is Confirmed. Cure of the Jaundies of the External Members. This Species of the Jaundies is usually attend∣ed with the following Signes, viz. want of Appetite, burning of the Stomach, the Skin discoloured and Members contracted, as in the Collick; this you shall Cure with the following Unguent. ℞. Oyl of Myrtles q. s. Gum Hederae ℥j. Rosin of Botin (viz. Turpentine) to the weight of all, distil these by Alembeck into an Arti∣ficial Balsam, with which anoint the Members Morning and Evening.
For Comforting the Members. ℞. Mastich, Mansgrease, Yolks of Eggs of each ℥vij. Oyl of Bay-berries ℥x. distil these by Alembeck, and anoint the Members, Mor∣ning and Evening therewith. Bemontine Ser∣pentina performes the same. Cure of the Jaundies of the Back-bone. ℞. Of Assellias lbj. distil these by Alembeck, afterwards, ℞. Oyl of Myrtles, Dill of each ℥iij. make an Unguent without Wax, with it anoint the Back-bone. Cure of the latter Species of the Jaundies, viz. of Precipitation and Suffocation of the Matrix. ℞. Grains of Actis (that is Elder berries) lbj. Wheat flower lbiij. of Nora ℥iv. make it up like Bread, and Bake it, when Baked; Dose from ℥j. to ℥jss. In Precipitation of the Matrix. ℞. Liquors of Amber, Lacca, Manna of each ℥j. Tetra pharmacon ℥ss. mix these and make a Bolus; Dose from ʒiij. to vj. or vij. to be taken Morning and Evening. If these fol∣lowing cure not in three days▪ the Disease is confirmed.
℞ Liquors of Xyloaloes ʒss. Cinnamon, Elder-berries of each ʒij. Seeds of Peony, Rue of each ʒj. make a mixture; Dose ℈j. In the Contracture. ℞ Oyls of Juniper-berries, Guaiacum of each ℥vj. Marrow of an Ox, Fatness of Mum∣my of each lbss. Fox Oyntment lbj. make these up into an Unguent. A General Description, in Suffocation, and Precipitation of the Matrix. ℞. ALcohol of Wine ℥vj. Pearls not bor'd ℥jss. (alias ʒss.) Red Corals ʒj. Li∣quor of Colcothar ℈ij. make a mixture; Dose ℈j. In Precipitation of the Womb, Liquor of Dogs-tongue is an Arcanum, so likewise is the water of Baum, and Baum applyed to the Belly.
Of Madness according to Paracelsus. ALtho' Madness be one only Disease, yet many names have been given to it, both by the Latins, and other Nations; and accord∣ingly various Causes have been assigned there∣unto, none of which are consonant to (or a∣greeing with) Experience, drawn from the very Light of Nature. When a Man having Reason, is depriv'd and spoiled thereof, so, as he cannot imploy the same to those ends for which it was created, but furiously acts, and inconsiderately tumul∣tuates; then is that Man seized with Madness. Indeed many Men are otherwise spoiled of their Reason, as the Possessed, Drunk, Fatuate and Tyrants; which are not to be referred to this Classis. For they are not deprived of Reason from a Disease, but from other Accidents: But those Distempers, of which we now treat, are true Diseases, and naturally arise from Morbifick Causes. Now that we may explain the Cause, it is to be understood. The Reason should be pure and Clean, such as the best Wheat in the Feild is, without Cockle or Darnel. But as among Wheat sown, Tares grow and increase; so also Darnel is bred in the Intellect. In a Natural manner Madness is thus caused, viz. When any thing is extended beyond its
Strength, and Nature, it is broaken. So the Eyes are blinded by beholding the Sun. For unto every Member its bound and Office is assigned, pass beyound these, it cannot, with∣out damage. To speculate beyond Humane Capacity, is to infringe and cast down Reason it self. But there is also another sort of Madness, which proceeding from Elements hurts our Reason, no otherwise, then as you see Fire to rage, and become furious in the Element of Water, and by that excited Ebullition, to cast forth Bubbles, Froath, and Vapour: for our Reason is as a certain Liquid thing, and so be∣comes that Element, in which the Fire exer∣ciseth its power. But by what is this Element broaken? viz. By Fire only: Therefore if, what breakes is Fire, what is broak must be Water. Thus the Body of our Reason is a fly∣ing Water, th highest subtilty of which is a boyling Dew. Therefore the Fire kindling, such Operations are made, as from Fire and Water. Besides these said two Causes of Madness, viz. One, a too great confidence of Strength and Power; the Other, the Operation of Ele∣ments, many other Causes of Madness may be added and commemoraed by other Men; but these can neither find weight, or place, in Phi∣losophy or Astronomy, in which Physick is founded, Yet I own there is another kind of Madness, which ariseth from Meats eaten, as
Lupines inflict Madness, &c. (See Paracelsus's Treatises of Madness; and of Diseases of Mad-Folks.) Also, trouble of mind even to Desparation, may cause Madness; for by this disturbance, they enforce Madness on the Brain. Yet the cause hereof is hidden and Obscure, &c. In like manner some Diseases may induce Madness, &c. But that an Imposthum should cause Mad∣ness, as the Humorists say, is utterly false. For this Imposthum they never saw; and if any should at any time appear outwardly, in a Person that is Mad, then judge, that the same thing, which generated Madness, produced the Imposthum its fore-runner: For the Im∣posthum it self inferrs not Madness, but is e∣qually produced by the same thing, which in∣duceth Madness. He, who suddainly degenerates from his na∣ture, custom, and manners, and is mutable according to the Affections of his mind, not having the use of Reason, but hates and striks Men, crys out and Raves, acting many mad pranks, may certainly be prounced Mad. Also he, who museth and sits quiet and still, not having the use of his Reason, may in like manner be termed Mad: Therefore the diver∣sity of their gestures and manners should be di∣ligently observed, yea, and the Assendant of every hour (which alone infuseth manners) exactly taken notice of, more then those things which are in the Body.
Cure. He, who indeavours Experimentally to cure this Disease, must let pass the Syrups, Purga∣tions, and prescribed Diet of Antient Physiti∣ans; the chief of which are Violets, Roses, Camomil, the Water Lilly and the like. This Disease is familiarly cured by the Adjurers of Divels, altho they themselves well know it is otherwise; in the mean while, they give him other Remedies, by which they expel the Mad∣ness, and then they glory they have cast out the Devil, when as they have only cured that Madness, which afflicted the Man. By these Deceits they gain more, then by their Medi∣cine. Therefore let him, who is desirous of Skill in these matters, learn of those Adjurers, not to cast out Divels, but to cure Maniacks, with sutable Secrets. Medicines taking away Madness are twofold; one Chirurgick, the other Physical. Yet I would have all Men be advised, not rashly to undertake this Chirurgick cure, un∣less by their proper Experience, they be well instructed and skilled in all Accidents, &c. Tke Chirurgick Cure is thus. First, make an Apertion in that place, in which the Madness ariseth; But if you be not certain of the place, then open all Extreami∣ties
in the Fingers and Toes; in the Head also, as far as the Circle, or Circumference of the Center is diffused. This Apertion is twofold. One takes away, and removes the Skin only, that the Flesh under it may be left bear. The other makes an hole, out of which the Eschar falls, and the hole remains. But according to the Condition of the Di∣sease, the following difference must be observ'd. If the Disease be vehement, and frequent, then the first Apertion of the Skin only, is not sufficient for removing the Cause of Madness; but thete is need of the other, which makes a more deep Ulcer. For every Hole hath a cer∣tain power and property of casting out, as an Emunctory. Therefore I here give you the Receipts of Either Apertion. A Receipt of the First Apertion. ℞. Root of Crowsoot, fresh, or imbibed in Vineger, Flowers of Crowsoot, fresh, or im∣bibed ℥j. Fatness of Saraes ℥ss. Cantharides ʒv. Ferment (or Yest) Vineger of each q. s. Beat and sift what are to be beaten and sifted, and mix them into an Unguent, which being spread upon a Cloath, apply it to the Fingers, Toes, &c. And to keep the Cloath moist, moisten it often with Vineger. Let this Plais∣ter
abide on five, or six hours: Afterward remove it, and brake the Bladders, and take away the Skin, that the flesh underneath may be bare. Anothor more gentle to be made at such a time, in which the said Symples cannot be had. ℞. Of the best Aqua-fortis, Sal-Armoniack sublimed ℥ss. Mercury sublimed ʒiij. mix these three, and put them into a Glass, which set over a Gentle Fire, that all may be resolved into the form of Water: With this wash the spaces of the Extreamities five, or six times, afterward let them dry. This being done, the Skin will be removed from the parts, like Dust from Flesh. These Apertions are sufficient for taking off any Skin from the Flesh: And the Blood which flowes out in this Excoriation, doth also help much to diminish the Madness. The Second Apertion. Where the aforesaid Apertion is not Effectu∣al, this Ulcerative may be used. ℞. Sublimate Mercury, pure Arsenick, A∣qua-fortis of each equal parts; mix these into the form of a Cerote, which apply to the Ex∣tremities, until they be benumed, or rendred sense-less. Afterward moysten the parts with some Fatness, that the Eschar's may come
forth. Then use the following Attractive ℞. Galbanum, Opopanax, Serapinum, Bdellium, Ammoniack of each ℥ijss. Dissolve these in Vineger, then strein the Solution, and boil it to a just consistency: Afterwards mix the following Species, first beaten and findly sifted. ℞ Mastick ℥ss. Frankincense ʒij. Amber ʒj. Herb Paris, Cruc. ungulae of each Mss. the Magnet ʒiij. Colophony ʒij. Fernisij (alias Vernix) ʒv. mix all into a Cerote, with which well fill up the holes of the Extreamities; and always renew the dressings so long, as until the Madness be plainly altered, and removed: Afterward consolidate, heal up the holes (with sutable Incarnatives. But touching these Apertives, and Attract∣ives, there is one thing remarkable to be ob∣served; and it is this, viz. that the Aperti∣ons of the Head ought to be, and be made last of all; the Apertions in the Extreamities being first healed up, and Skinned; For then, if ne∣cessity require, you may also open the Center of the Head, and proceed in the aforesaid manner. Also Note: The opening of Veins proper, may here likewise be very conducent. For by such Blood letings the Madness is oftentimes expelled.
The Physical Cure. Now we will speak of the Physical Cure, which is compleated without help of Chirur∣gery. There is a twofold difference of this Cure. One by Cooling, congeals the peccant matter of Madness; The other asswages and mortifies the same. Of things Cooling and Congealing, we first speak. These are either Internal, or external. Of Internals, you have the greatest part alrea∣dy described in Cure of the See the Author's Treatises of Diseases of Mad∣ness. Epilepsy (ari∣sing from Madness.) Nevertheless here take this one Description, the like of which, we have scarsly as yet found. ℞. Oyl of Campher, Oyl of Musk; mix them, and of the mixture give ℥ss. at one time in Drink. For this Medicine wonderfully takes away, and expels Madness, extinguisheth the Burning heat of the Body, and allays the boyl∣ing of the Blood; also it congeals, and com∣pels the matter, no otherwise, then as Cold congeals Water into Ice. Likewise this Oyl may externally be used, by anointing the Tem∣ples and Forehead. Besides this, there are many other Arca∣num's which take away Madness, as Quintes∣sences, &c. every of which per se, by reason of
a singular property, and an insited power of Comforting, may be sufficiently efficacious, for expelling Madness▪ Of this Classes are, Qintessences, of Silver, Iron, Lead, and Mercury. Solution's of Crystal, of Co∣rals, &c. But much more excellent are those things, which are given (as) appropiates against Mad∣ness, such are: Extractions of Campher, of Gold, &c. The other way of Curing, is effected by those things which mortify the Madness, and do moreover so still, and allay the peccant matter of the same, as it thenceforth can no more be perceived. Of this Cure the Remedies also are manifold, as well External as Internal; the best of which are those which are prepared ac∣cording to the Rule of Extracting Quintessen∣ces, as are: The Highest Anodine, Qintes∣sences of Poppy, Mandrake, Loliats, Opiats, and Henbane; Altho all these Remedies be strong and vehement, yet being so purged, and prepared, have no Impurities left in them, by which the Body can be hurt.
The Dysentery, Lientery, &c. according to Paracelus. WHen any thing is Eat, Drunk Dissol∣ved, and not well separated by the Stomach, and so passeth out by Urin, Seidg; or Vomiting, thence is made the Dysentery, Lientery, and Diarrhaea, either of the Urin, Seidg, or Vomiting. It is called a Disease from Dissolution, be∣cause it is dissolved in the first Operation. Dis∣solution and Putrifaction are one Passion, se∣parated from good things. Note, Dissolution is twofold, either by the Stomach, or by Minerals. When the Sto∣mach cannot Digest, then is a Dissolution of the Stomach. The other Dissolution is when the Minerals in the Body are dissolved. For every watery thing admits of resolution. Of the first Species there are three Diseases of Dissolution, or of things Dissolved, viz. Red, White, and Laxate. What is digested and not separated passeth out Red, as by the Fundament Clots of Blood are often expelled. All these proceed from the evil digestion of the Stomach, and the Blood issues not, from any Veins broke in the Body. When any one pisseth Blood, and yet in pissing feeles no pain, nor is pained in his Loins,
Groins, and Back, nor perceives any other Evil, then that he pisseth Blood; that is a Diarrhaea of the Urin, &c. When the Seidg or Stools are White, Froa∣thy as Lime or Chalk, or else have the Co∣lour of the Skin, and are Thin, Viscous, and Flatuous, that is the White Dissolved Disease, and the Stomach is faulty. If by Vomit it pass out white, it is a Diarrhaea of Vomiting. When the Urin is Milky, it indicates the Li∣entry of the Urin; and when without pain, it is the Diarrhaea. The Laxate Disease is, when the Archeity of the Stomach is infirm, and the Stomach operates not, as it ought. When the Patient makes abundance of Urin, and that appears now White, then Red, another time Turbid, and hath no content; then a Flux of the Urin is present. But when much Vomiting is ex∣cited, it is a Flux of Vomiting. Moreover, there are three dissolved Diseases (or Disseases of Dissolution) by Urin, viz. Urin of Blood, a milky Urin, and Mandra∣gorate or Aqueous Urin. Also, there are three dissolved Diseases by Vomiting, as Vo∣miting from what is digested, frequent Vomit∣ing, Vomiting of the Thorax. Mandragorate Urin is, when any one pis∣sing hath no sence at all of his Water passing from him, and voids much Urin, yet feels not that Tickling at its outgoing, which is common to all Creatures by Nature.
Vomiting from what is digested, is, when any one is compelled to Vomit an hour, or two after he hath eaten, and that as often as he eats. Frequent Vomiting is, when a Man per∣petually Vomits. Vomiting of the Thorax is, when any one is constained to Vomit every eighth day, or every two or three days. This Dissolved Disease is such, whether it pass out by Urin, Seidg, or Vomiting. The power and strength of this Disease, are the Accidents thereof. That Species which pas∣seth out by the Fundament, hath four Acci∣dents, viz. the Collick, Gripes, Dolours of the Hips, and Back. That which is by Urin hath three, viz. the Disury, Strangury, and Laxation. And in Vomiting the Accidents come from the Stomach, as bitterness of the Gall, which is made of the great dryness of the Stomack; but Sobbing (or the Hec-cough) comes from the Stomachs Coldness. Therefore the Cure of all these consists in Curing the Stomach, which should be deduced to such a state, as it may digest whatsoever is eat, or drunk; for this end the Archeity of the Stomach must be comforted. And such a Confortation must be procured by Spagyrick Degrees, that the Pure may be separated from the Impure. But in descending to the Cure, such things must be taken, as may Coagulate the Dissolution ℞ Of the seed and Locusts of Filix of each ℥ss. Dragons-blood ℥. Mustard, Crocus of
Iron of each ʒij. Tragacanth dissolv'd in Li∣quor of Plantain enough for Incorporation; Dose from ℥j. to ℥jss. Filix is Dill (alias Tansey). Dragon, is a Coal burning of it self, such are found in Smiths Forges, and in Metal∣lick mines. These Coals are insignized with Red Lines, which are called Dragons-blood. Another Description, in the three Diseases of the first Species. ℞. Oyl of Mars ʒj. Liquor of Orizeus x gr. Liquors of Filix, to the weight of all; Dose from one Goldweight, to one and a half. By this Receipt the Occasion is taken away, and then all Accidents depart of themselves. But if the Dysentry so long persist, as it becomes inveterate, and degenerates into a Chronical Disease, then the Minerals must be comforted by a Laudanum, of which this is the Descrip∣tion. A Laudanum in dissolute deplorate Diseases. ℞. Of Orizeus foliat ℥ss. (Leaf Gold) Pearls not bored ʒij. Asphaltum, Flowers of Antimo∣ny of each ʒss. Oriental Saffron ʒjss. Roman Myrrh, Epatick Aloes of each the weight of all. Reduce to a form; Dose from six, or se∣ven, to ten Granes.
Of the Second Species, or, of the Dissolute Diseases from Minerals. THe Disease dissolved from Minerals, draws its original from three Bodies; the occa∣sion is from Time, but the Cause from the Three first things. The Occasion and Cause is present, when the Minerals are dissolved. The Signs are these. This Dissolved Disease begining, the Patient is troubled with a continual Flux of the Belly, and yet eats and drinks much. He, who goes to Stool often, eats and drinks strongly, and waxeth lean in Body, doth also suffer a dissolution of the Mineral. When the Food is cast out by Vomiting, crude and undigested, that is a Sign of a dissol∣ved Disease from Minerals. A Flux passing out, either by Urin, or Seidg, or Vomit, if no Gripe, Strangury, or other like Sign be present, as in dissolution of the Sto∣mach, nor the bitterness of Gall, by Vomit∣ing; it is a Sign the dissolution is from Mi∣nerals. In a Mineral dissolution, the Blood comes forth by the Fundament more Red, then in the dissolution of the Stomach.
And this Red blood, when congealed, or clotted, passeth out by Urin. For it is con∣gealed in the Bladder, and not before. They who Piss congulate Blood, labour with this Disease. This Pissing is not for a day, or two, but continually. Yet if Blood be not continually Pissed, it is a Sign the Stone is pre∣sent, which hath broak some small Vein. For as the Disease begins, (viz. if any one have six Stools a day at first, the next he hath as many) so it continues, and ceaseth not until it be cured. Congealed Blood passeth out by Vomiting, which also argues a Disease dissolved from Mi∣nerals. Every thing which comes to maturity ob∣tains an Expulsive Virtue; and Minerals, when dissolved, expel themselves. So, Alu∣minous Salt expels it self by Vomiting. The Digestive virtue casts out the Entalick Salt, by the Inferior Parts, &c. In the Cure, care must be taken, to Coagu∣late the Salts by the following Description. A Receipt for Cure of the Dyscentery. ℞. Oyls of Ben, Lacca, and Laca, Liquor of Manna of each ʒss. Leaves of Serpentina ʒvij. Reduce these to a Form; Dose from ʒj. to ʒjss. in Oyl of Lentiscus. Lentisus, and Tamarisk are not one. Lentiscus is Mountain Silver: And what Wood
is taken from the Silver, before any Bark grows thereon. The Disentery cannot be cured with Scam∣mony: For the matter should be coagulated, not purged and constringed. Yet the Stomach must not be coagulated; but the coagulation must be directed to the Members, the Stomach in the mean while resting, viz. until the Salt be coagulated in the Exterior Members. All those things which are prepared of Metals, are Elementated, whether they be Flores, or whatsoever goes forth from the Minerals. These are the Principal in dissolved Diseases, especially they, which arise from the Water, as Talk, Cachimia, &c. These Cure the Dysentery, Lientry, and Diatrhaea. Thus farr Paracelsus. Van Helmont sayth, that the German Soul∣diers infallibly cured the Bloody Flux, or Dysentery, by giving an Hare dryed in the Smoak. Also dipping a Towel in the Blood of an hunted Hare, and when dryed admini∣string it by peices in Wine, Some Have cured the Dysentery. FINIS.
The Conclusion. I Had not any design to Publish this small Tract, especially the First Part thereof, but finding (as the saying is) some to ready to thrust their Sicle into another Mans Harvest, was one reason that mov'd me to it: For I never met with one Man from the Artist to the Bungler, but what pretended to the Species Vitae; if not to them all: But now they may with confidence pretend to them, yet let me tell yee, 'tis not every Fop can be Master of them, and I am fully resolv'd, never to alter or deviate from the Original method, but to prepare them exactly and curiously, with faith∣fulness and diligence, and to keep large Quan∣tities by me, to oblige all those ingenious Men who are pleased to make use of them. Another reason that induced me to Publish this small Treatise was the uncivility I receiv'd from some disingenious Persons (especially one in particular) who was so Foolishly Envious as to insinuate into the heads of some Men that I could not make any of these Medicines here deliver'd: But I think they had more Wit then to believe them, because they knew bet∣ter; but their full design in so doing, a Man of a mean Capacity may easily disearn: Also I did it in Respect to those ingenious Men, who
daily make use of these Medicines, that by knowing the method and manner of prepar∣ing them, they might the better know their Nature and partly to Oblige the Sons of Art, who have taken great pains, and made dili∣gent search after those Medicines, Especially the Species Vitae and Tincturae Regalis; but let me tell you the Species Minor, and Pleura comes not an Inch behind them as to what they are apropriated to. I hope these my small endeavours will be accepted, and receiv'd into the favour and pro∣tection of the Ingenious as a Guift from one of the meanest of its professors, which indeed is the least of my fear, being fully satisfied, of the love such Persons bare to all Novalties, and instead of hindring things of this Nature, they always applaud what ever may be of advan∣tage to the Publick, For it will be very rare if the Reader cannot find something herein that may be serviseable to him. But some my object and say, that the Part of Paraoelsus, is no Novalty, because we have it in the Latin. I answer, 'Tis true, we have it in the Latin Tongue; but there's several Ingenious Men that doth not understand the Latin: For which reason I thought it necessary to add them toge∣ther, in doing which, I hope such will not be offended at it, there being many a score of Cu∣rious Medicines in it; which I hope the Inge∣nious will find of great use and service to them,
to their desir'd success and advantage. Thus much I thought to premise by way of Conclu∣sion, hoping this Tract will find a general ac∣ceptance amongst the Ingenious, which will be an incouragment to me, and may cause me (if a Second Impression should be) to add som∣thing that may be as acceptable as this, if not more. So Gentlemen I leave it with you, wishing you success and prosperity both in your Studies and Operations which is the harty de∣sire of him who is Your humble Servant J. Headrich.
A Catalogue of such Medicine as I have always Ready prepared by me. SPecies Vitae. Species Coroborativa (alias) Pleuretica. Species Minor. Tinctura Regalis. Species Proprietates. Aqua Pestilentialis. Spiritus Vinosi. Absintij. Baccar. Junip. Cochleariae Simp. Chohleariae Purg. Castorei. Crani Humani. Lavandulae. Roris Marini. Oleum Vegatabilium. Absinthiae. Anisi. Aurantiarum. Guaiaci. Succini. Tartari distil. Tartari per del. Extracts. Croci. Resina Jalapi. Resina Scam. Extract. Rutae. Extract. Menthae. Salis Fixi. Absinthij. Artimisiae. Tartari. Tartari Vitriolat. Vitrioli.
Salis Volatiles. Cornu Cervi. Crani Humani. Succini. Urinae. Volat. Oleos. Spiritus Animalium. Corn. Cervi. Crani Humani. Sang. Humani. Sal. Armoniaci. Urinae. Oleum Animalium. Corn. Cervi. Crani Humani. Cerae. Spiritus Acidvegata∣bilium. Aceti. Fuliginis. Guaiaci. Succini. Tartari. Spirit. Acid Salium. Nitri Simp. Nitri Dulc. Salis Com. Salis Dulc. Sulphuris. Vitrioli. Aqua Fortis. Aqua Regis. Prepar. Antimonij. Antim. Diaphoret. Crocus Metallorum. Regulus Antim. Sulp. Antim. Auratum. Tinctures. Antimoni. Benzoinij. Castorei. Croci. Cinamon. Myrrhae. Succini. Salis Tartari. Elixirs. Proprietates Tart. Prop. cum ol. Sulp. Prepar. Sulphur. Bals. Sulphur Anizat. Bals. Sulp. Succinat. Bals. Sulp. Terib. Tinct. Sulphur. Lac. Sulphur.
Advertisements. I Have, with diligence and care invented a Curious Purging Electuary, which is who∣ly Chymical, and I am Certain, never known to the World before. It is certainly one of the most noblest Antivenerial Medicine as ever yet, discover'd to the World, as I have ex∣perienced both on Men, Women and very young Children. It is of a strange Predomi∣nating power in Correcting and Bnting the edges of the Venereal Salts, carrying of the Poi∣son by Stool and Urin, without griping, or offending the Bowels in the least, purifying the whole mass of Blood (with the Assistance of the Tincturae Scorbutica) totally Eredicating the Venomous ferment, causing a good Diges∣tion and Complexion, and Restoring the Pa∣tient to their former Vigor, its not Obnoxious to the Stomach, as most Commonly Clap Physick is, but is very pleasant, &c. Price 10 s. per Ounce. I have also an Infalable Powder for the Cough, Fever, and Pleurisy, &c. It is a most excellent preservative in the Pest, a Certain and Speedy cure in the Pleurisy, and inposthumes of what kind soever: it is a Pre∣servative in all manner of Fevers, it is also, a present help in the Epilepsy, and a Curative in every Cough of what Nature soever, whe∣ther it be newly taken, or inviterate, &c. Price 10 s. per Ounce.
