H1392 12090682 53868
Imprimat. Aphorism, Chymic. Th. Witherly, Praeses Coll. Med. Lond. Censores. Pe. Barwick, Jo. Elliot, Rob. Pitt, Joh. Bateman,
One Hundred Fifty Three CHYMICAL APHORISMS. Briefly containing Whatsoever belongs to the Chymical Science. Done by the Labour and Study of Eremita Suburbanus. Printed in Latin at Amsterdam, Octob. 1687. To which are added, Some other Phylosophick Canons or Rules pertaining to the Hermetick Science. Made English and published for the sake of the Sedulous Labourers in true Chymistry; By Chr. Packe, Philo-Chymico-Medicus. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by W. Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain; and D. Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1688.
To all the Lovers OF THE CHYMICAL ART. Gentlemen, ABout a Month since, I received among some other things, those 153 Chymical Aphorisms, from Am∣sterdam, where they had been newly prin∣ted in Latin, for which end they had been lately transmitted from Vienna, as appears by the Author's Epistle to his Friend. When I had perused and well-weighed them, with that little Judgment I could, I thought that I could do no∣thing more grateful to the Sons of Art, than to Publish them in English, which I have done with all the care and exact∣ness I could. The other 157 Phylosophick Canons I have taken from Bernardus G. Peno∣tus
a portu Aquitano; where they are inserted with 115 famous Cures of Pa∣racelsus, together with Pontanus his Epistle, and some other Phylosophick things, and printed in the Year 1582. Which together make up a Compenatum of the Chymical Art, and may serve the Studious for a vade mecum, or small pocket Companion, with which he may converse in his retirements. That it may be both pleasant and profitable to the Disciples of Hermes, is the only de∣sire of, Gentlemen,  Your ready Servant, Chr. Packe. From my House, at the Sign of the Globe and Chymical Furnaces in the Postern-street, near Moorgate. Decemb. the 8th. 1687.
The AUTHOR TO HIS FRIEND. YOƲ see here, my highly-esteemed Friend, part of a certain Excellent Writing, digested into brief Aphorisms, as a Compendium of all those things which Phylosophers are wont to observe, about the great Work of their Stone: Not that all things are here expounded which belong to the Compleat Description of the Physical Tincture; for there are more things yet behind, with which the Author intends to adorn it; inasmuch as he hath determined to fortifie these Aphorisms which he hath here emitted, from the Au∣thority of the Principal Phylosophers: in which Work he will accurately explain the Similitudes, Figures, and other ob∣scure and confused manners of speaking, which every where occur in the Writings of Phylosophers. That so at length those things which hitherto have been de∣livered
too intricately, and confusedly by most Writers, may appear in some Me∣thodical Order. Nevertheless, the principal scope of this Author, is not so much to expose or set forth his own In∣ventions, as to reduce the valuable Say∣ings of others into order; which he wil∣lingly submitteth to the Judgment and Examination of those, who have made a greater Progress in the Art than him∣self. But although I know this to be the pur∣pose of the Learned Author, nevertheless I chuse rather to transmit this little work to you, imperfect as it is, that you may weigh it, and cause it to be printed, then that the Sons of Art should any longer want this small help; that it may give a light to those who err and go astray in the midst of darkness. And that the Author may judge from the event of this his labour, whether it will be worth his Pains to emit the whole Work to the World. Farewel my good Friend, and let me continue to have a place in your Favour. Dated at Vienna, the 2d. of Septemb. 1687.
CLIII Chymical Aphorisms; To which ay be Commodiously referred whatsoever belongs to the Chymical Science. Aphorism I. ALchymy is the perfect know∣ledge of whole Nature and Art, about the King∣dom of Metals. Aph. 2. Which by reason of its cellency, is called by many other ames. Aph. 3. And was first invented by e Alchemus, as some think.
Aph. 4. And in all times hath bee so highly esteemed by Philosophers, by reason of its great Utility. Aph. 5. That the Adepti being mo¦ved with Pity, would not altogether conceal it. Aph. 6. Nevertheless, they hav delivered it but confusedly, enigma∣tically, and under Allegories. Aph. 7. Lest it should fall into the hands of the unworthy. Aph. 8. But that it should be known to its own Sons only. Aph. 9. With which Sophisters should have no Commerce. Aph. 10. Wherefore this Scienc is the Gift of God, which he bestow∣eth on whom he pleaseth. Aph. 11. Either by the Revelatio of a faithful Friend; or by illumina¦ting the Understanding of the Enqui¦rer. Aph. 12. Who seeketh it by Pray¦er, diligent Reading, profound Med¦tation, and assiduous Labour. Aph. 13. Therefore it behovet
the Studious of this Art, to be of a ure heart, intire manners, stedfast to his purpose, and a Religious keeper of Secrets. Aph. 14. And moreover, that he be indowed with a good Wit, health of Body, and a plentiful Fortune. Aph. 15. Because this Art requi∣reth the whole Man, being found out, possesseth him, and being once possessed, freeth him from every long and serious business, causing him to disregard all other things, and to repute them as forreign and strange. Aph. 16. The parts of Alchym are two, viz. The Theory, and the Practice. Aph. 17. For, seeing that Art can do nothing about Metals, except it imitate Nature; Aph. 18. It is necessary that the Knowledge of Nature should precede the Knowledge of Art. Aph. 19. Alchymy therefore, in re∣spect of the Theory, is a Science hereby the Beginnings, Causes, Pro∣perties
and Passions of all the Metals, are radically known; that those which are imperfect, incompleat, mixt and corrupt, may be transmuted into true Gold. Aph. 20. Seeing that the final cause in Physick co-incideth with the form, the Principles and Causes of Metals are their matter, form, and efficient cause. Aph. 21. The Matter of Metals is either remote or proximate. Aph. 22. The Remote is the Rayes of the Sun and Moon, by whose Con∣course all Natural Compounds are produced. Aph. 23. The Proximate is Sulphur and Argent vive, or the Rayes of the Sun and Moon determined to a Me∣tallick Production, under the form of a certain humid, unctions, and vis∣cous Substance. Aph. 24. In the Union of this Sul∣phur, and Argent-Vive, consisteth the form of Metals. Aph. 25. The which, seeing that it is
various, according to the various manner of the mixture, and the de∣gree of Decoction, hence arise various Metals. Aph. 26. Nature only effecteth this Union in the bowels of the Earth, by a temperate heat. Aph. 27. From the Union of this Water immediately flow forth two Properties or Passions, common to all the Metals, viz. Fusibility and Exten∣sibility. Aph. 28. The Causes of a Metal∣lick Fusibiity are, Argent-vive, as well fixed as volatile; and a volatile Sulphur not fixed. Aph. 29. The cause of Extensibility is the viscousity or toughness of Ar∣gent-vive, whether fixed or volatile. Aph. 30. Metals therefore are Mi∣neral Bodies, of a close and compact substance, and of a very strong Com∣position; fusible, and extensible under the Hammer, from every Dimension. Aph. 31. Which are commonly reckoned six, viz. Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Copper, and Iron.
Aph. 32. Of these, two are per∣fect; viz. Gold and Silver. Aph. 33. The other four are im∣perfect. Aph. 34. Of which, two are soft; viz. Tin and Lead; Aph. 35. And two hard; viz. Cop∣per and Iron. Aph. 36. The Perfection of Me∣tals consisteth in the abundance of Argent-vive, and the Uniformity of the Substance, or perfect union of the principles, which is performed by a long and temperate Decoction. Aph. 37. Hence slow various Pro∣perties or Passions, by which the per∣fect Metals are distinguished from the imperfect. Aph. 38. Of which, the first is, That the perfect Metals easily receive Argent-vive, but refuse Sulphur. Aph. 39. The second is, that they are not burnt, nor inflamed, but suffer the Examen of the Cupel, and of the Cement; or, at least, of the former.
Aph. 40. The third is, that the parts of which they consist, to wit, the moist and dry, cannot be dis∣sipated, severed, or broken by the Fire, which dissolveth all things. Aph. 41. The fourth is, that they suffer the greatest Extension of all the Metals. Aph. 42. The fifth is, that they are the heaviest of all the Metals, Lead only excepted, in respect of Silver. Aph. 43. The sixth is, that being heat fiery hot, they send forth a Sky-colour or Coelestial Splendor; nei∣ther are they melted before they have been some time fiery hot. Aph. 44. The seventh is, that they never contract Rust. Aph. 45. The Imperfection of Me∣tals consisteth in the abundance of Sulphur, and the nonconformity of the Substance; or in the imperfect mixture of the Principles, by too short, or a sudden and intemperate Decoc∣tion.
Aph. 46. By so many Properties or Passions as slow from the Water, the form of the imperfect Metals is plainly diverse from the Properties of the perfect Metals. Aph. 47. The first of which is, that the imperfect Metals easily admit Sulphur, but not Mercury; except so far forth as they differ but little from it, by reason of their imperfect Co∣agulation; of which sort are Tin and Lead. Aph. 48. The second is, that they are burnt and inflamed: Nor do they endure the tryal of the Cupell and Cement. Aph. 49. The third is, that their Essential parts (viz. the moist and the dry) are dissipated and separated by the Fire. Aph. 50. The fourth is, that they are less extensible than the perfect Metals. Aph. 51. The fifth is, that they are lighter than the perfect Metals, Lead only excepted in respect of Silver.
Aph. 52. The sixth is, that being heat fiery hot, they either contract a blackness, or a shining whiteness; and are either melted before they come to be red hot, or afterwards slower than the perfect Metals. Aph. 53. The seventh is, that they contract Rust. Aph. 54. Gold is a Metal most per∣fectly digested, of a yellow colour, mute, and shining; the heaviest of all the Metals, sustaining the tryal of the Cupel and Cement. Aph. 55. Silver is a Metal less per∣fect than Gold, but more perfect than the rest of the Metals; digested, of a pure whiteness, clean, sounding, and abiding the Cupel. Aph. 56. Tin is a soft Metal, im∣perfectly digested, white, shining with a certain Blewness, somewhat soun∣ding, and is the lightest of all the Metals. Aph. 57. Lead is a soft Metal, im∣perfectly digested, livid, mute, and heavy.
Aph. 58. Copper is a hard Metal im∣perfectly digested, of an obscure red∣ness, livid, and sounding. Aph. 59. Iron is a hard Metal, im∣perfectly digested, of an impure whiteness, livid, and growing black, and sounding much. Aph. 60. All the Metals therefore are of the same Original, and arise from the same Principles. Aph. 61. Neither do they differ a∣mong themselves, except in the quan∣tity and quality of their Principles, and their mixture, according to the various degree° of their Coction. Aph. 62. Whence it followeth, that the imperfect Metals have a Disposi∣tion of receiving the form of the per∣fect metals. Aph. 63. Provided they be freed from their Sulphurous and Hetroge∣neous parts, which are the causes of their imperfection, by a perfect De∣coction. Aph. 64. Either by Nature alone, in the Bowels of the Earth, in process of time.
Aph. 65. Or by the same Nature, in an Instant above the Earth, by the help of Art. Aph. 66. By the projecting of a Me∣dicine, which in a moment penetra∣teth and tingeth, the imperfect Me∣tals being melted, and Argent-vive being made hot. Aph. 67. Which transmutation of the imperfect Metals, into perfect; that it is not only possible, Aph. 68. But also true; Aph. 69. Is confirmed by the com∣mon opinion of Philosophers, and by Experience. Aph. 70. And therefore the Stone or Medicine of Philosophers, by which this Transmutation is made, ought to have in it self the form of common Gold or Silver. Aph. 71. For if it should want that, it could not actually introduce it. Aph. 72. Every natural Compound is distinguished from other natural Compounds, by its own particular form, being really and actually distinct
from all other forms of divers natu∣ral Compounds. Aph. 73. Hence, among all Substan∣ces which are determined in one of the three Families of Nature, to wit, the Vegitable, Animal, and Mineral; there is nothing found but common Gold, which actually containeth in it self the form, qualities, accidents, signatures and properties of common Gold. Aph. 74. Wherefore common Gold only will be the only Subject, from which the form of Gold ought to be taken, for the Composition of the Stone of Phylosophers. Aph. 75. Common Gold is only simply perfected by Nature; that is, it hath no greater perfection than it self wanteth, as it is Gold. Aph. 76. And therefore cannot communicate its perfection to other imperfect Metals. Aph. 77. Therefore if we labour in that, that common Gold should in∣troduce the form of common Gold
into the imperfect Metals, for their perfection, it is altogether necessary, that the common Gold should be made more than perfect; that is, that it acquire more Aureity and Vertue, than is required for the single per∣fection of common Gold. Aph. 78. No natural Compound can be made more perfect, unless it be again subjected to the Operations of Nature. Aph. 79. And as often as it is sub∣jected to those, so often it acquireth a more perfect form in its Species. Aph. 80. Which, that it may be done, it is necessary, to resolve it into a matter like to that, of which Na∣ture hath most nearly produced it. Aph. 81. For naturally, there is no new Generation made, without a pre∣vious Corruption. Aph. 82. And seeing that common Gold, as we said above, hath its nea∣rest rise from an unctious and viscous Humidity, Aph. 83. It is manifest, that it can∣not
not be made more than perfect, ex∣cept it be first resolved into such its first matter. Aph. 84. Every natural Agent as∣similateth to it self the Patient, ei∣ther in substance, or in quality. Aph. 85. Therefore, to resolve common Gold into a humid, unctious and viscous substance, there is requi∣red an humid, unctious, and viscous Agent. Aph. 86. Not any one, but one that is homogeneous, and of the same Na∣ture with Gold: Aph. 87. Such a one as hath emi∣nently the form of Gold, or may ob∣tain it by a new Specification and De∣termination, when it particularly in∣sinuateth it self into common Gold. Aph. 88. For, seeing that it ought naturally and radically to mix it self with the Principles of Gold, and to penetrate the Gold through every the least part of it, so that after the mix∣tion, no separation can ever be made; Aph. 89. After which manner,
things heterogeneous can never unite themselves. Aph. 90. And moreover, that it be more subtile, more active and spiri∣tual than common Gold; and there∣fore the first matter of Gold; Aph. 91. Seeing that nothing can be naturally dissolved, but in that, and by that, of which it is compounded. Aph. 92. Whence we conclude, that no Vegitable, Animal, or Mineral Substances, which are not of a Metal∣lick Nature, (such are Stones and Salts) by any Artifice of Depura∣tion, or Preparation, or Subtilty whatsoever, can make Common Gold more than Perfect. Aph. 93. Neither also Metallick Spirits, which are not of the nature of Gold; such are Sulphur, and Arsnick, and other lesser or middle Minerals, which are any way compounded of those, although they are more subtile, and more active than Gold. Aph. 94. For, seeing that it is spoyled of every Sulphur, therefore
it doth not admit the said Spirits. Aph. 95. Although the Vertue and Efficacy of Mineral Spirits be so great in the Kingdom of Metals, that they cannot be altered, but by those only. Aph. 96. Therefore that common Gold, by its resolution, may be made more than perfect, to the end, that it may bring the imperfect Metals to per∣fection; it is highly necessary to have recourse to a Metallick Spirit which is of the same nature with Gold, and therefore can unite it self with it. Aph. 97. But seeing that, from what hath been already said, that common Gold is nothing else but a pure Argent-Vive, perfectly digest∣ed by Nature in the Mines of the Earth. Aph. 98. It followeth, that it is to be dissolved and rendred more than perfect, by no Spirit, but by Argent-Vive alone, crude and indigested. Aph. 99. But not the common Ar∣gent-Vine, nor that of Bodies, which is drawn from Metals,
Aph. 100. Although Gold hath a reat friendship with those Argent-vives. Aph. 101. [For those, seeing that they come very near to the Nature of Gold, Aph. 102. They are the only Subject of a Passive Transmutati∣on. Aph. 103. In which Nature hath ceased to operate equally as in Gold. Aph. 104. Therefore seeing they are not the first matter of Gold, Aph. 105. They cannot act up∣on it.] Aph. 106. But by the Argent-vive of Phylosophers; to wit, that un∣ctious and viscous natural Humidity only, which is the root of all the Metals. Aph. 107. Which Metallick seed, seeing that it is no where obvious to our Senses in Mines; Aph. 108. And to create a Seed is not in the power of man, but of God only:
Aph. 109. From what hath been said, it is necessarily inferred, that there ought to be some Mineral af∣forded, which may furnish us with this Mercury of Phylosophers. Aph. 110. Which, seeing that according to the Premises, it ought to augment the Tincture, Fusibility, and Penetration of Gold; Aph. 111. And among Minerals there is none found which can per∣fect the colour of pale Gold, and facilitate its Flux, and render it more penetrating, but Antimony only. Aph. 112. Therefore that appea∣reth to be the only Mineral, of which, and by which, the said Mer∣cury may be obtained. Aph. 113. For, seeing that Anti∣mony cannot communicate more Tincture to Gold, than the natural perfection of Gold requireth, Aph. 114. And Gold, as hath been already said, ought to be more perfectly Tinged by the Mercury of Phylosophers.
Aph. 115. This Mercury cannot be had of Antimony alone; Aph. 116. But by it, as a Medium, from other imperfect Metallick Bo∣dies, which abound with the Tincture of Gold; Aph. 117. Of which sort there are found only two, to wit, Mars and Venus. Aph. 118. Whence we conclude, That of Antimony, and by its help, of Mars also, and Venus, our Royal Menstruum is to be elicited, by the work of Art and Nature. Aph. 119. Antimony, Mars and Venus, consist of Sulphur and Mer∣cury. Aph. 120. Sulphur, as we have said, is averse to the Nature of Gold, by reason of its unctuosity, adustive and impure terrestreity. Aph. 121. Wherefore the said matter of our Menstruum, before all things, is to be purged from its combustible Sulphur, Aph. 122. That only its Mercu∣ry
may serve for our intention. Aph. 123. This Mercury, without further Preparation, being projected upon Gold, doth not adhere to it with profit, but like other Mineral Spirits flyeth the force of the Fire, and leaveth the Gold unaltered, and unclean, or carrieth it up with it self, Aph. 124. By reason of its earthy, feculent and fugitive aquosity, which is yet in it. Aph. 125. Therefore, that of this Mercury, the Mercury of Phylosophers, may be made, which can unite it self with Gold, and render it more that perfect; it is altogether necessary, that it should be depurated, and freed from its Feces. Aph. 126. No natural Compound can be perfectly purged without its dissolution. Aph. 127. And every Dissolution of a natural Compound, is termina∣ted in the moisture of which it was made.
Aph. 128. Therefore, seeing that he matter of our Menstruum is Me∣allick; Aph. 129. And therefore, as is manifest above, ariseth from an unc∣tious and viscous humidity. Aph. 130. It is required for its per∣fect Purgation, that it be resolved into such an unctious and viscous hu∣midity. Aph. 131. This dissolution of the matter, requireth its previous Cal∣cination. Aph. 132. For seeing that natu∣rally no dry thing is dissolved into a moist, except Salt, or that which by the force of fire hath contracted the like nature. Aph. 133. Our matter is first to be calcined, that it may be rendred fit for solution. Aph. 134. The total Dissolution of no dry Body already dissolved into a Liquor, can be perfected, or a dis∣ion of its Essential parts be made, thout its putrefaction.
Aph. 135. Wherefore this ought to be done to the matter of our Men∣struum, for its compleat Depuration, equally as to Gold, for its plusquam perfection; as we have said above. Aph. 136. But every moist bod is corrupted and putrified in a ligh or gentle heat. Aph. 137. Hence our matter being resolved into a moist, viscous, an unctious Substance, is to be farther promoted and disjoyned by digestion▪ Aph. 138. That the subtile part may be elevated from the gross, an the Pure from the Impure, by Subl∣mation. Aph. 139. For the perfecting thos Operations, Nature affordeth us on∣ly two Mediums, viz. Fire and Water. Aph. 140. The Combustible an Volatile parts are separated by Fire Aph. 141. But the Earthy and Fe∣culent by Water. Aph. 142. In the said Phylosophic Sublimation of the Mercury, and it union with Gold, by various Soluti∣ons
and Coagulations, the Practice of Alchymy consisteth; Aph. 143. That thence may result  Cathoick Medicine, most potent in perfecting the imperfect Metals, and in restoring of all diseasy bodies what∣soever. Aph. 144. Which Medicine is com∣monly called the Stone of Phylosophers, because it resisteth the Fire. Aph. 145. And for other reasons it is also called by other various Names. Aph. 146. From the Premises, the Chymical Excellency is rightly defined, to consist of Metallick Principles, exal∣ted by various Phylosophick Solutions and Coagulations, unto the highest degree of Perfection. Aph. 147. For seeing that Nature alone in the Mineral Kingdom, pro∣ceedeth no further than the perfecti∣on of common Gold, Aph. 148. It is to be assisted by Art, that it may render it more than perfect.
Aph. 149. Therefore the Practice of Alchymy in general consisteth of two Operations; to wit, the prepa∣ration of the Mercury of Phyloso∣phers; and the Composition of the Elixir or Medicine. Aph. 150. Which although the are not very difficult, Aph. 151. Nevertheless, they ar not alwaies without their perils an ill success. Aph. 152. Not to be avoided, bu by Industry, and an expert, couragiou and prudent Artist. Aph. 153. Nor do the said Ope∣rations require any great Charge o Cost,
To the Lovers of Hermetick Studies. ALL the Books of Phylosophers, which treat of the abstruse Hermetick Medicine, are nothing but a Spagyrical Labyrinth, in which, for the most part, the Disciples of Art fall into various Ambages and Deceits; so that even to this day, there are but very few who have found a true end. For if in this Laby∣rinth some easie Way hath shewed it self to the Erring and Straying, which seem∣ed to extricate and lead them out, pre∣sently some impassable corners have occur∣ed, which keep them in a perpetual Im∣prisonment. So, if in the Writings of Phylosophers, manifest and easie Ways sometimes offer themselves, which at the irst sight seem to the Searchers to be plain according to the Letter, presently unwary Operators, being deceived by the open ords of Phylosophers, are involved in nnumerable Deceits. To this may be
added, That many Pseudochymists de∣ceive many by their specious Frauds an Cheats, dispersing and selling up an down lying Operations and Processes, i which they promise Golden Mountains  the Credulous; sowing Tares and bidding them expect Wheat. Wherefore I being moved with Compassion, have here offer these Rules, which are full of Physic Reasons and Truth; in which you ha the whole Art perspicuously depicted, as a Writing-Table. Examin and wei them throughly, fence your Opinion w firm arguments, and then you cannot e For he that without judgment believe every Sophism, is willing to be deceived.  The true Art is hidden under many Co∣rings, by which the unwary are easily c∣founded. Therefore, before you begin  work, weigh well, and prudently consi the natural Causes of things; or else∣ter not upon the matter. It is better  imploy your time in diligent Meditat and profound Judgment, than to under  the Punishment of a foolish and incons∣rate Temerity. — Farewell. B. D. P.
Some Phylosophick Rules or Canons, concerning the Stone of Phylosophers. What we seek, is either here, or no where. Canon I. THat which is nearest to Perfection, is the more easily brought to Perfection. 2. Things Imperfect cannot by any Art put on Perfection, except they be first purged from their fecu∣lent Sulphur and earthy Grossness, which is mixed with their Sulphur and Mercury; the which a perfect Medicine performeth. 3. To render the Imperfect fixt, without the Spirit and Sulphur of the Perfect, is altogether impossible. 4. The Heaven of Philosophers re∣solveth all the Metals into their first
matter; that is, into Mercury. 5. He that endeavoureth to reduce Metals into Mercury, without the Philosophick Heaven, or Metallick A∣qua-vitae, or their Tartar, will be greatly mistaken, because the Impu∣rity abounding in Mercury, from other Dissolutions, is even discerna∣ble by the Eye. 6. Nothing is perfectly fixed, which cannot be inseparably joyned with that which is fixed. 7. Fusible Gold may be change and turned into Blood. 8. To render Silver fixt, it is nei∣ther to be resolved into Powder, o Water, for that is radically to destroy it; but it ought necessarily to be re∣duced into Mercury. 9. Luna cannot be transmuted in∣to Sol, except it return into running Mercury (but by the physical Tin∣cture) the same is to be judged o the other Metals. 10. The imperfect Bodies toge∣ther with Luna are brought to per∣fection,
and converted into pure Gold, if they be first reduced into Mercury; and that by a white or red Sulphur, by the vertue of an appro∣priate Fire. 11. Every imperfect Body is brought to perfection by its reduction into Mercury; and afterwards, by decocting with Sulphurs in an appro∣priate Fire: For of those are genera∣ted Gold and Silver; and they are deceived, and labour in vain, who en∣deavour to make Gold and Silver after another manner. 12. The Sulphur of Mars is the best, which being joyned to the Sul∣phur of Gold, bringeth forth a cer∣tain Medicine. 13. No Gold is generated, but what was first Silver. 14. Nature compoundeth and coct∣eth her Minerals by a gradual process; and so from one Root only procrea∣teth all the Metals, even to the Ulti∣mate end of Metals, which is Gold.
15. Mercury corrupteth Gold, re∣solveth it into Mercury, and maketh it volatile. 16. The Stone is compounded of Sulphur and Mercury. 17. If the preparation of Mercu∣ries be not taught by some skilful Ar∣tist, it is not to be learned by the reading of Books. 18. The preparation of Mercury for the Philosophick Menstruum, is cal∣led Mortification. 19. The Praxis of this great Work exceedeth the highest Arca∣num of Nature; and except it be shewed by Divine Revelation, or the Work it self, by an Artist, it is ne∣ver obtained from Books. 20. Sulphur & Mercury are the mat∣ter of the Stone: therefore the know∣ledge of Mercuries is necessary, that a good Mercury may be taken, by which the Stone may be the sooner perfec∣ted. 21. Indeed there is a certain mer∣cury hidden in every Body, being fit∣ted
without other preparation; but the Art of Extracting it is very diffi∣cult. 22. Mercury cannot be converted into Sol or Luna, and fixed, but by a Compendium of the Abreviation of he great Work. 23. To congeal, to fix, is one Work; of one thing only, in one Vessel. 24. That which congealeth and fixeth Mercury, that also tingeth the same, in one and the same praxis. 25. The degrees of Fire to be ob∣served in the Work, are four: In the first, the Mercury dissolveth its own Body; in the second, the Sulphur dryeth up the Mercury; in the third and fourth, the Mercury is fixed. 26. The matters being radically permixed in their profundity, through their most minute parts, are after∣wards made inseparable, as Snow mix'd with Water. 27. Divers Simples being put into putrefaction, produce divers others.
28. It is necessary, that the form and the matter be of the same Spe∣cies. 29. An homogeneous Sulphur is of the same Mercurial nature, which produceth Gold and Silver; and this pure Sulphur is gold and silver, al∣though not discernable by the Eye in that form, but inasmuch as it i dissolved into Mercury. 30. There may be a certain fixed Unctuosity extracted from gold, with out a Phylosophick Dissolution of the Gold into Mercury, which serveth in∣stead of a ferment generating Sol and Luna; and that is performed by way of abreviating the Work, which Ge∣ber calleth Rebis. 31. The metals being resolved in∣to Mercury, are again reduced into a body, a small quantity of the Ferment being admixed, otherwise they al∣waies retain the form of Mercury. 32. The Heaven or Tartar of Phi∣losophers, which reduceth all the me∣tals into Mercury, is the metalline
Aqua-vitae of Phylosophers, which hey also call their dissolute Feces. 33. Sulphur and Mercury consist n the same homogeneous nature. 34. The Stone of Phylosophers is othing but gold and silver, endow'd ith an Excellency and more than erfect Tincture. 35. Sol and Luna, in their own roper species, have no more than that is sufficient for themselves, hich it behoveth to reduce into the ature and power of a Ferment, by reparation, and to digest, whereby he mass may be multiplied. 36. The chief Extremities in Mer∣ury are two, viz. too much Crudi∣y, and too exquisite a Decoction. The words in the Original are ni∣mis exquisita; but the word nimis, I udge, should have been minus; foras∣huch as that agrees well with Crudi∣y, no Crude subjected being well de∣octed.]
37. Phylosophers observe this for a maxime; that every dry thing what∣soever quickly drinketh up a moi∣sture of its own species. 38. The Calx of Luna being alte∣red, hastily drinketh up its own Mer∣cury; the Phylosophers Foundation of Minerals. 39. Sulphur is the Anima, but Mercury the matter. 40. Mercury is stayed or detained by the Sulphur of imperfect Bodies and is coagulated into an imperfect Body, and passeth into the same me∣tallick species of the imperfect Body by whose sulphur it was congealed and concreted. 41. To make Sol and Luna of the imperfect bodies, by sulphur, is alto∣gether impossible; for nothing ca give or afford more than it hath. 42. The Mercury of all the Metals is their Feminine seed, and their Men∣struum, being brought so far by the Art of a good Operator: For by the projection of the great Work, it
receiveth and passeth through the qualities of all the Metals, even unto Gold. 43. That a red Tincture may be eli∣cited, the Mercury is to be animated with the Ferment of Sol only; but for the white, with the Ferment of Luna only. 44. The Work of Phylosophers is perfected by a very easie Labour, and performed without great Costs, and that at any time, and in any place whatsoever, and by all men, provided they have the true and sufficient matter. 45. The Sulphurs of Sol and Luna stay or retain the spirits of their own species. 46. Sol and Luna are the true sul∣phurs, sperms, or Masculine seeds of the Stone. 47. Every thing which hath a power of retaining and fixing, ought necessarily to be stable and perma∣nent.
48. The Tincture which giveth perfection to the imperfect Metals, floweth from the Fountain of Sol and Luna. 49. Whosoever take the Sulphur of Venus, are deceived. 50. There is nothing given to Venus by Nature, which is necessary to the great Spagyrick Work, or that can serve for the making of Sol and Luna. 51. Note, that Gold converted in∣to Mercury, before its Conjunction with the Menstruum, can be neither Anima, nor Ferment, nor Sulphur, nor doth it any way profit. 52. The Work being brought to the end, may be rendred fiery, by Reiteration. 53. In the Abreviation of the Work, the perfect bodies ought to be reduced into running Mercury, and a dry Water, whereby they may rightly receive a Ferment. 54. The Preparation of Mercury, which is performed by sublimation,
(being adhibited after revification) s better than that which is done by Amalgamation. 55. The Anima cannot impress he form, except the spirit Intervene, which is nothing else but the Sol tur∣ed into Mercury. 56. Mercury receiveth the form f Gold by the mediation of the Spi∣it. 57. Sol being resolved into Mer∣ury, is the spirit and anima. 58. The Sulphur and Tincture of hylosophers design one and the same erment. 59. The Mercury of the vulgar is endred equal to all the Mercuries of odies, and cometh very near to their keness and nature. 60. A Ferment rendreth Mercury ore ponderous. 61. If the common Mercury be not nimated, or wanteth an anima, it ffords nothing of moment, either to he universal or particular Work.
62. Mercury being rightly morti∣fied, is then impressed with an anima. 63. Sol may be prepared into a Ferment, so that one part may ani∣mate ten parts of common Mercury; but this Work hath no end. 64. The Mercury of the imperfect bodies stand in a medium between the common Mercury, and the Mercury of the perfect bodies; but the Art of extracting it, is very difficult. 65. Seeing that the common Mer∣cury, by projection of the Stone, is changed into Sol or Luna, therefore it may ascend higher, be exalted, and rendred equal to all the Mercuries of bodies. 66. Common Mercury animated, is a very great Arcanum. 67. The Mercuries of all Bodies are changed into Gold or Silver, by an Abreviation of the Work. 68. A moist and gentle heat is cal∣led by the Name of the Aegyptian Fire.
69. It is worthy to be noted, that Luna is not the mother of common silver, but a certain Mercury, endowed with the quality of the Coelestial Luna. 70. Metallick Luna is of a mascu∣line nature. 71. The Mercury of the vulgar, through coldness, putteth on the na∣ture of a barren Woman. 72. The Mercuries of Semi-mine∣rals resemble the nature of Luna in likeness. 73. All things whatsoever are pro∣duced of Sol and Luna; to wit, of two substances, 74. Male and Female; that is, Sol and Mercury grow together into one 75. Common Mercury without Preparation, is remote from the Work. 76. Four of Mercury, and one of Sol; that is, of the ferment, Consti∣tute a true matrimony of male and female.
77. The Solution is performed, when the Sol is resolved into Mer∣cury. 78. Without Putrefaction no So∣lution is perfected. 79. Putrefaction endureth, and extendeth it self even to whiteness. 80. The great Secret is the mun∣dification of the Spirit, whereby the Menstruum is prepared, for by it the Gold is resolved. 81. Mercury resolveth Gold into a Water of its own form; that is, into a running Mercury, as it self is. 82. Dissolution is the beginning of Congelation. 83. Sol being converted into a running Mercury, remaineth in the same form for a little time. 84. The Ferment dryeth up the Mercury, and rendreth it more pon∣derous, retaineth and fixeth it. 85. The Sol of Phylosophers is called their Fountain. 86. The matter is converted by the power of Putrefaction, into a Pul∣tis
or Lute, which is the beginning of Coagulation. 87. There is a certain Compendi∣ous way, by which the Sulphur is aken from Sol and Luna, whereby very Mercury may be fixed into gold and silver. 88. The matter ought never to be emoved from the fire, nor suffered o cool, otherwise the work will be estroyed. 89. When the matter attaineth he colour of blackness, then it is ne∣essary to give the second degree of re. 90. The lotion or washing of Phi∣osophers, is a similitude; for the fire lone performeth and perfecteth all hings. 91. The Venome and Fetor is ta∣ken away, without the addition of any thing, by the force of the Fire, which alone performeth all things. 92. The Fire, by its acute and pe∣netrating Vertue, purgeth and clean∣seth an hundred times more than any water whatsoever.
93. In the generation and vegeta∣tion of any thing whatsoever, the heat being extinct, death presently invadeth the growing matter. 94. The Spirit is heat. 95. The matter being brought to whiteness, cannot be corrupted and destroyed. 96. Every Corruption of matter is impressed with a deadly Venome. 97. The Glass or Vessel is called the Mother. 98. The vertue of Sulphur is not extensive beyond the term or limit of a certain proportion, neither can it exceed unto an infinite weight. 99. This question is to be obser∣ved, Wherefore the Phylosophers call their Menstruum the matter of the stone? 100. Sulphur meriteth the name of the form, but the Menstruum, of the matter. 101. The Menstruum representeth the lesser and lower Elements, viz. Of Earth and Water; but Sulphur
e two superiours, to wit, Fire and ir, as a masculine Agent. 102. If you should break and Egg∣ell, so that the Chicken should come t, it could never be hatched, nor ome to perfection: In like manner,  you open the Vessel, and the mat∣r shall feel the Air, you can per∣rm nothing. 103. The Calcination which is ade with Mercury, in a Furnace of everberation, is better than others. 104. The Phylosophers manners  speaking are studiously to be noted, r by sublimation they understand e dissolutions of Bodies into Mer∣ry by the first degree of Fire; the cond Operation followeth, which is e Inspissation of the Mercury with he Sulphur; the third is the Fixa∣on of the Mercury into a perfect nd absolute body. 105. The number of those which rr, is infinite, who do not allow Mercury as it is in its own form, and malgamated with the Calx of the
perfect bodies, to be the subject and matter of the stone. 106. The white Medicine is brought to perfection in the third de∣gree of Fire; and this degree is not to be exceeded in the preparation of the white Medicine; for if you do otherwise, you will destroy the wor for the white. 107. The fourth degree of Fire bringeth forth the matter Red, where appeareth also divers colours. 108. The work after it hath at∣tained the degree of whiteness, no being carried on to a perfect redness, remaineth imperfect, not only for the white, but also for the red Tin∣cture; therefore it is left dead till i endeth in a perfect redness. 109. After the fifth degree of Fire to perfect it, the matter acqui∣reth new Virtues. 110. The Work hath not attained perfection, except the Medicine shall be incerated, and rendred fusible, like Wax.
111. The Work of Inceration is erfected by a double or triple quan∣ity of Mercury, to that which gave he Stone its Original. 112. The Inceration of the white Medicine is performed by the white ater, without the animation of the Mercury by Luna, but the Inceration f the red Tincture is done with Mer∣ury animated with Sol. 113. It sufficeth, that the matter fter Inceration remain like a Pultis r Paste. 114. Repeat the Inceration till it will bear a perfect Proof. 115. If the Mercury with which he Medicine is incerated, being con∣erted into Fume, shall fly away, it vaileth nothing; wherefore do not manage it ill, for the matter by that means will go backward. 116. The medicine being rightly ncerated, will explain to thee that Enigma, of the King returning from the Fountain. 117. Sol being reduced into his
first Water or Mercury, if he shal be refrigerated or cooled by the help of common Mercury, the work pe∣risheth. 118. Phylosophers take the mat∣ter prepared and cocted by Nature and reduce it into its Prima ma∣teria; forasmuch as every thing re∣turneth into that from which it hath its Original, even as snow is re∣solved inseparably in water. 119. The wise men reduce year into months, months into weeks, and weeks into days. 120. The first decoction of Mer∣cury which Nature performeth, i the only Cause of its own singl perfection, beyond which it canno ascend of it self; for it behoveth to help its simplicity, by sowing ou Gold in its proper Earth, which i nothing else but a pure Mercury which Nature hath a little, but no perfectly digested. 121. But in the second decoction of Mercury, besides the first of Na∣ture,
the vertue of the Mercury is multiplied ten-fold. 122. And the Stone is made of Mercury by reiterating the Decocti∣on, Sol being admixed, for by this means the male as well as the female are twice decocted. 123. Sol ought to be put to Mercury, that he may be dissolved into Sulphur, and then cocted into the stone of Phylosophers. 124. Every Phylosopher in all times contemplated Mercury, when nevertheless he neither knew nor understood it. 125. Every Mercury of whatso∣ever Original, being rightly taken in a due manner, exhibiteth the matter of the stone. 126. Every thing from which Mercury may be elicited, is the subject of the Phylosophick medi∣cine. 127. Whosoever taketh or un∣derstandeth the writings of Phylo∣sophers, according to the Letter, is
grievously deceived, when they af∣firm their Mercury to be one. 128. One Mercury exceedeth ano∣ther, in a greater heat, dryness, decoction, purity and perfection, which ought to be prepared with∣out the corruption and loss of its form, and to be purged from all its superfluities, in which the treasure and secret of the stone consisteth. 129. If the preparation of common Mercury were known to the studious of Phylosophy,Nota bene. they would have no need to search after any other Mercury of Phylo∣sophers, nor another metallick and mercurial Aqua-vitae, nor another Water of the stone; because the preparation of vulgar Mercury con∣taineth all those things in it self. 130. Every Mercury of Metals and Minerals may by successive de∣grees be cocted and exalted unto the quality of the Mercuries of all the other bodies, even to a solar body, and thence be deduced to the
degree and vertue of what metal∣lick body you please. 131. Common Mercury before a Legitimate Preparation, is not the Mercury of Phylosophers, but after preparation, it is called by the name of the Mercury of Phylosophers; contain∣ing in it self the true way and method of extracting the Mercury from the other Metals: And it is the begin∣ning of the greater Work. 132. Common Mercury being pre∣pared, is taken for a metallick Aqua∣vitae. 133. The passive Mercury and Menstruum ought by no means to lose the External form of Mercury. 134. Whosoever useth sublimate, or calcined, or precipitated Powder, instead of running Mercury, (for the Compleating the Work of Phyloso∣phers) erreth, and is wholly deceived. 135. Whosoever resolveth Mer∣cury into a clear water, for the per∣fecting of the Phylosophick Work, erreth grievously.
136. To compose or make Mercu∣ry of a Limpid water, is in the power of none but Nature. 137. In the great Physical Work, it is necessarily required, that the crude Mercury should resolve the Gold into Mercury. 138. If the Mercury be reduced in∣to water, it dissolveth the Gold into water: And in the work of the Stone it is highly necessary, that the Gold should be dissolved into Mercury. 139. The Sperm and the Men∣struum ought to have the same ex∣ternal form. 140. It is the Doctrine of Phylo∣sophers, that it is necessary for us to irritate or stir up Nature; therefore if the Menstruum be dry, it will be in vain to hope for a Solution. 141. The seed of the Stone ought to be taken in a form like and near to the metals, and which cometh very near to metals. 142. It is highly necessary to take a seed of the Phylosophick Medi∣cine,
which resembleth common Mer∣cury. 143. It is the secret of all se∣crets, to know the Mercury and matter to be the Menstruum of the Stone, and the Mercury of the per∣fect Bodies to be the form. 144. Mercury by it self only, af∣fords nothing of moment to genera∣tion. 145. Mercury is the Element of Earth, in which the Grain of Gold ought to be sowed. 146. The seed of Gold is not on∣ly put into a multiplication of its quantity, but also of its vertue. 147. A perfect Mercury requireth a female for the work of genera∣tion. 148. Every Mercury ariseth from and partaketh of two Elements; the crude of Water and Earth, that which is concocted of Fire and Air. 149. If any man would prepare and exalt Mercury into a Metal, let him add a little Ferment to it, that
it may be exalted to such a metal∣lick degree as he would have it. 150. The great Arcanum of the whole Work is the Physical Dis∣solution into Mercury, and reducti∣on into the first matter. 151. The Dissolution of Sol ought to be perfected by Nature, not by the work of the Hands. 152. When Sol is conjoyned or married to its Mercury, it will be in the form of Sol, but the greater Preparation will be in the Calx. 153. It is a Question among the Wise, Whether the Mercury of Luna, being conjoyned with the Mercury of Sol, may be taken in∣stead of the Phylosophick Men∣struum. 154. The Mercury of Luna is of a masculine nature, but two males can no more generate than two fe∣males. 155. The Elixir consisteth in this, that it be elicited and chosen from a most pure Mercury.
156. He that desireth to operate, let him work in the Solution and Sub∣limation of the two Luminaries. 157. Gold giveth a golden co∣lour; Silver a Silver colour; but he that knoweth how to tinge Mercu∣ry with Sol or Luna, hath arrived to a great Arcanum. FINIS. HEre thou hast (friendly Reader) those Phylosophick Canons, with∣out which, whosoever thou art, thou wilt hardly attain thy wished End: If thou receive these Hermetick Fundamentals with a grateful mind, and exercise thy Self in this Theory with a pious Medi∣tation, time may hereafter bring forth the Praxis of those Rules, not that im∣perfect or maimed one, which I have shewed to some, but Intire and Compleat, confirmed by many Arguments, and solid Reasons. In the mean time, Farewel.
POST-SCRIPT TO THE READER. WHereas I have Lately published Proposals for the Printing of all the Works of that indefatigable and highly-experienced Chymist, Glauber, in one entire Folio. And, whereas there are divers of his Treatises in the Ger∣man Tongue, which never were printed in Latin, which I had not by me at the time of publishing the said Proposals and Specimen; so that I could not insert their Title Pages in the Specimen, as I did of the rest. Now, having obtained the said German Treatises, and procured them to be translated by a fit and able Hand, I have thought good (having this opportunity) to insert them at the end of this little Book; First, that all the Lo∣vers
of Chymistry may know what to ex∣pect more than the 44 Treatises, whose Titles are in the Specimen; and second∣ly, forasmuch as Glauber wrote those last in his later days, when he had arrived to a great Experience of Things, and was willing to be more Open and Plain than in his former Writings; those Last Pieces of his seem to be of another strain, and to teach many things very openly, which the Adepts have either wholly con∣cealed, or at the least have delivered so abstrusely, that very few have been able to understand them; So that, if I mi∣stake not, that Theory of the Hermetick Medicine, which is contained in the 153 Aphorisms very regularly, though concise∣ly, may, without much difficulty, be put into Practice by the assistance of some of the following Treatises. That Glauber before his death was Master of some Phylosophick secrets, I verily believe by his manner of Writing; and himself pro∣fesseth in one of his last Writings, speak∣ing concerning the secret Fire of Arte∣phius, That he could now, sitting still in
his Chamber, do more with an Egg-shell, than heretofore with all his Furnaces and Glasses. But, to detain the Reader no longer, the Treatises I speak of are en∣tituled as followeth. I. The Third Century, Containing the Discovery of many Chymical Secrets. II. The Fourth Century, Shews 1. How to extract Gold out of Granats. 2. To make the Mer∣cury of Wine. 3. To make the Mercury of Metals. What the Ani∣ma of the greater and lesser World is. That all superfluous Egestions of Nature, afford a volatile Salt. To separate Gold from Silver on a Cupel. A Tincture out of Metals. The Tincture of Gold and Sul∣phur. To make Gold red. A Cement to graduate ♀ into ☉. To dulcifie all Corrosives.
Sal Mirabile, or a sweet gradua∣ting Spirit, useful for the exalting of Metals. The Phylosophick Work. Sulphur, the father of all Metals. The Universal Coagulater is a Sulphur. Demagorgon is the Grandfather of all things. The Vital Spirit and Radical moi∣sture is the Life and Growth of all men. III. The Fifth Century Sheweth the greatest Particular, and the cheapest Universal. IV. Of Elias the Artist. Or who this Elias the Artist is, and what he is to reform or amend in the World when he comes, viz. The true Spagyrick Medicine of the ancient Aegyptian Phylosophers, which hath been lost for a Thousand years, and which he will again re∣store, renew the same, and gloriously
illustrate it with many New Inven∣tions, lay aside much smoaky work∣ing, and shew to the present erring World a nearer and better way, by which with more ease and less Char∣ges than hitherto, good Medicines may be obtained. V. The Second Appendix to the Seventh part of the Phar∣macop. Spagyrica. In which is handled the further Use of the Secret Sal-Armoniack, for the meliorating of the meaner Me∣tals, and especially of the profitable extracting or separating of Gold out of Silver and Tin; with an Informa∣tion subjoyned, how by the means of the mercurial Water of Tin, the Tinctures may be extracted in quan∣tity not only from Gold, but also from Mars and Venus; and pre∣cious as well as Common stones; and that, as it were, in a moment, without Fire or Charges.
VI. The Third Appendix to the Seventh part of the Phar∣macop. Spagyrica. In which is treated of the yet-fur∣ther Use of our Wonder-working Alcahest, or most secret Sal-Armo∣niack, and in particular, how the Tinctures may be extracted out of Sol, Mars, and Venus, and out of all Precious and Common Stones; and how the said Colours may again be introduced into other white Metals and Stones, in order to colour the same permanently, and meliorate them. VII. Of the Animal Stone. Wherein is demonstrated, That there is a Mineral Vertue hid in all things, and particularly in all Ani∣mals whatsoever, but most of all in man; and that consequently the stone of Phylosophers may be pre∣pared of them. To which is added, the way of fixing Mercury by means of the na∣tural
superfluities and Excrements of Animals, in order to the obtaining a true Phylosophical Tincture. VIII. Of the Three Secret Fire-Stones. Or, the three most Noble stones generated by three secret Fires. And, First, Of the Stone of Phyloso∣phers, which is prepared by the se∣crot Fire of the Wise. Secondly, The upper and lower Thunder-stone, how they are gene∣rated above by the Meteorological Fire, and below by the secret Arti∣ficial Fire. And, Thirdly, How the Lapis Ignis, or Fire-stone of Basil-Valentine, is to be prepared out of Antimony by Art. And how those three most Noble Stones of the World are to be used in Medicine and Alchy my. IX. The Purgatory of Phy∣losophers. Or, A Treatise concerning the Purifying Fire of the wise men;
with which the Phylosophers cleanse their Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal subjects, and exalt them to the high∣est degree of Purity, in order to pre∣pare Ʋniversal Medicaments from them, for the Bodies of Men & Metals. Which Purgatory Fire is called by the ancient Phylosophers Ysopaica, that is to say, the Art of washing by Fire. Together with a subjoyned in∣struction, how by means of the Salt of the World, out of all Metals and Minerals, a living Mercury may be prepared in quantity. X. Of the Secret Fire of Phylosophers. By which they not only brought to maturity their Universal Medi∣cine, but also fixed particularly all the Inferiour Metals, into good Gold and Silver, with great profit. XI. A short Exposition upon the Hellish Goddess Proserpina, the Wife of Pluto, viz.
What the Heathenish Phylosophick Poets, as Ovid and Virgil, &c. un∣derstood thereby. And how by the help of this Proserpina, the Ani∣mae or souls of the mortified metal-lick Bodies are carried out of the Chymical Hell into the Phylosophick Heaven. These are the Treatises of which I could not give a particular Account in the Specimen, and which being added to those there exhibited, make in all 55 Treatises, which will amount to a large Volume in Folio, in which are also many Cutts; which is all ready for the Press, and wants nothing but a sufficient number of Subscribers to give it Breath in the English Air. I have spared neither Pains nor Cost to serve my Country in this Work; and I hope there will not be wanting so many Ge∣nerous Souls, who will concur with me (by subscribing to it) to render it ef∣fectual.
The Terms of Subscription are as followeth. THat whosoever shall pay to Chri∣stopher Pack, at the sign of the Globe in the Postern-street, near Moorgate; or to William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little-Britain, Booksel∣ler; or to Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, Booksel∣ler; the sum of Twenty shillings, in manner following, shall have one Compleat Book in Quires, viz. Ten shillings in hand, and Ten shillings more upon the delivery of the said Book, which is intended to be pub∣lished in Trinity-Term next. And for the Encouragement of those who shall subscribe for six Books, they shall have one Book, when printed, presented them Gratis. The Specimen may be had at any of the three places above-mentioned, as also of divers Booksellers in and about London.
Advertisement. MYographia Nova sive Mus∣culorum omnium (in Cor∣pore Humano hactenus reperto∣rum) accuratissima Descriptio, in sex Proelectiones Distributa. No∣mina singulorum in suo quaeque Loco, situque Naturali, in Aeneis Musculorum Iconibus exarantur: Eorum item Origines, Insertiones, & usus, Graphice describuntur, additis insuper ipsius Authoris, & aliorum Nuperrimis Observatio∣nibus & Inventis. Opera & studio Joannis Browne, Serenissimi Caroli secundi, Bri∣tanniarum Regis, nec-non Nosocomii Regalis, quod est ad D. Thomae, Chirurgi Ordinarii.
