h882 13693879 101429
A DESCRIPTION OF The KING'S Royal Palace AND Gardens at LOO. TOGETHER With a Short Account of HOLLAND. In which There are some Observations relating to their DISEASES. By WALTER HARRIS, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and Fellow of the Col∣lege of Physicians. LONDON: Printed by R. Roberts, and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers Hall. MDCXCIX.
THE PREFACE. THIS Description of the King's Palace, and Gardens at Loo, was most of it written at the Command of our late most Incompa∣rable Queen, of ever Glorious Memory, who was not displeased with the Sight of it; and who, though she Honoured this Royal Fabrick with the laying its first Stone, yet could never have the Pleasure of see∣ing it Perfected: The Wise and Good Queen's Pre∣sence being, during the War, most Necessary with∣in the Kingdom, whilst His Majesty exposed His Royal Person in the Field, for the Preservation of us all, and for the Benefit of Mankind; and did so eminently signalize himself abroad, that all the Mar∣tial Virtues which are reported in History to have belong'd unto any the most Renowned of the Roman or Grecian Heroes, have been evidently conspicuous, and United together in His Majesty. Since this Description was first written, it has been Corrected and Enlarged, by the frequent Opportu∣nities I have had, of walking over the Gardens, in
the five Years time that I had the Honour to wait upon His Majesty abroad. And the Reading it must give some Diversion to the Curious, as the Writing it was pleasing to me. Also Persons of Quality, and Great Fortunes, may here find many things to Ad∣mire, and also to Imitate, if they please, when they are taking their Summer Diversions at their Coun∣try Seats. As for what I add, in the Account of Holland, I shall only tell you, I considered that a Description cannot possibly represent things with that pleasure and advantage, as they are Seen upon the Place; and I thought a few Common Observations I made in Holland, and which I have recollected upon the Printing this Description, would not be unacceptable to some Persons, for Variety sake; though I have been guilty of many Omissions, rather than I would be tedious, by Consulting Authors, or reciting any of their Observations, who have taken Pains upon this Subject, and been more large and accurate in their Performances.
A TABLE of the Chapters. THE Introduction. Page I CHAP. I. Of the Situation of the Palace and Gardens. Of the Court before the Palace. A short view of the Palace it self; and a summary Account of all the Gardens in General. p. 6 CHAP. II. A Description of the Great Garden, next behind the Palace; and first of that part of it, called the Lower Garden. p. 12 CHAP. III. Of the second part of the Great Garden, called the Upper Garden: Together with the Middle Walk, and Canals, which do divide this Garden into the two Parts. p. 20 CHAP. IV. Of the Kings Garden, and, Westward of it, a Labyrinth, or Wilderness. p. 26 CHAP. V. Of the Queen's Garden, and another Wilderness, beyond it Eastward. p. 29 CHAP. VI. Of the Voliere, or Fowl-Garden. p. 35 CHAP. VII. Of the Park, and its Fountains, Canal, Cascade,&c. Of the Viver, that supplies the Fountains, Cascades, and Canals, with water. Also a Description of fix other Vivers, or Fishponds. p. 38
A Short Account of HOLLAND. The CONTENTS. THAT the Gardens at Loo were finished during the War; when the French King put a stop to all his Pub∣lick Works, p. 49. The occasion of this Account, 50. Of the Courage of the Low-Country Men, ibid. A preference of the English to all others in that respect, 51. Their pre∣ference in former times, 52. In Turenne's time, ib. At the Siege of Namur, ib. Of how great Consideration the Goodness of a General is to an Army, 53. A remarkable Instance of it in the Revolution that happened in 1672. ib. Of the Unanimity of the Dutch, 54. Their great deference to His Majesty's Wisdom, ib. Of the Province of Holland more particularly, 55. The Low Countries why so called, ib. Of the Canals in Holland, ib. Their Water not offensive, 56. No Variety of Objects to be seen in the Country, ib. A re∣commendation of the Country about Dort, 57. Of the Dutch Brabant, ib. Of a Noble Seat near Zutphen, 58. Of Zea∣land, ib. The good effects that Travelling abroad has, or ought to have, 59. How a Traveller ought to demean him∣self in Holland, ib. Of their Taxes, 61. Of their Jus∣tice, ib. Their Musick-Houses at Amsterdam, 62. Of their Food, 63. Beer, and Wines, ib. Of their Dis∣cases, 64. And particularly their Fevers and Agues, 65. Of their Phlebotomy, 68. Why the Dutch have so few Coughs, and we so many, 69. Of their provision for the Poor, ib. Of their Charity in Churches, ib. Their Ap∣parel, 70. In what respect the Dutch do deserve great Consideration from us, 71. A remarkable Observation of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, against Bigotry, ib. A strict Alliance, and good understanding between England and Holland, never more necessary than at present, 72.
A Prospect of the King's Palace, and gardens at loo. A. The Palace. B. The Stables. C. Other Stabes. D. Offices. E. Orangery. F. Fountain. G. Lower Garden H. Upper Garden I. The King's Garden. K. Bowling green. L. The Queen's Garden. M. A wilderness. N. Another. O. The Old Court. P. The Fowl Garden Q. The Park. M.Vander Gucht Scul
A Description of HIS MAJESTY'S Palace of Gardens of LOO: Together with Some Account of the People and Country. The INTRODUCTION. NOTHING does give Posterity so Noble an Idea of former Times, as the Magnificence of their Buildings. The Remains we still have of the Roman Greatness in their Publick Structures are enough to merit our highest admiration. The Ruins of their Amphitheatres as they are now to be seen, their immense Obelisks, their prodigious sAquoeducts, their splendid Palaces and Temples, their subterranean Catacombs, and even their Via Appia, and Flaminea, or their Causeways that were made near Two thousand Years ago, when Rome was a Republick, with a Stone so hard, and so firmly laid, as still to remain entire a good way in many Places, are all Objects so conspicuous, and so durable in their kinds, that some of
them are like to continue to the end of the World everlasting Monuments of the just Veneration due to Ancient Times, of their admirable Skill, if not Per∣fection in Architecture; and in a word, as undoubted Testimonies of the Splendor and Magnificence of the Greatest People that ever were recorded in History. What can give us such a representation of the Pomp and Grandeur of the Kings of Aegypt, as the Wonder∣ful Pyramids there to be seen, and the illustrious Ruins of Grand Cairo and Alexandria! Our English indeed have bestowed their Munisicence chiefly in lasting Monuments of their Piety, in erect∣ing abundance of the Noblest Cathedrals that can any∣where be seen. And England may deservedly glory not only in the slately Cathedrals she built at home, as well as in her Palaces, Universities, and other Pub∣lick and Private Buildings, but hath lest in France the lasting Evidences of her Magnificence, by erecting those stately Nostredames at Paris, at Amiens, at Rouen, &c. at a time when great part of France was under the English Dominion, and when the rest of it did as much dread the English Power and Courage, as themselves have of late years been a Terror to all their Neigh∣bours. Nay at this present time, by the Publick Au∣thority (to our Honour and Renown be it spoken) there is now erecting, and almost finished, in her Me∣tropolis, one of the most Spacious and Magnificent Cathe∣drals that ever yet was built in the World; and the which, in the judgment of Travellers, is like to emu∣late in its Structure, even Saint Peter's at Rome, and Sancta Sophia at Constantinople. His Majesty is possessed of many Noble and Stately Palaces both at home and abroad. Kensington and Hampton-Court are too well known to be more than
mentioned. His Castle of Windsor may dispute for Ex∣cellency in many respects with most of the Royal Pa∣laces in Europe. And at Winchester there is another of His Majesty's Palaces, in a most admirable Situation for Health as well as Pleasure, that wants but little of being finished. I cannot but wish this last were nearer to London, or were thereby better situated for His Ma∣jesty's Convenience. For I have sensibly experienced the benefit of that Healthful Situation, having had the Happiness to be Educated in the College at Winchester; where in Seven Years time I never knew one of the Seventy Children of that College to dye, although it be seated in the lowest, and consequently the most un∣healthy part of that City. And others have assured me, that in Fifty Years past, there have not died above four or five of that Excellent Seminary of Learn∣ing, and most of those too by Violent Accidents, not by Epidemical Diseases. The which is a Considera∣tion worthy of the thoughts of such Parents, who would do their utmost to preserve their Posterity, and are desirous to breed their Children in the best School in England. In the Low Countries, in Brabant, and elsewhere, His Majesty's Ancient Hereditary Palaces are dispersed in great number. The Royal Palace and Gardens at Loo are the Subject of the ensuing Discourse. I will only mention Dieren, an Ancient Seat of the most Illustrious House of Nassaw, five Leagues from Loo; Honslaer-Dike, two Leagues from the Hague; Soestdike, not far from Utrecht; the Castle of Breda, made much more Illu∣strious of late by His Majesly; Ryswick the auspicious Place of Treaty of Peace, and now rendred everlast∣ingly famous by the conclusion of a Peace so Happy and so Honourable to the greatest part of Europe. All
which Palaces (except the last, where the King has never resided, it being so near the Hague) do remain nobly furnished for His Majesty's reception, and have Gardens belonging to them that might merit a distinct Description. For Buildings or themselves, howsoever Noble and Great, do appear very deficient without the Ornament and Conveniencies of a Garden. Italy, the Garden of the World, and the great Repository of Rarities and Antiquities, does now as much glory and pride her self in the Pomp, and Ornaments, and Conveniencies belonging to her Gardens, as in any of her so much celebrated Curiosities. It is certainly one of the most innocent and sweetest Diversions that can be desired; it gives easy opportunities for Retirement and Contem∣plation, and conduces to the obtaining a chearful tranquillity of mind, and to the preservation of a healthful temper of Body. It is a delight and satissa∣ction to which some of the Greatest Princes and Noble∣men in all Ages have had recourse, after they had been satiated and cloy'd with the pleasures and Vanities of the World, or had been tired with the Crosses and Disappointments, the Vexations and Troubles, which do necessarily attend all Conditions of Life. And if there be any tolerable share of Happiness and Content to be any where enjoyed by an Innocent Man, out of the hurry and noise of the World, a compleat and spaci∣ous Garden, furnished with variety of Walks and Groves, and adorned with Fountains, Cascades, Grottoes, &c. must do very much towards the obtaining even a Para∣dise upon Earth. The Gardens of Loo are become so famous and re∣markable to all the Provinces near them, that Curious Persons from divers Parts of Germany, as well as out
of all the United Provinces, do frequently resort thi∣ther to satisfy their Curiosity. I will not here enlarge in their praise and admiration, but leave it to the Reader to make a true judgment of them from the De∣scription it self, which is at lest natural and plain, and as perspicuous as the nature of such Descriptions (sometimes necessarily intricate through the great va∣riety of matter) will admit, though indeed very de∣stitute of the ornaments and flourishes that are usually made in the describing Great Things, to make them ap∣pear Greater than they really are.
CHAP. I Of the Situation of the Place and Gardens; of the Court before the Palace; a short view of the Palace it self; and a summary Account of all the Gardens in general. HIS Majesty's Place and Gardens at Loo are situ∣ated on the cast-side of a large Sandy Heath, or in the Veluwe, a considerable part of the Province of Gelderland, one of the Seven United Provinces. The Heath is extended Southward unto the Rhine, and Northward unto the Zuyder, or South Sea; Westward it runs almost to Amersfort, or within less than two Leagues of it; and Eastward it is extended to the Issel, a considerable River that divides Overyssell from the Veluwe. Loo is three Leagues from Deventer, five from Harderwick on the South-Sea, five from Dieren, ano∣ther of His Majesty's Places, six from Arnheim, and twelve Leagues or Hours from Utrecht. It is an ex∣cellent Country for Hunting, and abounds with Staggs, some Roe-bucks, the Wild Boar, Foxes, Hares, and some Wolfs. It is no less excellent for Fowling, and has good store of Woodcocks, Partridges, Pheasants, &c. In a Wood near Loo, there is a Herniary for Hawking; and within a league of it North-cast, His Majesty has of late caused to be made an Excellent Decoy, which supplies his Family with good store of Ducks and Teale. And in the Heath beyond the Gardens, there are six Vi∣vers or large Fish-ponds, somewhat after the model or resemblance of those in Hide-Park, the one commu∣nicating with the other. You will sind them de∣scribed
at the end of this Treatise, in the Seventh Chapter. The New Palace, lately built by His Majesty, is near unto the Old Hoof, or Old Court, which is a Castle sur∣rounded with a broad Moat, and purchased about 12 or 14 Years ago from the Seigneur de Laeckhuysen, a Gen∣tleman of this Country. They are separated from one another only by some of the Gardens, which lye on the West-side of the New Palace. The Gardens are most Sumptuous and Magnificent, adorned with great variety of most Noble Fountains, Cascades, Parterres, Gravel Walks, and Green Walks, Groves, Statues, Urns, Paintings, Seats, and pleasant Prospects into the Country. Before the Gate that enters into the Court of the Pa∣lace, there is a broad Green Walk between a double row of Oaks, half a mile long; and at the end of this Walk next to the Heath, there is a Gate of Iron Rails between double Stone Pillars of an Ancient Model, the Pillars being about a yard distant from each other, and joined at the top by a Crown Work on each side, where∣in is cut His Majesty's Cypher, and at the bottom by a Stone Ground-work, or Supporters. The Golumns are of a good heighth. Before this Gate there are three Walks between Trees for a Mile, or more, farther into the Heath. On the South-side of the Palace we do enter through a large Gate of Iron Bars, painted Blew and Gildel, into a Quadrangular Court, of which the whole Sought∣side hath Iron Rails alike Painted and Gilded. The Rails are placed on a low Brick Wall that is covered with Free-stone the whole length, five Inches above the Brick. Among these Iron Rails, which do rise above eight Foot higher than the Wall, there are at
due distance eight and twenty Pilasters, every one of them of one entire Stone. The East-side of the Court does contain Offices and Chambers for the Officers and Servants of His Majesty's Houshold. On the West-side of the Court are the King's Stables, and in these are kept Horses for His Majesty's own riding. And at the end of this Stable, adjoining to the Rails before-men∣tioned, there is another double Stable for His Majesty's other Horses, and for those of some of his Servants, extended Westward about eighty Paces on the Road that comes from Utrecht. At the other end of the Rails, or adjoining to the East-side of the Court, upon the Road, there is another Row of Building, in pro∣portion to the Stables, containing a Guard-house, a large Orangery, or Green-house, the King's Coach-house, &c. In the middle of the Court there is a Fountain, whose Basin consists of a wrought blew Stone, and whose Stone-work is raised two Foot and a half high. In the middle of this Fountain there are four Marble Dolphins, out of whose Mouths do fall four Sheets of Water, to the East, West, North and South. The Dolphins are placed upon a Marble Pedestal; their Tails are inter∣twisted, and turned upward in the middle of the Pe∣destal. But this Fountain has been ordered to be changed into a Noble Cascade, in a octangular Basin, seven yards diameter. Next unto the Walk that en∣compasses this Fountain, there are in this Court four Gazons, or Green Plots, with Walks on every side pa∣ved with Brick. On the North-side of the Court in the King's Palace, to which we ascend by nine broad Stone-steps. The Palace is built of Brick, and had the Honour to have its first Stone laid by the hands of the most Incompa∣rable
and Best of Queens, her late Majesty of ever Bles∣sed Memory. From the Front, or Body of the House, each Wing does stretch out in two Pavilious towards the two sides of the Court, until the Wings and Sides do come to unite. Besides the Gate in the middle of the Front, there are two others in the two outmost Pavilious. Over the Gate of the Front, and the Gar∣den-Gate, and over the two outmost Pavilions, there are Frontispieces, or Relievos on high, with Representa∣tions relating to Hunting. The Pilasters of all the Gates or Doors, the Frize, and the Cornishes of the Windows, do consist of Free-stone. The Body of the Palace is Leaded above, and adorned with Ballisters; and it has large Shash-windows throughout. The Hall we do first enter into, is paved with very large Black and White Marble. The Dining-room below is very re∣markable throughout, and especially in its Marble and Military Devices, and glorious Gilding. The Great Room above, that we do first enter into from the Stair∣case, and in the middle of the Apartments, is not only adorned with large Landskips, as well as the Stair∣case, but is very resplendent with its Gilding on every side, and throughout all the Cieling. The Rooms of State, and the Bed-chambers, and other Chambers, are all provided and furnished after the Noblest manner, for the entertainment and reception of Great Persons. But the Antichamber to His Majesty's Bed-chamber has most excellent Hangings, representing the Functions or Duties of Cavalry, to wit, the Incampment of Horse, their Foraging, their making of Fascines, and the Firing it self of two Parties of Horse in an Engagement, most lively and naturally exprest, in four several Pieces. The Chappel is handsomely Wainscoted, and the whole so compleatly finished, that nothing can be said to be
wanting, and no Cost spared in order to render the House Magniscient, as well as the Gardens. When we have gone through the Hall of the Palace, and advanced between a very large Stair-case on either hand, we do come to the garden-Gate, which is di∣rectly before the Entrance, and consists of Iron Bars coriously wrought and painted. But before I describe particularly any of the Gardens, it may not be amiss to take a short and general Pro∣spect of them, as also to name some of the most re∣markable Fountains and Cascades in them, that thereby the whole may in some of its Particulars be more di∣stinctly comprehended. On the North-side of the Palace, there is a large and most Magnisicent Garden, the which is divided into two Parts, the Lower Garden, and the Upper: the two Divisions being separated by Canals, by a low Wall, and a broad Cross-walk, in the which Cross∣walk there are on each side a double row of tall Oaks; but in the middle of this Walk a Considerable space is left open, without Trees, for the more convenient view of all the Fountains, the Porticoes, and the Cascades, that are beyond the said Walk, from the Garden-Gate of the Palace. The first partition of this Garden, called the Lower Garden, has a Terras Walk on three sides of it; and here we behold straight before us the Fountain of Ve∣nus, and beyond it another Fountain of a young Her∣cules. In the Cross-walk that goes between those two Fountains, there is on the right hand a Fountain of a Celestial Globe, and on the left such another Ter∣restrial Globe. And at the end of the same Walk on the right hand, upon the side of one Terras Walk, there is the Cascade of Narcissus, as also on the left,
upon the side of the opposite Terras Walk, the Cascade of Galatea. In the Upper Garden we behold a most Noble Foun∣tain, with a Basin of a vast extent, and with three and thirty Spouts, that in the middle of all throwing up the Water five and forty foot high. A little beyond this, we see another Fountain, wherein the Water rises in the form of a Peacock's Tail, under which as also beyond it, are divers Cascades. We do likwise here behold two large Porticoes, or se∣micircular Cloisters, with Rails over them, and sup∣ported on divers Pillars. On the West-side of the Palace there is a Garden un∣der His Majesty's's Apartments, and called the King's Garden. This has a noble Fountain in the middle of it, and adjoining to it there is a large Bowling-green. Beyond this Garden Westward, there is another cal∣led the Labyrinth or Wilderness, some of whose Foun∣tains may be seen, as also Statues in it, and Painting, from His Majesty's Bed-chamber. On the East-side of the Palace there is another Gar∣den, under the Apartments appointed for the Queen, and called the Queen's Garden. This bears a just pro∣portion with that of the King's, and hath such another noble Fountain. And adjoining to this Garden fourth∣wards, there are divers Arbor Walks, with five Foun∣tains in the middle of Parterres. Beyond the Wall of the Queen's Garden, Eastward, there is another handsom Garden for retirement, or a Labyrinth, answering the other, with Fountains, Sta∣tues, Walks, &c. From the Cross Walk that divides the Upper from the Lower Garden, behind the Palace, we go through Gates into the Voliere, or Fowl Garden, west from those
others. And still farther Westward we enter into a large extent of ground, called the Park, wherein are to be seen the Long Canal with Spouts the whole length of it, all rising in the form of an Arch. Beyond this, is the Cypher Fountain and Cascade, and beyond that the Viver, or large Quadrangular Pond, which con∣tains the Water that supplies the Jette's, and Cascades. Within this Park is also the Fountain of Faunus, di∣vers pleasant and long green Walks, Nurseries of young Trees, Groves, and Canals; and West of the Viver there is a fine Grove for solitude or retirement, and called the Queen's Grove. Of all which now more at large. CHAP. II Containing the Description of the Great Garden, next behind the Palace; and first of that part of it called the Lower Garden. SO soon as we have pass'd through the Place, we do enter upon a very broad Terras-walk, extended on the right and left the whole breadth of this Gar∣den, the which is continued forwards by a Brick-wall, and by other Terras-walks on the right and left sides of it. The first Terras-walk is paved with Brick four∣teen yards forwards, between the Garden Gate and the Stone-steps, by which we are to descend into the Garden. It is also paved with Brick thirty paces both to the right and left. From the said paving, this Terras∣walk is continued to the Garden Walls on each side, in a green and gravel Walk. The middle part of this
Walk is Green about sisteen foot, and on each side of the Green there is a Gravel-walk, each of them ten foot broad. At both ends of this first Terras-walk we do ascend by seven Steps unto the side Terras-walks, which are raised higher than the former, for the better placing of those Noble Stone-sabricks that compose the Cas∣cades of Narcissus and Galatea. These Terras-walks do, like the former, consist of a Green-walk in the middle, and a Gravel-walk on each side of the Green. In the middle of these side Terras-walks, behind the Cas∣cades, there are Seats next to the Walls, and painted Green. From the first Terras-walk, near the Garden-gate of the Palace, there is a very large descent into the Gar∣den, first by three Semicircular Stone-steps, and after a little space by fifteen Steps more, all of a very large circumference, the lowermost of those fifteen Steps be∣ing twenty eight yards round. On the right side of the foresaid Steps, upon the Terras-walk, there is a large Stone-Statue, with a Hart behind it, and on the left such another great Statue, both lying or leaning on a distinct Basis, and both holding under one Arm a Stone-vessel. These two Statues and intended to represent two great Rivers, the Rhine and the Issel, between the which Rivers, the Veluwe, and Loo are situate. Out of those Stone-vessels there runs Water, which makes an unexpected Cascade on both sides of the Steps adjoining to the Wall. These Cascades are made from the said Stone-vessels, on each side, into seven double Basins, one below another, besides an eighth large single Basin, which receives the Water of all the rest, at the bottom of the Steps. All these Basins are of a blew Stone. The one half of
these double Basins is raised two or three Inches, in order to retain the Water, and the other half is equal∣ly sunk or made lower, that the sheet of Water may fall from the upper into the lower Basins. From all the three Terras-walks there is a Green slope, reaching from those Walks above unto a low Brick-wall below, that is only two foot high; at the four corners of these Slopes, in this Garden, there are broad Steps for descending from the Walks above. And at the upper part of the Green Slopes there are abundance of little Pipes of water, about a foot di∣stance one from the other. Each of them hath a Cop∣per head, wherein there are four small holes, through which the water is made to play, in order to water the Slopes, and to preserve them always Green. In the Summer Evenings they are made frequently to rain a small shower for the end aforcsaid. In the low Walk below the Green Slopes, at every four yards distance, there are white Stones, each of them above a foot and a half square, on every one of which there are Urns and noble Flowerpots placed, or to be placed, as on Bases: And some of them have representations of divers Ancient and Modern Curiosi∣ties carved upon them. And all along the Wall of the Lower Garden, whi∣ther that which separates the first Terras Walk from the King's, and Queen's Garden, or those that separate the higher Terras-walks from the two Wildernesses, those Walls have such white square Stones near about the same distance from one another, and for the same purpose. On the top of the said green Slopes there do grow many Pyramidal Juniper-trees, with other curious Shrubs intermixed among them. The Slope from the first Terras-walk to the low Walk at bottom is about
eleven foot: but the Slopes from the side Terras∣walks to the said low Wall have a descent of about fif∣teen foot, these being raised higher than the former Walk, on the account of the Cascades before-mentioned. When we have descended into the Garden by the foresaid eighteen Stone-steps, we do enter upon a broad Gravel Walk, into which advancing forty sive paces from the Steps, we come to a Noble Fountain, in the middle of whose Basin is a Marble Statue of Venus at full length, and another of Cupid under her left hand, he holding a gilded Bow. This Statue is supported on a small Whale for its Pedestal, with four great gilded Tritons behow it, a large gilded Shell being between each of the Tritons, and each Triton blowing in a large Trumpet in one hand, their other hand being dispofed in different postures. At the end of each Trumpet the water runs out in a broad sheer, incir∣cling a great part of the broad end of the Trumpet. Also about the Tritons there are many gilded Rushes, and Water-lilly Flowers, which do all contribute to the ornament of this Magnificent Fountain. On the right and left of this Statue, Within the same Basin, as also before and behind the Statue, there are four Gilded Swans, which do spout the water in broad sheets towards the Statue; and all the Swans are raised a lit∣tle above the water. The Basin is bordered with a blew Stone about sixteen inches breadth. It has four Angles, but on the four sides where the Swans are placed, it has a circumflexion or semicircular cut in∣to the Walks, in form of four Half-moons. On either side of this broad Walk, next to the Par∣terres, both before we come to the foresaid Fountain, and also on the sides of the Walk beyond the Foun∣tain, there are Spouts at proper distances in a distinct
Canal; and there are six Spouts in each of them, which do throw up the water about a yard, though of late those Spouts are now always stopt, to avoid the incon∣venience of the waters being blown on the Walk, or on the Parterres. These Canals are walled with Free-stone, and bordered with the same three inches breadth. They are each of them about eighty foot long, and a foot and a half broad, but in those parts where the Spouts are placed, the Canals are widened unto three foot and a half squre every way, in order to avoid the Winds blowing the water either on the Walk, or Parterres. These Canals are paved, after the Mo∣saick manner, with Pebbles of a dark colour, but the Figures that are made by the Pebbles, and which run along the middle of the Canals, and especially about the Spouts, are made in a long sort of Pebbles, pure white and black, of the Diamond cut. If we advance still forwards beyond the Fountain of Venus in the same Walk, we behold another Noble Fountain, in the middle of whose Basin is a young na∣ked Hercules of Marble, arising as from his Cradle, al∣so of Marble; the Hercules squeezing a green Serpent in each hand, and both the Serpents spirting the water about two yards above the Basin. On the right and left of the Hercules, at a little distance, within the same Basin, there are placed two Dra∣gons, each spirting seven several Jette's towards the Hercules. The Basin of this Fountain is likewise bor∣dered with a broad blew Stone, sixteen inches breadth; and paved with a Stone that is about a foot square. Turning out of the aforesaid Walk, from the Foun∣tain of Venus, into a Cross-walk on the right, we meet with a Fountain in the middle, wherein is erected a Celestial Globe, placed on a Marble Pedestal, between
which Pedestal and the Globe there are four naked Boys in Marble, incircling one another in ther Arms. About the Globe the twelve Signs of the Zodiack are curiously painted, the Stars Gilded, and out of abun∣dance of the Stars there do spout out Jettes on all sides of the Globe. Passing beyond this Globe, we behold at the end of the Walk a most Noble Cascade, a Fabrick of wrought Stone, reaching from the Terras-walk above, down to the Gravel-walk below. The water here falls out of the Mouth of a great Head at the top of the Stru∣cture (a round carved covered Basin being placed above the Head) into three great semi-oval carved Basins, one below the other, each of them being two yards in front, besides the allowance of above two foot more on both sides of the two lowermost of those three Ba∣sins, which two foot do serve for conveying the water that is to make the lesser sheets, which will be pre∣sently mentioned. On both sides of the uppermost of those three Semi-oval Basins there is placed a Pine∣apple in Stone, by way of ornament; and on both sides of the second of those Basins, is erected a round scollopt Basin of two foot diameter, that has a Spout in the middle, which throws up the water about two foot. From three parts of those round scollopt Basins, as well as from the whole front of the three great semi-oval Basins, the water does fall into the upper∣most of six lesser semi-oval Basins placed on each side. These lesser Basins are about a yard in front, besides an allowance of about two more for the forming of the smaller falls of water that are now to be men∣tioned. On each side of the six lesser Basins, both on the right and left of the Structure, there are made lit∣tle sheets of water one below another in six descents,
contiguous to those made from the foresaid lesser Ba∣sins. But at the bottom of this Fabrick, between the falls on both sides, there is an excellent Statue of Narcissus at length in Marble, standing upright, but looking a little downward into the water in the com∣mon Basin, or Receiver below; and holding a Hunt∣ing Horn in one hand, whilft he draws up the other by way of Admiration, at the beholding his own re∣flection in the water. Again, turning from the Fountain of Venus on the left hand the same distance in this Cross-walk, as we did before from thence on the right to come to the Celestial Globe, there is, I say, on the left such ano∣ther Noble Fountain, in the middle of which is crect∣ed a Terrestrial Globe. On this Globe, Europe, Asia, Africa and America, the four parts of the World, are exactly painted, and out of the several parts of it there do spring a great number of Spouts, which throw up the water from all parts round it, as in the former Globe. This is likewise placed on a high Pedestal, round which there are four naked Boys in Marble, the first with a Crown on his head, the second with a Tur∣hant, the third a Negro in his short frizled hair, and the fourth with long hair hanging down his back: The four Boys representing the Inhabitants of the four parts of the Earth. At the end of this Walk, beyond this Globe, and on the slope of the opposite Terras-walk, there is such another admirable Cascade as was just now described. Only in the middle of this Cascade there is a Marble Statue of Galatea sitting with a Lute in her hand, at the bottom of the Fabrick, where Narcissus was placed in the former Cascade. All along the middle of this Crofs-walk, between
the Fountain of Venus and each of the Globes, as also between the Globes and the Cascades now deseribed, there are little Canals without any Jette's in them, of the same length and make with the others that were placed on the sides of the first Walk. This first Partition of the Garden, that contains all the aforesaid Fountains and Cascades, does likewise contain eight several Parterres, all the Quarters being separated by Gravel-walks on every side. The four inmost Parterres do consist of divers Figures in Box, en∣compassed with Beds of Flowers, and in those Beds there are intermixed many Juniper Trees growing in Pyramidal forms about round and high Staves painted Green. But the four outmost Parterres do consist of Green Plots, that haves Statues placed upon high Pe∣destals in the middle of every one of them, and have Beds of Flowers a little interspersed among the Green Plots, besides other Beds of Flowers on all the out∣sides of those Parterres, next to the Gravel-walks. The Statues in the middle of those Green Quarters are excellently cut in Marble; they are of Apollo and Pomona on one side of the Garden, and of Bacchus and a Flora on the other side, standing upright on the fore∣said Pedestals. The Beds and Parterres of this and the other Gar∣dens, are not only adorned with Pyramids of Juniper and Box, and with Shrubs of Marshmallows of all co∣lours, but contain variety of Flowers, which succes∣sively blow according to the Seasons of the Year. In the Spring there is a variety of the finest Tulips, Hya∣cinths, Ranunculi, Anemond, Auricula ursi, Narcissus, Junci, &c. In the Summer there are double Poppies of all colours, Gilliflowers, Larks-heels, &c. In the Au∣tumn, the Sun-Flower, Indian Cresses, the Pass-rose or
Stock-rose, Marygolds, &c. On the Walls of these Gar∣dens do grow great variety of most excellent Fruit, as the best Peaches, Apricocks; Cherries, Pears, Figs, Plums, Muscant Grapes of all sorts; and their props are every where painted Green. At four yards distance from the before-mentioned Fountain of Hercules, we advance forwards unto two broad Stone-steps, thirteen foot and a half in front; on both sides of which Steps there are Stone-rails near five foot high, and on each side of the Rails are Pi∣lasters of Stone, which are raised a foot higher than the Rails. On the two Pilasters next to the Steps are placed two Beautiful Sphinxes with their Riddle ex∣press'd or carved; and on the two others are seen two Wolfs in Stone, each of them giving suck to a Romulus and Remus. From those Pilasters and Rails there is continued the whole breadth of the Garden a Brick∣wall, that is above four foot high, wherein there are also divers Pillars of Brick, faced with Free-stone, for the placing of Flowerpots. CHAP. III Of the Second Part of the Creat Garden, called the Upper Garden; together with the Middle Walk, and Canals, which do divide this Garden into the two Parts. WHEN we are up the two Stone-steps now mentioned, we pass over a Canal into the Middle Cross-walk, that divides this Garden, and is remarkable for its double row of tall Oaks on both
sides of it. This Walk is eighteen yards broad from the two Stone-steps, and Rails, unto the Bridge over which we are to pass the second Canal, in order to go into the Upper Garden. The first Canal is five foot broad, the second is fourteen foot. They run from West to East, and are supplied from Cascades that are made at the West-end of the foresaid Walk, which has Iron-rails fastned in Free-stone, that is half a foot above the Brick-wall, and that hath also divers Stone-pilasters, ten Inches broad, and as high as then Iron-rails. Be∣tween those Rails there is a Gate of wrought Iron, through which we are to pass into the Gardens near the Old Hoof. From a Marble Head, placed in this Wall over the Canals, there is on each side a double fall of Water into two Stone-Basins, that are one below the other. The uppermost Basin is about a yard in front, and the lowermost a yard and a half. About the Bridge of the second Canal, there is a Stonework, that is extended both East and West from the Bridge about sifteen foot. At both ends of this Stone-work, which crosses the Canal, a Fountain rises in the middle of the Crofs-wall, and by the declivity of a Basin both ways forms a sheet of water both East and West, and also the same on both sides of the Bridge. Moreover, out of the Walls that are on both sides of this Canal, and also on each side of the Bridge, there are other falls of water from Stone-basins, besides some others in other parts of the Canal, made by raising the water, of stopping its passage, to a certain heighth. These Canals are all along bordered with green Turf, and have a green Slope reaching from the border down to the Water.
Advancing forwards from the second Canal about a hundred Paces, in a very broad Gravel-walk, we come to a most Remarkable Fountain, of a vast circum∣ference. The Basin of it is Octangular, and there are sixteen Paces distance between each of the eight An∣gles. In the whole it is a hundred and twenty eight Paces round. 'Tis bordered with a broad raised Stone-work, and paved with Pebbles, like many of the other Foun∣tains, in divers sorts of uniform Figures. In the mid∣dle of this Great Basin there is a Spout that throws up the water forty four, or forty five foot high perpendicu∣lar. And round about this Spout there are placed two ranks of other Spout, each of the ranks containing sixteen, which do all at a small distance encompass that High one in the middle. The inmost of these two ranks do throw up the water twelve foot high, and the out∣most rank six foot. This Noble Fountain containing no less than three and thirty Spouts, does make an agreable shower of them together, and must abun∣dantly please and divert the most curious Spectator. The water of the Spout which throws it up so many foot high, is brought from a Hill two Leagues distant from Loo, and called Asselt. But the sixteen Spouts which do immediately encompass that High Spout, are brought from another Source, called Orden, about a League off. And the rest of them are supplied from the Viver. A little beyond this Great Fountain, in the same Walk, we descend by three wide Stone-steps to ano∣ther admirable Fountain, in the middle of which there are four naked Boys in Marble, with four Beasts be∣tween them, those Boys and Beasts representing the four parts of the World. Over the Boys Heads there are four gilded scollop Shells, and over the inmost part of
those Shells a gilded Basin inverted. Out of the mid∣dle of this Basin the water rises in form of a Peacock's Tail spread out at length, about a foot and a half above the inverted Basin. This Fountain hath its Basin bor∣dered with Free-stone, sixteen inches broad, and its Stone-work raised three or four inches. From the said Border to the bottom of the Basin, there is rough Rockwork of divers Colours. But the bottom it self is bordered with White Marble ten inches round, and the rest of the bottom is paved with dark Pebble, among which there are also intermixed Marble Stones in divers Figures. As we do ascend from this Fountain forwards, we meet with a Fall of water from one semioval Stone Basin, ex∣tended four foot and a half in front, and placed be∣tween three Stone Steps on each side of it. At the four Corners of those Steps, Bases are raised for the placing of Flower-pots. And round this Fountain there is a Green Slope equal to the height of the Steps, by which we descend to, or ascend from the aforesaid Fountain. Farthermore, between those Steps and the Border of the Basin to this Fountain, there is a round Gravel Walk above four yards broad. Going ten Paces forwards beyond the former Cas∣cade, we come to another, where the Water falls from Three Stone Basins, one below another; whereof the up∣permost is about three foot in front, that in the mid∣dle four foot and a half, and the lowermost five foot, besides a farther extension of these Basins on both sides, for the making of lesser Sheets of Water of eleven inches each in front, which are likewise one below another in three descents. Here is also an ascent of five stone steps on both sides of the Water, with four
Bases at the four Corners of those Steps, for the pla∣cing of Flower-pots. So soon as we are up these Steps, we do presently turn on the right and left of the Walk into Semicircu∣lar Galleries or Porticoes, below which there are two Green Slopes, one below the other; and between those Slopes there are Flower-pots disposed the whole length of them. Each of these Galleries is forty paces long, and about six yards broad; and each of them is sup∣ported by twenty Pillars. They are covered with Lead to shelter from the Rain, and have White Ballisters four foot high upon the Leads, to which there is an ascent by Stairs behind the Galleries. On the Wall within the Galleries, there are drawn the Gods and God∣desses at length in Fresco, thirteen of them in each Gal∣lery. They are paved with White and Red Brick. At the farther end of them there is a descent of seven Steps into the Garden. Beyond these Galleries the former Walk ontinues between Kitchen Gardens on our right and left, but we cannot see them by reason of a Hedge of Dutch Elm five yards high. At the farther end of this Walk Northwards, we come to another Cascade and Foun∣tain. The Cascade is from one plain, long Basin, about eight foot in front. On both sides of it we do ascend by three Stone Steps that are five yards in length, unto another Fountain, that has no Spout in it. The Basin of it is oval, and but seven foot in length. On both sides of this Fountain there are Seats, covered above, painted behind in Fresco, and paved below with white Marble. The open space about this Fountain, and be∣tween the Seats, is paved with a Black, White, and Yellowish Pebble, set in divers Figures.
And here going up two Stone-steps more, that are extended the whole breadth of the Walk, we are stopt from going farther by large Iron Balusters, and a Canal beyond them. In the Canal below, there is another Fountain in the midst of Gardans, made of Shells, Petrified Earths, or spungy Stones, from the top of which the water does fall on three rows, or Garlands of the same substances, placed one below another. Lastly, on both sides of this Fountain there are other Falls of water to be seen below. Nor is our view here limited, though our passage be; for looking on still forwards, we carry our pro∣spect between Trees, unto a high Pyramid, erected in the Heath, about half a mile's distance from the end of the Garden. In this Second Division of the Garden there are twelve Parterres, with Gravel-walks between them all. The six inmost Quarters adjoining, three of a side, to the middle Broad-walk, through which we passed, do consist divers Figures in green, encompassed with Beds of Flowers, in the which there are divers Juniper Trees growing up Pyramidal about green round Staves, and placed at convenient distances. The six outermost of these Quarters, next to the Garden-wall on both sides, are all plain green. From the low Wall at the bottom of the first Terras-walk, unto the Stone Rails or Steps in the Lower Gar∣den on the South-side of the middle Cross-walk, it is about a hundred and twelve Paces. And from the Steps of the side Terras-walk on the right, unto the opposite Steps of the other Terras-walk on the left, it is two hundred and twenty Paces. Beyond the aforesaid Cross-walk, from thence un∣to the Galleries, it is a hundred and forty Paces; and
thence to the Iron Bars at the farther end, about a hundred Paces more. CHAP. IV Of the King's Garden, and another Westward of it, called the Labyrinth. ON the West-side of the Palace, under His Maje∣sty's Apartments, there is a Garden called the King's Garden; which consists of two Divisions. The one has three Parterres, and a Fountain near the mid∣dle of them. The other is a large Bowling-green. The three Parterres do consist of Beds of Flowers, bordered with Box in divers figures, with Pyramids of Juniper, or Box, in many parts of them. The Fountain is bor∣dered with white Marble, thirteen Inches broad: In the middle of this Fountain there is a gilded Triton, holding under his left Arm a gilded Dolphin, out of whose Mouth springs a Jette, that throws up the wa∣ter about six foot high. On the border of this Foun∣tain there are placed at convenient distances eight gilded Sea-Dragons, every one spirting the water up∣on the Triton in the middle. The Bowling-green lies on the South-side of this Garden, and has the King's Stables adjoining on two sides of it. At the West-end of the Gravel-walk, that is be∣tween the King's Garden and the Bowling-green, we do pass through a Gate of Iron Rails, partly gilded, and partly painted Blew, into another Garden, called the Labyrinth, or Wilderness.
When we have here cross'd a Gravel-walk, a Hedge, and a Green-walk, we come to an ascent of three Stone-steps, on both sides of which there is a Stone Fa∣brick with Ballisters in the middle, and four wrought Flowerpots covered, one on each side of the Ballisters. From the Stone-work on each side of the Steps, the water falls from three Marble Heads into a common Basin bordered and walled with Stone; in each of these Basins there are two Spouts which do throw up the water six foot high. Advancing Westward from the said Steps about thin∣ty six Paces, we come to a Fountain, in the middle of which there are four Sea-Cupids in Stone, sitting on four Dolphins. Between the Cupids there rises a Spout out a Serpent's Head, that throws up the water about five foot, and out of every nostril of the four Dolphins there do run other little Spouts. The Border of the Basin of this Fountain is a raised Stone-work; and it is pa∣ved with white Pebbles, but towards the Angles (the Basin being octangular) there are Figures of large Flowerdeluces in a dark Pebble. At this Fountain there are eight several Walks to be Teen, between Hedges of an equal heighth, all the Hedges being between seven and eight foot high. Of these eight Walks four are Green, and the four others are of Earch without Turf, and ungravelled. The Green Walks are placed between the others. At the end of all these Walks there are to be seen Statues, or Paintings, and Westward from the Fountain, besides a large piece of Painting, there is a Fountain with two Spouts, and a fall of water out of a Head placed below the Painting. North and South from this Foutain, at forty Paces distance, we come unto other Fountains. In the mid∣dle
of that Northwards, there are two little Boys of Stone, with an Otter between them, out of whose mouth there rises a Jette, six foot high. It is border∣ed with rough Rockwork of divers colours, with some large Concha, or Shells intermixed: The bottom of the Basin is paved with white and brown Pebbles in different Figures. At the same distance from the Fountain of the Sea-Cupids Southward, there is another Fountain, in the middle of which there is a naked Boy in Stone, hold∣ing a scollopt Shell in his hand, through which there rises another Jette like to the last now mentioned; and below this Boy there is a Satyr in Stone. The Basin of this is bordered, like the other, with rough Stones and Shells, and the Paving is with Pebbles, after the Mosaick manner. Beyond these three Fountains, North and South, the Walk is continued to some distance; and from all those Fountains there are other Walks also to the East and West. And besides these Walks now mentioned, there are other Walks and Turnings between the Hedges, into which when we have gone a little way, we are obli∣ged to return into some of the former Walks by the way we entered. Lastly, The Ground that is between these Hedges, Walks, and Turnings, is all planted with Fruit-trees of divers kinds.
CHAP. V Of the Queen's Garden, and another Private Gar∣den, or Labyrinth beyond it, Eastward. ON the East-side of the Palace, there is a Garden that is called the Queen's Garden, being under the Apartments appointed for her Majesty, as the King's Garden before described was on the King's side. Both of them are of the same dimensions. This garden is divided into two Parts; whereof the one, being next to the Great Garden, consists of three Parterres of Flowers, bordered with Box, and having Pyramidal Juniper Trees in divers parts of them. The Parterres are on all sides encompassed with Gravel-walks; and on the Walls here are divers fort of Fruit-trees, Grapes, &c. besides Paintings of Flo∣ras, &c. in some places. In the middle of the Parterres is a Fountain of Arion gilded, playing on a Lute, and riding on a gilded Dol∣phin, out of whose Nostrils there do rise two Spouts five of six foot high. The Basin is bordered with white Marble, thirteen Inches broad. On the border are placed at convenient distances eight gilded Sea-Horses, every one making a Jette out of each Nostril. The Ba∣sin is paved with a square Stone, about a foot broad. On both sides of this Fountain are Seats painted green, next to the Parterres. The other Part of this Garden consists of divers Gravel-walks within Arbors, the whole length and breadth of it, and has five Fountains in the middle of all the Arbors. Into the middle of the first Arbor-walk
there is an ascent of four Steps, besides a like ascent of Steps at both ends of the same Walk, without the Arbors; or between them and the Garden Walls. Between those three pair of Steps, there is a green Slope the height of the Steps, and at the top of the Slope there are long Beds of Flowers, with Juniper Trees intermixed. And at the corners of all the Steps there are Flowerpots. The first Arbor-walk that runs from West to East, and is next to the Garden now described, hath eight open spaces or Windows, towards the Parterres, be∣sides eight other such Windows on the inside, whereas the other three Sides or Arbor-walks have their Win∣dows only on the inside of the Walk. These Windows and five foot and a half long, and near upon the same height; and they are square at bottom, and convex at top. The four long Arbor-walks, on the four sides of this Part of the Queen's Garden, are each above threescore Paces long, and twelve foot and a half wide, At the four corners, or ends of these Walks, there is placed a Cupid above the Seat, and from those Seats we can see through Windows cut in the inward Arbors, diametrically cross this Part of the Garden, three of the five Fountains, that are presently to be described. Besides the four Gravel-walks within the Arbors, and three other Gravel-walks without the Arbors, next to the Garden-wall; there are other Walks with∣in Arbors that are not gravelled, the which do wind and turn in uniform Figures from the middle of one of the side Arbor-walks to the middle of another. And between these there are Parterres with Fountains in them. In the middle of all the Arbors there is a Fountain with a large gilded Triton, sitting on a Rock of Stones
and Shells, and blowing through a gilded Horn a Spout about eight foot high. The Basin is border'd with rough Rockwork. It is paved with Pebbles, and white Mar∣ble set among them, cut in oval, or Diamond forms. From the middle of the four long Arbor-walks unto this Fountain there are four direct Walks, and between these Walks there are four little Gardens, or Parterres, separated from the said Gravel-walks by Hedges of Dutch Elm, about four foot high. In the middle of each of these four little Gardens, there is a distinct Fountain, and in each of the Foun∣tains there is place a gilded Triton, sitting on a gild∣ed Sea-Horse, or an a Sea-Goat, all upon Rockwork, like that in the middle Fountain; and the Basins of these are paved like the former. But these four Tritons and Basins are less in proportion than that in the mid∣dle Fountain. One of these four Tritons holds a Cup in his Right hand, through which there rises a Jette six of seven foot. The second holds a Trident in his hand, and through the three Spikes of the Trident are made three Dards or Spouts. The third holds a Fish, and makes a Spout through the Mouth of the Fish. And the fourth blows another through a twined Trum∣pet. All the Spouts in these four Fountains do rise much about the same height. And besides these, the Sea-horses on which the four Trions do ride, do all make a little sheet of water from their Tongues. About the first and largest of these five Tritons, pla∣ced in the middle of those other four Fountains, and the Arbors, there are eight semicircular Seats, covered behind and over head Arbor-like; the Seats and Prop∣work, and also the Prop-work of all the Arbors being painted green. Every one of these Seats is above eight foot wide, and ten foot high. And between the
four Gravel-walks, which come to this Fountain from the middle of the four Side-Arbor walks, there are two of these eight Seats, as also between every two Seats there is an entrance five foot wide into the Par∣torres of one of the four lesser Fountains. All along these Gravel-walks, and round the mid∣dle Fountain, there are placed Orange-trees, and Lem∣mon Trees in portable Wooden Frames, and Flower-pots about them. In a corner of the Queen's Garden, next to the Ter∣ras-walk of the Great Garden, and under one corner of the Palace, there is a fine Grotto, consisting of the Roots of Trees, Flints, and Shells, disposed in a rough Grotesco manner, and in one corner of this Grotto there is a Aviary. The Room for the Grotto is paved with Black and White Marble, there being two Fountains in it over∣against one another, and they are raised Arch-wise from the bottom to the top of the Room, the border round the Fountains being raised above a foot from the floor, in order to hinder the water from wetting the Room. The sides are embellished with divers sorts of Shells, and all parts of the Windows beautisied with the same, in divers Figures. There are three Gates or Passages into this Room, one from the Queen's Gar∣den, another from the Great Garden, under the Terras-walk, the third goes into a little Room, where a Couch is placed for Repose, and thence we go into another Room adorned all over with abundance of Porcelaine, or China. The Aviary is exposed to the open Air, but incom∣passed with a small Grate, to confine the Birds; and there is a place in the corner of the Grotto for the Birds to retreat into, from the Rain, or Weather.
On the Eastside of the Queen's Garden, there is ano∣ther Garden for retirement, with Walks, and Hedges of Witch-Elm, about eight foot high; into which we do pass out of the former through a Gate of wrought Iron, painted Blew and Gilt. Turning in it North∣wards in the second Walk, we come to a Noble Foun∣tain, unto which we descend by six Stops; but in the middle of these Steps there is a small fall of water in six descents from a Fountain at the top of the Step; and from thence the water runs in a small channel cross the Walk that encompasses the Fountain which I am going to describe. This Fountain is oblong, or of an Oval figure; its diameter is in length twenty Paces, and it is about ten Paces wide. In the middle of this Basin there is a round Rock, of rough Stones, Shells, and Forge∣cinders, about a yard above the water. Out of this Rockwork there springs a Jette about five yards high, from the middle of it; and from the other parts round about this Rock there do rise abundance of other Spouts. This Fountain is bordered with green Turf, on the Slope of which Border there are placed at due distances six collopt Shells of wrought Stone. Into all these Shells there is a fall of water from the mouth of a wrought Head, joined to the Shell in one and the same Stone; and from four parts of each Shell the wa∣ter falls into the Basin of the Fountain, which is not paved at all, the Bottom being only of Earth, as the Border of it and the Slope were of Turf. Round this Fountain, next to the Hedge, and di∣rectly behind the foresaid six Shells, there are six Sta∣tues in Stone, or so many little Cupids standing upon high Pedestals of wrought Stone; and at the bottom of each Pedestal there is a fall of water into a small
square Stone-basin, from whence the water runs un∣der the Walk into one of the Heads and Shells that were before mentioned to be placed on the Slope below the Border. The first of these Cupids is drinking out of a Stone-cup held in one hand, and has a bunch of Grapes in the other. The second holds a Tulip in his Right hand. The third is reading in a Book, through a pair of Spectacles, held near the Book. The fourth has a Play-thing in his hand. The fifth has a Snake, which he squeezes hard in his Arms. And the sixth leans upon a Spade. Also round about this Fountain there are placed fifty Orange-trees in Frames. Going still Northwards about thirty Paces from this Fountain, we come at the end of this Walk to a Statue of Venus at length, a little stooping, and holding Cu∣pid by both hands. The Venus is placed on a Stone Pedestal, and out of a wrought Head at the bottom of the Pedestal, there is a fall of water into a small Stone-basin. A little Eastward of this Statue of Venus, there is another Fountain in a square Stone-basin. In the middle of it there is a small fall of water from a round Stone-basin, whence the water does fall equally all round in one sheet. And besides another Cascade that is here made out of a Head into a large Basin, there are five other falls of water from out of the Walls of this Foun∣tain, each of them about a foot in breadth.
CHAP. VI Of the Voliere, or Fowl-Garden. AT the West-end of the Middle Walk that divides the Great Garden into two Parts, we pass through a Gate of wrought Iron, into a Walk between high Trees, that goes Southward into the first Labyrinth, de∣scribed in the Fourth Chapter, and Northwards as far as the Heath, that is beyond all the Gardens. At this Garden-gate, we behold the Old Hoof di∣rectly before us Westward, but are separated from it by two Moats, between which there are five rows of Lime-trees; on the South of which the Labyrinth is seated, and on the North the Fowl Garden, that is now to be described. Advancing from the foresaid Gate fifty paces North∣wards, we turn to the Gate of the Fowl Garden on our left, to which we pass on a Bridge over the Moat. This Gate is likewise of wrought Iron, painted Blew and Gilt. Going from this Gate two and twenty paces, we descend by three Steps to a Noble Fountain and Cascade, round which Fountain from the bottom of the Steps to the Border of its Basin there is a Walk twelve foot and a half broad, into which Walk there are four descents by three Steps, four opposite ways: And be∣tween the one and the other row of Steps there is a Green Slope round the Fountain. The Basin of this Fountain is oblong, or oval, and of a great circumference, the Diameter at least forty paces in length, and about twenty four paces in breadth. It is designed for the use of divers sorts of
Fowl; and there are Houses built on the two sides of this Garden, for sheltering the Fowl. In the middle of this Fountain there is a Jette, that throws up the water about twenty foot; and below the Jette there is a tri∣ple Cascade, made from three round Basins, whereof the uppermost appears to make a sheet about a foot in depth, the middle-one near about two foot, and the lowermost four foot. Between these three Ba∣sins the spaces or intervals are filled all round with Shells, &c. the which Shells are seen round them through the Sheets of water that fall from the said Basins. On the North and South-side of this Fountain, six yards from one of the descents by three Steps, there are two Summer Houses, the one opposite to the other. They are within painted in fresco and bronze, and have Cupola's over them, painted Blew and Gilded. Into these Houses we enter by folding Doors, which consist: of two foot Wainscot from the bottom, the rest in broad Glass up to the Cupola. Each of these Houses hath four Shash-windows, besides the Doors, and hath on each side of them contiguous to the middlemost and largest Windows, an Aviary, wherein are kept curious Foreign, or Singing Birds. When the Shash-windows next to the Aviaries are opened, there is still a Wire-grate remaining, to hinder the Birds from fly∣ing out of their Aviaries into the Summer-houses. These Houses are paved with white and red Marble, cut in∣to curious Figures, but they are bordered all round with black Marble, of half a foot breadth, over which Border there is also a Ledge of white Marble, between the black, and the Wainscot. The Aviaries that adjoin to Summer-houses, are likewise covered with lesser Cupola's of Lead, painted
Blew and gilded; but large Cupola in the middle has a round Glas-window, and another little Cupola above the Window, and on the top of the highest Cu∣pola in each House there is a Gilded Pine-apple placed on a Gilded Basis. These Aviaries have on three sides Grates of Wire, which do reach from the Cupola above, to a Stone-wall about two foot high at bottom. The two outmost Side-grates have wooden Shutters with∣out them, and those Shutters an oval Glass-window in them towards the top. In the middle of the Aviaries there is a Jette, whose water falls into a little shallow leaden Basin, near a yard square. Behind these Avia∣ries there are other lesser ones, open above, and on one side, for the receiving some particular Birds, that must be more in the open Air, or that must be kept alone by themselves. And besides these Aviaries, there are in two corners of this Garden, on the Northwest, and Southeast, two other Houses in three divisions, for Ducks, Pigeons, Poultrey, &c. with holes on both sides at the bottom for the Fowl to enter. The middle part of these Houses is now used for tame Pigeons, and has a large Wire-grate towards the Air, and a Spout in the middle, that falls into a shallow round Leaden Basin of about two foot diameter. Round the uppermost Walk that encompasses this Fountain, there are high Stakes joined together, five yards above this Walk, being a prop for the Hedges to grow on, that are now of that heigth, according to the manner that is frequently used in the Low Coun∣tries. In four places of this Hedge there are also se∣micircular Arbors, of the height of the Hedge, with Seats at convenient distances from the Summer-houses.
Between this Hedge and the Wall of this Garden there are some plain Parterres bordered with Box, and in other places Ever-Greens set here and here. CHAP. VII Of the Park, and its Fountains, Long Canal, Cascade, &c. together with the Viver, that supplies the Fountains and Cascades with water: as also a description of six other Vivers, or Fish∣ponds. THE Park is a great space of Ground contain∣ing many Long Green Walks, Groves, Nurseries: Fountains, Canals, Cascades, the Viver and divers Corn-fields, within the Pales. So that when His Ma∣jesty is pleased to take diversion at home, there is not wanting Game for Shooting, Setting, &c. As we go from the Fowl-Garden Westwards, we do leave the Old Hoof on the the left hand, and at the West-end of this Garden we come to a large Wire-grate, of the bigness of a large Gate, on both sides of which Grate we pass through Doors into the Park, and first to a Long Ca∣nal, in the which there are no less than a hundred and eight Spouts, half on one side, and the other half on t'other side of the Canal. They throw the water above four foot high, and the water of every Spout is made to fall on the contrary side of the Canal. This Canal is about six foot broad, and the distance between every one of the Spouts is five foot, so as that between eve∣ry two on the same side there are ten foot distance.
At the beginning and end of the Canal, there are pla∣ced two Spouts falling the one upon the place of the other; but all the rest do fall on the contrary side, and distant from the opposite Spouts, the whole length of the Canal. All these Spouts do fall into the figure of an Arch. This Canal reaches from the Gate of the Fowl-Gar∣den already described, unto a Great Cascade that will be presently mentioned; it has Hedges on each side five yards high; and on the farther side of the Hedge South of the Canal, has a stately Grove of tall Trees, and Northwards of it has all along a Nursery of young ones. About half way, the Walk on each side between the Hedge and the Border of the Canal is about five foot broad, but the other half way, next the Cascade, the Walk is widened unto fifteen foot on both sides. The Canal is Bordered with Green Turf, and has a Slope of the same from the Border down to the water. About the middle of this Canal, on the South-side, there is placed a Marble Statue of a Flora at length, on a high Stone Pedestal; and on each side of the Flora there is also a Head; the which Statue and Heads are seen as at the end of a long Green Walk North of the Canal, the which Walk is a hundred and seventy paces, to go from the Canal unto the Fountain of Faunus, that will soon be described. At the West-end of this Long Canal, we come to a most Noble Fabrick of wrought Stone, or to the Cas∣cade of the Fishers, sometimes also called the Cypher Fountain. It is joined to the side of one of the Walks about the Viver; it has Ballisters at the top of the Fabrick, and joining to the Walk above; and there are covered Flowerpots upon the Ballisters. On each side of
this Cascade there are two several ascents by Stone-steps. And first we come to four Steps, on the corners of which there are placed two little Dragons, out of whose mouths the water falls into two scollopt Stone Basins at the bottom, under the Dragons. From these four Steps on both sides, we cross over other Canals by a Stone-bridge, and then come to eleven Stone∣steps more. These Canals do serve to carry away good part of the water that makes this Cascade, and the rest of it runs into the Long Canal, just now described. In the middle of this Cascade, below the Ballisters, there are four little Boys a fishing, and drawing a Nett full of Fish; the four little Boys are of Stone, with leaden Net-work coloured like Stone, in their Arms; and through a great deal of this Net-work placed between the Boys, the water falls into the a large wrought Basin, and from this Basin the water falls again in five several places between other Net-work. Two of these falls of water from the said Basin are made into a Stone Canal below, that runs along the side of the Wall, under the Stone Bridges into the Canals on the North and South sides of the Cascade. The three other falls are thence made first upon Rockwork, and from thence into a common or general Basin that receives the water aforesaid, besides what comes from the Spouts, and Bell, that will be presently mentioned. Moreover, into the said Canal that runs along the side of the Wall of this Casacade, there are four other falls of water, whereof the two outward are from two Heads of Stone, the two inward from two Heads of Marble, placed at due distances in the Wall aforesaid. The water from the Heads of Stone falls directly into the Canal, but from the Heads of Marble it falls into Stone-basins, that are about a yard in front, and from
them the sheet of water falls into the said Canal. Be∣sides, out of the lower Wall of this Canal there are two other falls out of two more Heads of Marble into two other Stone-basins of the same bigness with the former, and directly under those Heads of Marble and Basins, that were before mentioned to be placed in the upper Wall of the Canal, or the Side-wall of the Cas∣cade. And from these two Basins the sheets of water of fall into the general Basin at bottom. In the middle of the common Basin there is a large inverted Bell of water, near two yards high, and the diameter of its basis on the top seems to be much about two yards likewise. About this Bell there do arise twelve Spouts which throw up the water about eight foot. On the North and South sides of the Basin, wherein were the said Great Bell, adn the twelve Spouts, there are other lesser Bells of water inverted, on each side one. These do rise about a foot high, and the diameter of them at the top is much the same. The common Basin below the Cascade is bordered with a broad Stone of sixteen inches breadth, and walled with Rock∣work; and the whole space between the said Border, and the Long Canal before described, as well as to the Stone∣stairs on either side of this Cascade, is taken up chiefly with little Stone-Canals of seven inches breadth, their Border but two inches. But in the intervals between those little Canals the space is paved with white and black Pebbles in divers Figures. From the two lesser Bells the water does run along those little Canals, which besides the flourish they do make on each side, do form the Letters R. W. M. R. And above those Let∣ters the said small Canals are so disposed, as to form the representation of a Crown. Moreover, from among these Pebbles, with which all the intervals between the
little Canals are paved, there are made to rise, when 'tis thought fit, by the turning of two sCocks, about fourscore the most minute Spouts that can be con∣ceived. They are like a shower of small rain, ar∣tisicially made in a certain order. One half of the fourscore is made to play by the turning of one Cock, and the t'other half by turning the other. And these Cocks are turned in the Walk above the Cascade, or between it and the Viver. Every one of these little Spouts plays about a yard high, and the Pipe of every one of them is covered with a small Copper Cover, that has five little holes through which the water does rise in five small branches, like to a very small shower of Rain. Some of the Covers of these Pipes are half an inch, others are three quarters of an inch diameter. But in short, they do make a very pleasant and agreeable sight, when∣ever they are made to play: And they are intended to divert the Spectators, by causing a small Rain un∣awares on those who shall advance within the compass of their reach. I did before mention two pair of Stone-steps, the one of four, the other of eleven Steps on the North and South sides of this Cascade. From the two sides of the lowermost, or least pair of Steps, where the little Dragons were said to be placed, there are conti∣nued from the Steps on one side to the Steps on the other side of the Cascade, all round this space (which was said to be paved with Pebbles, and to consist of the soresaid Stone Canals) two circles of Stone of fourteen inches, breadth, which do serve instead of a double Bor∣der to the whole; the two Borders keeping the same distance from one another throughout, as the Steps do make in front, or breadth.
When we are up the second pair of Stairs of eleven Steps, we enter upon a Walk, that encompasses a large Quadrangular Pond, called the Viver, being the common Storehouse of the Water that supplies so many of these Fountains, Cascades, and Canals. The Walk on the four sides of the Viver is seven yards broad; it is a Gravelled Walk; and on the side next to the water it is adorned with Juniper-trees two yards high, adn six yards distance from one another; and on the other side of it has Lime-trees at the same distance, besides large round Bushes between the Lime-trees. The Viver is a hundred and forty paces long, and threescore and ten paces broad. It is bordered with green, and has a green Slope from the Border down to the water. At the West-end of the Viver, in the middle of the Walk, we do pass through another Gate, the Bars partly Gilt, and partly Blew, into a long shady Grove, usually called the Queen's Grove, wherein there are divers Walks, some near unto Brooks of a clear running water, others at some distance from the Brooks, and all of them as solitary and retired, as can well be imagined. This Grove is of a good extent, and in the Summer-time very delightful. And now before we end, let us return unto the East-gate of the Fowl-Garden, from whence we may enter North-west into a long Walk between high Trees, there being a Grove on each side beyond the rows of Trees. In this Walk, when we have gone about two hundred and twenty paces, and there cross'd another long green Walk, towards the middle of this Walk, where the Groves do end, we do at length come to the Fountain of Faunus, whose Basin is round, and about fifty seven foot diameter. In the middle of this Fountain there is crected the Statue of Faunus in Stone at length, with an Infant in his Arms, and a Goat at
his Feet to suckle the Infant. This Statue of Faunus does lean upon a Stone Pillar, and stands upon a high Pedestal of a Blew Stone, placed in the midst of a Rock, consisting of many rough Stones, petrified Earth of divers colours, and large Shells here and there inter∣mixed. From about this Rockwork there are made six double sheets of water, whereof each double fall is over∣against a several Walk. For from this Fountain there are six distinct Walks, one opposite to another. And round about it, between each of the six Walks, near the corners of the Walks, there are placed two Statues in half-length of the Termini, or Gods of Boundaries, twelve in all; some of which twelve Statues have the face of a Man, and some of a Satyr; and they are placed upon Pede∣stals two yards high. All these Walks are twenty two, or twenty four foot broad; they are green in the mid∣dle, and on each side of the Green they are plain Earth ungravelled, according to the Dutch custom, to about four foot and a half breadth on each side of the Green. The Hedges of all these Walks do consist of Trees both great and small, planted close together. Here are also other handsome long Walks in the Park, that are not men∣tioned; besides Brooks, and Fishponds within the Grove on the sides of the Long Canal. There is one thing more very remarkable in these many Fountains and Cascades that have been described; as that they are supplied with a natural conveyance of water that does constantly run, and is not forc'd up with Engines into great Cisterns, where it must soon corrupt and stink, if not quickly discharged. Whence it comes to pass, that the famous Water-works at Ver∣sailles have in this regard a very great disadvantage and inconvenience, because they soon contract corruption, and after they are forc'd to play, are found to cause
an ill stench in the Gardens. Whereas at Loo the water is always sweet, and there is no need of Commands, or Preparations for a day or two before, in order to make it run. These Gradens in the whole are a Work of wonder∣ful Magnisicence, most worthy of so Great a Monarch; a Work of prodigious expence, infinite variety, and cu∣riosity; and after nine years labour by abundance of Workmen they were some years ago intirely finished, and brought to perfection in all respects. I should here conclude this Description, if I did not judge it it may be acceptable to give a short account of six Vivers, or Fish-ponds, which His Majesty has caused to be made in the Heath, beyond the Gardens. When I was at Loo, two years since, there were about two hundred Persons imployed in the making the said Vivers, which are since finished. They are situated on the East-side of that Walk which is continued from the end of the Upper Garden, between Lime-trees, un∣to a Pyramid that is crected half a mile off in the Heath. The first of these Vivers is about twenty yards di∣stant from the Lime-trees, and is eight hundred and forty foot, or two hundred and eighty yards in length. And it is two hundred and forty foot, or fourscore yards in breadth. All the six Vivers do lye Eastward of one another, and the water is conveyed from one to another, after the manner as in the Fist-ponds in Hide-park. To the first there is made a subterrancan Passage, built of Brick, from the Canal that runs at the North-end of the Great Garden, by the which Passage the water is brought into the first Viver, and from that let into the others.
The second Viver is in length six hundred and twelve foot, or two hundred and four yards; and it is two hundred and forty foot, or fourscore yards broad. The third Viver is four hundred forty four foot, or a hundred forty eight yards long; and of the same breadth with the two former. The fourth, sifth, and sixth Vivers, are all of the same length, that is, three hundred ninety six foot, or one hundred thirty two yards long; and they are all three of the same breadth, that is, four hundred forty four foot, or one hundred forty eight yards. The length of the three first Vivers is extended Northwards, but that of the three latter is made East∣ward; the situation of the ground, wherein they are made, requiring this alteration. For on the North∣side the Heath has a rising ascent, which makes this alteration of the dimensions necessary. Between the Vivers and this rising-ground there is room enough for receiving the water that shall at any time be emptied out of them, in order to fill them with fresh water. They are not made above six foot deep, and the Earth that is dug out of them does serve to make the Banks round about them; the which Banks being rais∣ed three foot above the Vivers, does occasion that their depth is but three foot more. The Banks that surround all the six Vivers are twenty four foot broad, and on those Banks which so encompass them, there is made a pleasant Walk, adorned with Willows the whole circumference. But the Banks which serve to separate them from one another, are but eighteen foot broad. These Vivers are provided for the sup∣plying different sorts of Fish; and are now finished
by a Model of Mosieur Marot, a very ingenious Mathematician, who is the same Person that first Designed all these Gardens and Fountains; but the Or∣ders relating to them were from time to time gi∣ven by the Right Honourable the Earl of Portland; and his Lordship's Directions were punctually observed by Monsieur des Marais, His Majesty's Chief Archi∣tect, a Gentleman of great Endowments and Ca∣pacity.
A Short Account of HOLLAND. IN the foregoing Description I have given the Reader a moderate comprehension of those famous Gar∣dens; the finishing of which so nobly, and with that great variety, is the more to be Admired, because it was done during the late War, when all things were at stake, and the event was feared so much by most men. And although things were not indeed in that danger from the French, as the Roman State was, when Hannibal was at the Gates of Rome, yet it puts me in mind of a Brave Action of that Great People, who, whilst Hannibal was just under their Walls with his Army, and some of the Fields whereon he was Incamped, happening to be then exposed to Publick Sale, were no destitute of Purchasers of the Magnanimity, who at that very time gave even the Market Price for an Estate then in possession of the Greatest and most Deadly Enemy that ever threatned that Republick, from the first Founding of the City. And this is the more remarkable, because the French King, at the breaking out of this War, though his Cof∣fers were then full of an inexhaustible Treasure, as 'twas thought; and though he had an inclination to Magain∣cent Buildings beyond all his Predecessors, yet he imme∣diately Ordered a full stop to be put to all his Publick Works: Well foreseeing what a terrible Storm he had brought upon his Kingdom, and with how Great a Ge∣neral he was like to contend. Insomuch that this Grand Monarch, who was often said to give Peace to Europe, out
of a certain peculiar Generosity, when he had on a sud∣den snatcht away from his Neighbours one Province after another, and his Slow Enemies had begun to form their Forces; this Monarch, I say, was by the late long and Expensive War, by the firmness of the Confederate Union, and by the prospect of a Peace with the Turks, brought to such Fears and Apprehensions, that he Purchased a Peace with a strange and surprizing dismembring his Great Monarchy, and by the Surrendring an incredible number of large and rich Provinces, and many Forts and Strong Towns that were thought to be Impregnable. An since there is so near a proximity between Loo and Holland, I cannot here omit to say somewhat of that Great, and Considerable People, among whom these Gar∣dens are to be seen. But this Subject having been ex∣cellently well performed, if not in a manner exhausted, by one of the best of our English Pens, who has joined to∣gether the Scholar and the Gentleman in his Writings, as well as any of our Modern Authors; and particularly in his late Essays upon Ancient and Modern Learning, &c. I shall therefore refer my Reader to Sir William Temple's Curious Observatios upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands, for a more distinct and full knowledge of this Great Subject; and yet however I will not pass it by altogether in silence. The Belgae, or the Low Countries, were for their Va∣lour and Courage eminent above other People, even in the time of Julius Caesar, who at the beginning of his Commentaries, de Bello Gallico, has these words. Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae. When Caesar had divided Gaul into three Parts, he says the Stoutest and most Cou∣ragious of them all, were the Belgae, or Low Countrymen, then called Gallica Belgica, and since divided into Seven∣teen Provinces under the Dominion of the House of Au∣stria, until William the Wise and Valiant Prince of Orange
first rescued, and the Invincible Prince Maurice of Nas∣saw, by abundance of Victories, and Sieges, compleated the Peace of, Seven of those Provinces, and established them in a Free Republick, on the 9th of April, 1609. Again Tacitus, lib. 4. says, Quicquid roboris apud Gallos sit, Belgas esse: That the chiefest strength of all France was in these People. By which it appears, that the Dominion of France was then greater than it is now, and yet Europe was not overrun with it. That Providence, which certainly counducts and over-rules the Affairs of the World, sets bounds to Empires, as well as to the Sea. But to proceed, We have had, in the late War, sufficent experience of the Fortitude and Valour of the Provinces now mentioned. For what Horse have done their duty, or fought better upon occasion that the Walloons, so miserable to look up∣on, usually called the Spanish Horse, though Natives of Flanders, and Brabant? Or what Foot have done better service in the late War than the Dutch, either in Sieges, or in Battels? For if I were to speak of the English Soldiery, or were askt which were the best Soldiers, the French or the Bel∣gae, I sshould answer, the Englissh, as Sir Walter Rawleigh did, when putting the question, in his book of the World, which were the bravest Soldiers, the Roman, or the Gre∣cian, made answer the English; who, if they were in his time of such account and esteem, when only a Queen, though she indeed a most Excellent one, sate on the Throne, and lest her Armies to the Conduct of her Ge∣neris: What admiration ought now to be had of the English, when they have our Present King at the Head of them! For we must not forget, tanti esse f, quanti Imperatorem. That the Strength of an Army is to be truly measured by the Valour and Conduct of the General.
And we may have some reason to doubt, whether Alexander the Great had a better Army, or better Sol∣diers, even of his Grecians, with which it was his good fortune to Conquer the World before him, and the which he led so boldly and bravely against a great concourse of Persians, who were a weak and esseminate People; than our Edward the Third, or Henry the Fifth, conducted against France it self, that was always esteemed a Warlike People, and was long ago adjudg'd such by Caesar himself, by his own Experience, after he had Conquer'd them, and the rest of Europe. Those two famous English Kings, I say, did sufficiently manisest the Superiority of English Armies to all others, upon better trials than with Persi∣ans, when they had Kings at their Head, like to themselves, and worthy to conduct them. The knowledge of this Truth, made the late Re∣nowned and Excellent General Turenne, so much to co∣vet English Soldiers before all others, and even before his own Countrymen, in the Armies he Commanded. And this made him so desirous of the Honour, to be called Father of the English, when he was their Friend and Pro∣rector. The last Demonstration we have had of the English un∣daunted Courage, was lately before Namur, where in the first Attack that was made, the English Red-Coats struck such a Terror on the French, by an unparalel'd Brave∣ry, that they were never able to recover themselves from the fright, during the Siege. And when the Town was forced to Surrender, and the King then Ordered away all the English to the Succour of Prince Vandemont, after the famous Retreat he had made, and to Preserve Brussels from falling into the hands of Villeroy, at the time he Bombarded it; the Elector of Bavaria, as I have heard, begg'd of His Majesty the detaining four English Battalions towards carrying on the Siege of the Castle, and Forts ad∣joining
to the end that the same Terror might still re∣main with the Enemy, which the Valour of the English had struck so deeply upon them. And of how great weight and force to the animating a People, or Army, the genius of a Good General is, may be evinced, by that dismal Revolution, which happened to the United Provinces in the Year 1672. This People, so famous in History for their Courage, and who had so gallantly signalized themselves for it against the Spani∣ards, when they were besieged by them in Leyden, Haer∣lem, and Alcmar; when it happened that the inundation of the French Armies came upon them in that Year, they made no manner of Resistance, their Towns hardly staid for a Summons to surrender, the French were advanced within sight of Amsterdam, and all the People of Holland seem'd to be without a Soul, as they were without a Head. Now at this so strange and fatal a Juncture, when once the Perpetual Edict, for abrogating the Office of Stadtholder, was annulled and at end, and the then Young Prince of Orange was restored to the Power and Dignity of his Ancestors, behold all things quickly recovered new life, the Soldiers resumed the Courage they had lost, and the many Towns that were subjected to the French, in Gelderland, Over-Issell, Utrecht, and in part of Holland it self, they were soon obliged to restore, and with the same celerity, as they had before over-run them. Nay, and the strong Town of Grave, situated upon the Maese, defended so well by Chamilly, and which the French were so unwilling quit, was by the vigor and prudent Conduct of the same successful General, our present most August Monarch, soon reduced to the Obedience of the States. Moreover, to the same Cause, under God, to the In∣fluence and Conduct of the same General; our most Mag∣nanimous King, at the Head of the Confederate Army,
Spain does now owe, not only the recovery of Ca∣talonia, that was entirely lost; but the Preservation of Brabant and Flanders, by the Surrendring of Aeth, and Courtray; the Restitution of Luxemburgh and Hainault; and the late Conquest of Namur it self, in sight of a French Army of above a hundred thousand men. And lastly, To the same Generalissimo Europe will ever be indebted for this Glorious, and Wonderful Peace, that it now so hap∣pily enjoys, and which will always be recorded by Hi∣storians, to the immortal Praise of the Great King William, and to the Admiration of all Posterity. The Dutch are not now torn and divided into Factions, and Parties, but are generally unanimous in their Coun∣sels, calm in their Deliberation, and soon resolve on such Supplies or Taxes, as are necessary for the safety and wel∣fare of the State. Formerly indeed, by the influence of French Emissaries, they have laboured under Divisions and Ani∣mosities, to the detriment, and danger of the State; and they have not always hearkened to the wisest Counsel, wit∣ness their hasty conclusion of the Peace at Nimmeguen. But it is now become a frequent Observation among the Dutch, as a Gentleman of theirs of good understanding, and considerable employment, informed me, that in all things wherein they have been found to follow the Wise Counsel and Advice of our present King, they have always found themselves to be Successful; and whensoever they have rejected, or not followed the same Wise Counsel, they have as often proved unfortunate, as the Events themselves have afterwards demonstrated. And hence it comes to pass, that now the State of the War for the next Year can there be determined in as few days, as it is in months in some other Countries. And now the Pensionary of Holland Consulting two or two three days with the Stadtholder, does bring matters of the greatest moment to a shorter issue, than can be easily expected from the different Senti∣ments
of a great number of Counsellors, though never so Wise. Holland does contain a greater number of large, popu∣lous, and considerable Towns, than possibly are to be found so near together in any other part of the Universe. But though it abounds with multitudes of Inhabitants, and is enriched with so many great Towns, such as Amster∣dam, the Hague, Leyden, Dort, Delf, Rotterdam, Haer∣lem, the Briel, &c. and others, as remarkable as the Chief Cities in other Countries, yet it yields to their su∣stenance little or no product of Corn or Grain. They are sain to fetch from the Baltick, and other Places, where it is plentiful, Corn enough to supply themselves, and their Neighbours, who want it. And they do send out great Fleets every year for that purpose. All this Coun∣try is a low level, lower tan the Sea it self in many places, and defended from the inundation of the Sea by incredible Dykes, or Banks. All the seventeen Provinces are commonly called the Low Countries; no that they are all a Low level like unto Holland, but because they are situated towards the Lower part of the Rhine, and therefore are now called by Authors Germania inferior, or Lower Germany. The Country of Holland is excel∣lent for Pasture, and cultivated to the best advantage by mighty labour and industry of the Inhabitants. They have cut large Canals through all parts of the Country, by means of which they do go commodiously and plea∣santly from Town to Town, at a regulated easy expence, in cleanly and large Vessels, covered from the Weather, which set out constantly at certain hours, whether the Passengers are many or few, so soon as a Bell has done ringing. And by means of the said Canals, they do en∣rich, and water their Grounds at pleasure, and by Wind∣mills they do throw out the water again, as they judge convenient. As we travel along these Canals, it is de∣lightful
to see so many Noble Country Houses, bordering upon them, and adorned with near Gardens, within sight of ll Passengers. The water of these Canals is not offen∣sive to the smell, even in the Summer time, although generally they are a Standing water. Possibly the great number of Boats that are continually plying to and fro, and drawn by Horses upon the trot, do keep the water in that agitation, that it has not time to putrify, and grow offensive. If this Low Country wants any thing, it is that variety of different Objects, which we do enjoy so much here in England; and the which Variety is so acceptable and agreable to the nature of Mankind, who do all, and in every thing, consist of Variety, as in Languages, Voices, Persons, Countenances, Gestures, Hand-writing, Cloaths, Appetites, Gustoes, and what not. For what can con∣tribute so much to the establishing our Healths, when declining into a Consumptive state, as Variety even of Country-Air? Or to what end has Providence made that insinite Provision of Flesh, and Fish, and all other Suste∣nance, if not to please and gratify the different Appetites of men? And I am mightily mistaken, if even in Physick too, the constant, long continuance of the same Medi∣cines will have that good effect on abundance of Consti∣tutions in Chronical Cases, as a Change, and Variety, and Alteration of Medicines. But to return; there is little of our Variety to be seen in Holland. In travelling from place to place we do eve∣ry where see the same sort of Country again and again. One House that we look upon may differ in dimensions, or other circumstances from another House; but the Countrey in one place has the same Aspect and Resem∣blance to that in another, as an Egg is like to an Egg. So that after our first Curiosity is reasonably well satis∣fied, our Entertainment in the Boats is commonly a
Book, or viewing the mixt Company, or sometimes Discourse of I know not what, to pass away the time. He that would see kind of Paradise in this Country, must go by Land from Dort one League towards Breda; and there he will see all the way a Country so adorned with fine Houses, and fine Gardens, and with that va∣riety of Trees, planted in good order, and on all sides, that he will not know which way to cast his Eye first, so many Objects will invite him. Perhaps he will find him∣self distracted with as much diverting variety, as a young Gentleman or Lady is wont to be, when they first come out of the Country, and take the diversion of the Ring in Hidepark in good Weather, on a Sunday Evening, when the Town is full. I need not describe the Charms, the Lustre, the Atractions of Living Objects there, Ori∣ginals in the greatest perfection that Nature ever drew, and such Masterpieces of Man and Womankind, as nei∣ther Italy it self, nor all the World perhaps, can equal, or shew the like, as in this our Paradise of Women, as England has been often and justly called; nor need I hint how the Eyes of young Comers do there nimbly rowl about, not without pain sometimes, and even danger of Distortion. The Dutch Brabant to say nothing now of the Velawe) from Bergen-op Zoom to Breda, Boisleduc, and so to Grave, is for much the greatest part a barren and sandy Coun∣try, where Horses do seldom travel above a League an hour. It is indeed a very strong Frontier, and hard to be attempted; and therefore the French, when they made their memorable Inroad on these Provinces in the Year 1672. thought it more adviseable to hazard the difficult passage of the Rhine it self, by swimming one of the great∣est Rivers of Europe, than to make its Attack upon any part of this large Frontier, where the Towns were so strong, and Forrage would have been so scarce.
I was never in Frieseland, nor Groningen, and therefore shall say nothing of those Parts. Once I rid from Die∣ren to Zutphen, over the Issell, in order to see a most No∣ble and Magnisicent House of the Right Honourable the Earl of Albemarle, that his Lordship has lately built about half a League from Zutphen, and from which City there is a very spacious Avenue, or Access made to the House, between a double Row of Trees; his Lordship possessing a considerable Estate in that Province. This House has Noble Gardens adjoining to it, and made after the greatest Models, with Terras-Walks, Fountains, Cascades, Canals, &c. But they were not then finished, no more than the House, when I went to see them, after the last Cam∣pagne. His Lordship is descended of an Ancient Family in this Country, and was Baron of Keppell, or Kappell, a Town of note in the Jurisdiction of Zutphen, before he was made an English Earl; and his Lordship is admitted among the Noblemen of Holland, which compose one part of the States, or have their Representation in the States General. It is now twenty years since I was in Zealand, having been then sent to Ulussing to see a sick Gentleman; whom after I had, through God's Blessing, soon put into a state of sasety, I went to see Middleburgh: and going thither upon a high Causeway, and looking down upon the Country, I could not but think it anciently belonged to the Dominion of the Sea, from whence it has therefore properly its name of Zealand. They are Towns of great: Trade, and Ships of the greatest Burthen, or Force, do ride in deep Canals, in the middle of the Streets of Ulussing, as well as in some parts of Middleburgh. Great Geographers may indeed write learnedly of all the World, though they never were out of the Country they were born in; nor ever hazarded their Persons, by
dangerous Travels, in order to form their Notions, or Experience, Yet I shall give but a short and slender Account of my Observations in these Provinces, because my Travels here have been none of the greatest. I always thought it my Duty to continue in my proper Post, that so I might be ready to receive the Honour of the King's Commands, when His Majesty sShould judge it convenient to lay any upon me. For in my Profession sudden Acci∣dents do sometimes happen, which will not allow that Liberty or Curiosity which other Gentlemen may take at plaesure. Travelling abroad is certainly of singular use to the ac∣complishing a Gentleman. It enlarges all his Faculties, and takes off that narrowness or littleness of mind, which for want of knowing the World, is apt to sowre his Tem∣per and Conversation. It makes men have just, and kind, and charitable Ideas of Mankind; and though many of our Gentlemen have so great natural Endowments, and have besides such advantages above Foreigners, by their Education in our own Unversities, that they do not seem to want either this, or any other Improvement; yet Tra∣velling will, as it were, polish even a Diamond, take off its Roughnes, and give it a new Lustre. And lastly, it will have that good essect, if it be well employed, as to make him love his own Country the better. And Eglish∣men, that Travel, prove very unhappy, or make but lit∣tle good use of it, if after they have seen what is to be seen abroad, they do not relish and admire the abundant Happiness of their own Country, much better than they did before. A Traveller in this Country must be easy, and obliging in his Carriage, must make no noise, and but little di∣spute about his Reckonings; and then he will seldom have just cause of COmplaints. He must be contented with what he finds upon the spot, and must take care to
put his Host to as little trouble as may be. The more he appears a Man of Quality, the more he must expect sometimes to pay for it; but in the general, if he be pru∣dent, and of a quiet peaceable Temper, he will Travel in this Country with as much frugality and fair dealing, as he can in any other, notwithstanding the Clamors which have sometimes been made through the indiscre∣tion of Stranger. Great Taxes are here sussered patiently, and without murmuring, for the sake of the Liberty, and Security they enjoy. They are all laid as equally as possible; and he that can invent a New and Easy Tax, that will not be Grievous to the People, shall be sure not to fail of a Publick Reward. Whatever is said of Laws, their Taxes are not like Cobwebs, in which the lesser Flies are usually catch'd, whilst the greater break through and escape. The inferior People, and the Rich, do pay to a Penny the same Pound-rate, in proportion to their Abilities. No body there thinks it their Interest (or at least it was ne∣ver practised) to promote Unequal, or Uneasy Taxes, that shall crush one part with an insupporatble burthen, and leave other parts free from feeling the weight. And their Excises, although they reach almost every thing imagi∣nable, are but little felt bythe generality, or cause but few Complaints, by reason that all do share alike in the payments, according to their consumption; and that they reach the Luxurious and Expensive, more than the Poor, or Frugal People. Their having but one Flesh∣Market, and one Fish-Market, &c. in a large Town, ren∣ders the Collection also easy and certain. Fustice is so well distributed among them, and severely executed, that many do think a Traveller may with more Safety pass through all the seven Provinces with his Purse in his hand, by Day and by Night, than go ten miles out of London with Money in his Pocket. Insomuch that few
do 'susser here on the account of Felonies and Burglaries, excepting some Swart-makers of late, who did blacken their Faces to conceal themselves in their Robberies. But that Gang has been happily disovered, and I think ex∣tirpated before this time. Those that ever Rob, or Steal, are all hang'd in Chains on the Gallows, or remain on the Wheel they were broke upon, until the Fowls of the Air have done picking their Bones, and they drop asunder. The which exemplary Punishment has that good effect in deterring others from the like Offences, that it is thought more do dye by the hands of the Common Executioner in London at one or two Sessions, than do on such ac∣counts in a Year in all the Seven Provinces. Though all Opinions, that are not Dangerous to the State, do here find a refuge, and are tolerated without scruple; yet Idle People, who will not work for a Liveli∣hood, and have no visible way of subsisting honestly, will not long meet with a safe Sanctuary in these Provinces. The Magistrate will soon find them out, and make them give a probable account how they live and subsist. They who desire to see what becomes of Idle Drones, or Pro∣fligate Wretches, may take a walk to the Rasp-bouses, and Spin-bouses, where they will find them busily employed at their daily Tasks; but if they will not work there ac∣cording to appointment, the Pump is ready for the one, to Work or Drown, and due Correction to enforce the other. Indeed the Musick-Houses, where loose People may meet in the Evenings, are suffered by connivance, if not allowed by Authority, at Amsterdam, for some Poli∣tick Considerations, and particularly, that the East-India Seamen, or others, when they are trouble with too much Money, after a long Voyage, may here have the convenience of disburthening, or soon ridding themselves of the Incumbrance; and may thereby be the sooner rea∣dy for another Voyage. But even these Houses do observe
some Order. No boisterous Rudeness, or scandalous Obscenities are here permitted. And if a Couple co happen to agree matters, strike up a Bargain, and resolve to try dangerous Experiments, they must e'en retire from thence to private Lodgings hard by, in order to commit their Follies. If in other Places of this famous City Frailties of this kind do come to be taken notice of; and the Scout, or Magistrate, who has his Spies abroad, should receive information of such Adventures, he enters all Places immediatly without opposition, and where he finds Offenders, he inslicts such Fines and Amer∣ciaments as with sufficiently discourage Debauchery; and the Law is soon dispatcht, being wholy in his own hands. Their Food is commonly Fish, and they do generally seem to like it, and prefer it to Flesh, for Gusto, as well as Cheapness. For here they study not the Dainties of Apicius, nor the Roman or Asiatick Luxury. But in great plenty they do live with great frugality. Their Flesh they Stew, or Boil, and but seldom Roast. For their Fewel being Turf, they cannot so Conveniently, or so Well Roast, as we do with our Coals and Wood. Their Beer and Moll, that are publickly sold, are wholsome, cool, and good, and fail not to quench the Thirst; whereas the Liqours we commonly meet with here in our Inns, and our London Brewing for sale, is unhappily be∣come such a Mystery, that a great deal of it will rather increase than quench the thirst. Their Nimmeguen Moll, that is so plentifully transported about Holland, is a sort of Oat-Ale, much celebrated by them for its sanative var∣tues, like their Fresh Herring in Summer. 'Tis a well∣tastd, mild, and wholsome Ale, And 'tis hoped, that our Parliament, when the have leasure to consider it, will take some care of the wholsomness of our London Brewing, both by Brewers and Vintners, since our Health does depend as much (if not more) upon the goodness
of the Liquors we drink, as it does upon the Food we eat; since our Table-Beer that is well Brew'd, is both a whol∣some, and Pleasant Drink: And lastly, since we are come to that Skill, or Persfection now-a-days, that we an make Wine without Grapes, Cyder without Apples, and Beer without Malt. The Wine they drink is either a sweet, and to us nau∣seous White-wine, which they call French Wine, but ge∣nerally such a White-wine, as I cannot remember to have tasted in France; or else Rhenish and Old Hock. The Rhe∣nish they are well known to make, or to store up plenti∣fully, at Dort; and the Hock they have sometimes most excellent in its kind. For it cannot be supposed, that after so long a War on the Rhine, they can have that abun∣dance of those Wines in reality, as when the Great Tun of Heydleburgh, and other Magazines were in being, and the Vineyards not destroyed by the Fate of War. They have also common enough, a sort of Sack, or Spanish Wine; but it is as different from our Canary, as Posset-drink is from good Table-beer. Claret is no where to be found in their Publick Houses, unless perhaps at Rotterdam, or in some French Ordinary. And they are not yet fallen in love with Claret, or else in pure Civility to England do leave to us the free possession of a whole Ocean of Claret, fetcht from divers Countries and People, who are con∣tented to drink Water themselves, and very little Wine, that we may have enough to drown our selves in, for pleasure and diversion. They have also every where their Wormwood-wine, which is commonly called by the name of Alsom Wine, and by the English for sound-sake, Wholsome Wine, and the which they do not drink only for a Whet before Dinner, or on Physical accounts, but indifferently at any time of the days, or evening. It is made of the French Wine before mentioned, and by its Bitterness does take off that lusciousness, or nauseous taste to Strangers.
This Country being Cold and Moist, their Food com∣monly Fish, their Moll very cool that they so much drink of, and their usual Wine Rhenish or Hock, their Temper casily chills, and grows tender. Insomuch, that they do as naturally fall into Agues, or else into Putrid Fevers, as we do into Inflammatory Distempers, or into the most Violent and Malignant Fevers, the effects of our Luxuri∣ous Living, and over-high Feeding. And although they have many Learned and Good Physicians among them, yer I know not how it happens, that their Agues are not very easily, or very soon Cured. Many Months are usu∣ally spent in such Cures, and the Agues very often first or last do turn into Continued Fevers, or from a Safe into a Dangerous State. For it happens that the use of the Jesuit's Bark is too much suspected among them, and de∣serves not to be tried, until all other ways have been long tried in vain. And this I observed at a time, when there was never a more general occasion of using the Bark, and when the use of it was never more proper or effectual; I mean, in the two first Campaigns that I had the Honour to wait upon His Majesty, being the Years 1693, and 1694. Agues were at that time very Epidemi∣cal; and the Continued Fevers had such remarkable Remissions, that they were Cured with as much Certainty, if not Speed too, by the Bark, as the Agues theselves, provided that proper Evacuations did precede its exhibi∣tion. And I have reason to say with Speed; for I was then seldom obliged to make above three or four Visits, even in those Fevers. And by reason of the Bark's so well agreeing with the Fevers at that time, as well as the Agues, I made use of as many Pounds of the Bark in ei∣ther of those two Years, as I have since done Ounces in any subsequent Campaign, or Summer; the nature of the Fevers being since quite altered, and therefore requi∣ring a different Method of Cure.
And as for the common practice of the Netherland Physicians, in not using the Bark for the Cure of Agues, I am apt to believe, that it may have proceeded from a fear of Innovation in Physick, by a New Medicine of that importance. As it happened before to the Learned Faculty of Paris, Who were as much afraid of Inovations, and all cried out, Fire,, when Spagyrical Preparations came first into use. For prudent Persons will not lightly relinquish an Established Method. And I can say farther in their behalf, that some few among them do begin to be con∣vinced, that the Bark does not deserve to be too much neglected in the Cure of Agues. I may add concerning it, what is said of the Italians, When they are Good, they are extraordinary Good; and when Bad, as extraordinary Bad: So it may be said of the Bark, in what cases soe∣ver it is properly administred, no medicine was ever known to have such great and good effects; but when it is improperly, or unseasonably given, it becomes one of the most Dangerous that can be used. And therefore those who shall think fit to use this Bark in hazadous or difficult Cases, or in Asthmatick Persons, must be sure to have a very watchful eye over it, to observe whither it agrees, or disagrees, and accordingly to prosecute, or quickly desist from its use. But it may be Objected, That Agues are in some Coun∣tries more Dangerous in their nature, and Difficult of Cure, than they are in others; as they are said to be with us, in the Hundreds of Essex, and in the Isle of Shep∣pey. And therefore that the Dutch may have good reason for neglecting, or deferring, as they do, to Cure their Agues by the use of the Cortex, or Bark; and which possibly they do think will not agree so well with their Agues, or their Tempers, as it is found to do with ours. To which I Answer, That when I was abroad, I ne∣ver observed one single Person, either at Loo, or in the
Field, who miss'd a Cure of his Ague by the use of the Bark, or who had any Relapse afterwards, that throughly followed my Directions, both before, and after he had lost his Fits. And in that Success, I do think my self very much obliged to the Worthy Mr. Rottermond, Apo∣thecary to His Majesty's Person, for his so good choice of the Bark I used, and who is perfectly skilful in the knowledge of Simples, and in all the parts of Pharmacy. Indeed some of His Majesty's inferior Servants had Re∣lapses through their own neglect and folly, because they would needs think themselves well before I did, and so soon as they had miss'd the Fitt Returned; and this would sometimes happen more than once unto the same Person. And however the Bark has been sometimes censured, as if the Cures by it were more subject to Relapses than by other Methods; on the contrary, I am fully persuaded, that the Cures of Agues by Vomits, Seasonable Purges, by Cordials acidulated, or by Amulets, or Domestick Applications alone, are all more subject to Relapses, than those by the Bark, if this be prudently administred. To confirm which Opinion, I may add, That those who recover by the Bark, look florid and vigorous, grow quickly athletick and strong, and eat and digest well; whereas those who miss their Fitts by other means, look pale and weakly some time after, and their natural functions do return more slowly, and by degrees, to their former strength and vigor. As for our Agues, in the Hundreds of Essex, the Cure by the Bark does certainly agree with them, as well as with those in other places. And it was to this very place, that our once famous Sir Robert Talbor had his recourse, in order to the first establishing his Method of giving such repeated Doses of the Bark.
I do apprehend an Ague to be but a weak and slight Attack of a Fever, or to be an imperfect Fever, or it may be said to be a Fever by halfs. Either the Enemy that makes the Assault is weak and feeble, or the Fort that Na∣ture defends, is Strong, and well prepared to make Re∣sistance. Either the Body is not sufficiently predisposed for such a Combustion as the Continued Fever does occasion, or the Pores are then but little Obstructed; and therefore after the two first proper Symptoms of a Fever, the Cold∣ness or Shivering, and the Burning Heat, have a-while ex∣erted themselves, there is alwasy in an Ague a sudden suc∣cession of a Profuse Sweat, which terminates the Fit. For when the Burning still remains, and no Sweat succeeds, the Fever Continues of course, and undergoes another de∣nomination. The one may be said to make its Impression more Out∣wardly, and upon the Pores; the other not only so, but also more Inwardly, and upon the Vitals. The one falls chiefly upon the Outworks, or upon the Counterscarp, the other makes a breach in a Bastions, or in the Courtine. The Attack of the one is not in it self hazardous, or dangerous to the state of the Body; the Attack of the other is like a General Assault, and proves of a Critical nature, or de∣termines the fate of Life and Death. And this is a more easy, and natural, and a more intelligible explication of the General Difference between Fevers and Agues, than other Accounts of them, that are more Obscure and In∣tricate, more Philosophical, or artificially wrought into some Ingenious Hypothesis. I have Observed, that in Seasons or Times when Agues are very Epidemical, as it is in Countries where they are very common and frequent, the Continued Fevers are usu∣ally of the same nature and progeny, and do generally require a like Method of Cure, and are actually Cured by a prudent use of the Conrtex, as Intermittent Fevers, or
Agues are. Only in the former we must always remem∣ber, as we must also sometimes in the latter, to take care that we use sufficient proper Evacuations, in order to bring the small Remission that they then commonly have, to some Intermission, if it can be obtained, before we pre∣sume to give the Bark. And then we may as safely and effecttually make use of the Bark in the first, as we do without difficulty in the other. I hope the Reader will excuse this Digression, because, with respect to my Fa∣culty, it may be matter of note and illustration to some, if not of use and benefit also to the Publick. The Diet and Air of the Dutch do much contribute to their growing so plump, and fat; and that may be one reason, why they Bleed so sparingly, and seldom as they do. For when they do think fit to Bleed, they will seldom or never take away more Blood from a Man or Wo∣man, than we do from an Infant of a Year old. How they came to fall into such an Extremity of Bleeding little, I cannot well comprehend, considering how pro∣fusely the French, and the more Southern Nations, do use Venesection upon most occasions. Nor are the Dutch the most abstemious from Wine and Brandy, which will be apt to heat and inflame the Blood, and consequently upon excess sometimes cause Diseases that properly re∣quire large Bleedings; neither am I ignorant that their Physicians are very Learned Men, and must read those Excellent Books of Galen, concerning Venesection. Coughs, that are so common with us, are very seldom known among the Dutch; insomuch that in the Autumn, when we are deafning one another with Continual Cough∣ing, you may go into a Church there, and not hear a single person Cough. And for this reason I am induced to think, when an Inflammation there falls upon the Lungs, and causes a violent Cough, they cannot so well deal with such a strange and foreign Disease, as
those who have less apprehensions of Bleeding plentifully when there is occasion. I have been ask'd sometimes the reason, why Holland has so few, or No Coughs, and England so many. The True Reason I conceive to be this: Holland has as great a scarcity of Minerals, as of Corn, of its native growth. England does abound with Minerals of divers Kinds, that are very offensive to the Lungs; howsoever Chymists may commend the Preparations from them, for other Physical uses. And our Air does abound with Mineral Effluviums, and much of our water with Mineral Impregnations. This is also the reason, why the Isle of Sheppey, otherwise a Rich Country, is so unwholsome to live in. And this is the reason, why the Waters of the Danube, and others Rivers in Hungary are so unhealthful to drink of. For it was well said of Plmy, the Great Naturalist: Tales sunt Aquae, quales Terroe per quas sluunt. I cannot omit to take some notice of the good Provision they do make for their Poor, whereby they are not pester'd or molested in their Streets, in their Shops, in their Coaches, with any crowd of Beggars, which would serve to divert their Chavity from proper and good Objects; I mean poor Labourers, or Housekeepers, who take much pains, to the getting little, towards a sorry main∣tenance of a great many Children; or such who through Infir∣mities, or Accidents, are disabled from getting any thing at all, and are above the Trade of Begging. If the Poor there cannot work, or do want work, there is provision made for them both. The Magistrate, or Officers, do not think it any trouble to them, to go sometimes from House to House, to enquire privately into their Condition, to observe what Children they have, and to un∣derstand what they can, or cannot do, towards their Maintenance. And accordingly, both the known, and unknown Poor, who are asha∣med to ask for what they want, are supplied by the Publick from time to time. In their Churches they do never assemble to serve God, but they manifest their Love to their Neighbour. There is always a Bag trans∣mitted to every person, with the notice of a little Bell; and I am told, that there's hardly one single Person, though never so mean or little, that comes to Church, but does drop some Mite, or Doit, into the Poor's Bag, every time he comes. And whatsoever is so Collected, or upon other Occasions, for the Poor, does not serve
to fatten, and make merry, the Petty Officers, but is faichfully ac∣counted for, and expended duly to its proper uses. The Apparel of the Dutch is grave, and free from levith. The men do put on Black on Sundays, and other high days; and at other times dark Colours. And this is the mode of all Citizens, and many others, even fo the Boors, not only in the Seven Pro∣vinces, but in Brabant, and Flanders. Nevertheless, their Nobility and Gentry, both Men and Women, do dress as fine, and modishly, as we our selves, or others, that cannot for all the world help imi∣tating of Apeing the French. Indeed I must say, we in England are not in such mighty hast for New Fashions, but that we can make a shift to stay until our Taylors do supply us, and make us happy with Modes from Frances, by their taking a Journey on purpose to Paris in vacation-time. But some of the Princes of Germany are more careful to be à la mode de France as early as may be; for they have the Fashions brought to them some hundred Leagues in Post-haste; and, before the War, did use to keep Couriers at Paris ready, to bring them quickly mat∣ters of such great moment, upon the first Invention of a New Mode. As if Peace and War, or a sudden irruption on a Neighbour-State, could not be of greater concern, than a new-cut Feather in the Cap, or some surprizing Masterpiece of Gayety. And thus I have but gently toucht upon some of the Customs, and some part of the Good Government of the Dutch, which though in so near a Neighbour-State, they cannot but be well known to many of our better sort, who are perfectly well acquainted with this part of the Word, and much better than they can be inform∣ed by me; yet I thought even the mentioning these things would not be unacceptable to some others, who have never been abroad. For it I should undertake the Relation at large of only the Curiosi∣ties of Amsterdam it self, or should particularly speak of the Keyser-Grafs, the Princes-Graft, and the Heer-Graft, three spacious Streets that do almst incircle the whole City, and three Streets that con∣tain more Sumptuous Houses, all of Stone, throughout their long circuit, than can be well imagined by those who have not seen them; or if I should treat of the Pleasant and Magnisicent Gar∣dens of Sorgvliet, within a Mile of the Hague, given some years since by His Majesty to the Right Honourable the Earl of Portland, and which no Strangers, that have any Curiosity, can omit See∣ing; they are so Admirable and Pleasant: and the King does often
retire thithes to Dine, whilst he resides at the Hague; or lastly, if I should describe the Charming Sweetness of the Hague, in the Sum∣mer-time, the Pleasantness of Leyden, or enter into a repetition of what others have done with applause before, this Account would soon swell into a Volume, and a short Memorandum into a prolix Nar∣ration. To Conclude, The Dutch do deserve great Consideration and Kindness from us, as they are become a Principal Bulwork of the Protestant Religion, next unto England, whose Church is without dis∣pute the chiefest Honour and Glory of the Reformation, and the brightest Example of True Moderation, between the gay Decorations and Paintings of Superstition on the one side, and the mean and homely Adrresses to Divine Majesty on the other. And now espe∣cially the Dutch may lay nearer claim to our Amity, when the Protestant Interest in general had never greater need of Bulworks and Defences; when not only France does manifest an unparallel'd Bigo∣try by an impolitick and unchristian Rage and Persecution, that may in time be found so to weaken and unpeople it sels, as to be a main cause of her Declension, whatsoever glorious or formida∣ble appearance she may make for the present; but also divers Ro∣man Catholick Princes have with one accord, and with an unusual Sympathy, in this Age exerted a Zeal against their Protestant Sub∣jects, that is inconsistent with their own Temporal Interest, and contrary to the Rules of Humanity or Prudence. And 'tis certain, that whenever Religion comes to be so far abused, as to lay aside the most Essential part of it, Churity, it blinds the Eyes of all Zealots, that they cannot see their own In∣torest; it transports and turns them from all the Rules of Prudence and Reasons, and makes men commit the most fatal, and extrava∣gant Errrors, in Politicks and Civil Socity. It is worth the Consideration of warm and imprudent Princes, whose indiscreet Zeal it so apt to instigate them to molest and ha∣rass their Subjects for the sake of what Honest and Pious men cannot sometimes help, I mean, difference in Religious Senti∣ments, what happened to the Observation of Charles the Fifth, after he had Resigned the Empire to his Brother Ferdimand, and the Kingdom of Spain to his Son Philip the Second. This Warlike and Great Prince, after he was grown weary of the Pomp and Glories of the World, and had made his Retreat into a Monastery, had abundance of Clocks broght him thither by the best Artists
he could hear of; and his desire was to make all his Clocks strike together at the same Hour. When he had long tried this Attempt in vain, he brake out into this poius Exclamation: How vain and foolish is it for Princes to endeavour to make all their Subjects to be of one mind, when no Art is able to make a few Clocks strike together at the same time! And therefore, since now no former Alliances, no common Interest, no remenbrance of Benefits lately received, no Obliga∣tions, how great soever, can possibly restrain Roman Catholick Po∣tentates from trampling their own Subjects under their feet, meerly for thinking otherwise than they do in matters of Suppersti∣tion, and from attemptng to Convert them by the powerful mission of irresistible Dragoons, and by more refined Methods than were heretofore practised in the Ten dull Pagan Persecutions; most certainly at Hearty Union, and Strict Alliance, and Freindship, be∣tween England and Holland was never more absolutely necessary than at this time, for the Good and Prosperity, shall I say, or for the Preservation and mutual Defence of both Nations, and also for the maintenance and support of the Protestant Interest through∣out Europe. Whilst We stand firm, and strictly United with Hol∣land, we shall have no need to fear the Power or Attempts of any Common Enemy; our Trane can never suffter in any great degree, and our Riches will supply to us such Smews of War, such an inex∣haustible Magazine of Military Force, as will defeat and overcome those Princes or Monarchs, whose Ambition will never suffer them to be quiet, but whilst they are disturbing the Peace of their Neighbours, or who will needs be aiming at Impossibilities, the Philosopher's Stone, or Universal Monarchy. FINIS
