J947 12888536 95050
A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF James Margetson, D. D. Late Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland. PREACHED At Christ Church Dublin, Aug. 30. 1678. By the R. R. Father in God Henry, Lord Bishop of Meath. WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, A Funeral Oration on that occasion, in the name of the University of Dublin, at the Herse of him their Vice Chancellor. LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's Church yard, 1679.
Imprimatur; Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Decemb. 18. 1678. Geo. Thorp Rmo in Chri∣sto P. & D. D. Guliel. Archi-Episc. Cant. à Sacris Domesticis.
TO THE READER. THe preserving the blessed memory of a great and Pious Prelate to a publick goood, hath occasioned the publishing of this thereunto introductory. In doing whereof, Opportunity is given for adding and enlarging some things, which had bin omitted by reason of the shortness of time, both for preparation and delivery. The subject matter of the following discourse, was not (it is confest) for every auditory, but purposely chosen for those who then heard it; there being beside the Crowd, a confluence of learned and Judicious per∣sons of every condition, and from all quarters, which might be well foreseen on that occasion. The design in this, was the vindicating the ho∣nour and greatness of Christ our Lord from lessening
Doctrines of Socinians, troubling the Church, al∣though, blessed be God, not so among us, as elsewhere. This being here rather in way of Caveat and preven∣tion, which may not be unnecessary, the finest Wits being apt to be tickled with Subtilties, which is the way with those, whose plain and downright speaking might end in Blasphemy; whereas by sly and covert Insinuations, some desirous of Novelties, may be un∣awares inveigled and enticed by shew and sweetness, not considering it to be that of Poyson. Hereunto is added (what was foregoing) an E∣legant Oration, in name of the University of Dublin, by one of the principal and learned Members of that Society, at the Herse of this great Prelate, lately their Vicechancellor; whose Life and Death, and surviving Vertues therein described, might have spared further labours in that, did not a mixed Auditory after re∣quire it to be in some sort declared in a Language, to most there, more Intelligible. Of all which these short Advertisements being thus premised, the rest, Reader, is for thy further Conside∣ration.
1. Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, authority and power. For he must reign, till he hath put all Enemies un∣der his feet. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. For he hath put all things under his feet, but when he saith, all things are put under him, it is ma∣nifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. THat great Doctrine and Article of our Faith, the Resurrection, is the subject of this Chap∣ter entirely; both Christs Resurrection and ours; Christs in the former part of this Chap∣ter, ours after to the end. Both these are fundamental to our Happiness, and the denying either destructive to Faith and Salvation1. Cor. 15, 14. 2. Tim. 2. 1 Direful were the consequences of Christs not bin risen
1. Cor. 15. 13. to 19. and miserable were it with us, if the Dead rise not1. Cor. 15. 19. but for our comfort Christ is risen, and our Resurrection in that assured.1. Cor. 15. 20. to 24. Obj. But Christ is risen; and yet are not the dead rai∣sed notwithstanding. Res. The answer to this, is the design of the words now read, (v. 24.) shewing that a great work is to be first done, by Christ in this World; His reigning and putting all his Enemies under his feet. That this takes up the worlds whole duration, that till this be done, that general Resurrection cannot be expected. But that work done, then the end to be, then shall Christ deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, and then shall the Son himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. This is the Sum and intent of the words. In which we find the double state of the Church. 1. As here till the Resurrection, Christ Reigning, till he hath put his Enemies under his feet 2. After his Resurrection to eternity; Then cometh the End, &c. 1. Here is the state of the Church, till the resurrection: He shall reign till, &c. 1. Where is Christs Kingdom, 2. And his work in that reigning and subduing. 1. As to Christs Kingdom here described, concerning that is to be enquired. 1. What this his Kingdom? 2. With the nature of it, and how Christ is in that considered. 1. As to Christs Kingdom. This is two fold. 1. Generall. 2. Special. 1. General, taking in the whole Creation, Heaven and Earth, and all the Host of them; All being by him
created, preserved, and ordered in all their motions at his will, he riding upon the Heavens as upon an Horse:Psal. 68▪ Where, as upon an horse, is added in the vulgar reading as a fitting paraphrase, a Rider ordering his Horse, turning about his whole body,Jam. 3▪ going forward or backward or stopping at pleasure. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in Heaven and in Earth, and in the Seas, and in all deep places:Psal. 13 This is Christs general Kingdom. 2. His special Kingdom is taken out of that his general, this respecting not all but some only of the creatures, and of them the principal and chief of them, the Rational, An∣gels, and men, and the best of these: These make up the Church, Christs Kingdom, in which he reigneth, unto which all the rest of the Creation come in also as subservient: So is Christ described, set at Gods right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world but also in that which is to come: God having put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things, to the Church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.Ephes▪ 20, 21, 22▪ This is that Kingdom of Christ, in which he here reigneth. II. See now the nature of this his Kingdom. 1. It is a Kingdom by the Father given unto his Son, and that in way of delegation and substitution: The Father hath committed all judgment to the Son, having given him Authority to execute Judgment, they are Christs wordsJohn 5. 27. And again, Thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him, saith the Son to the Father.John 17. ▪ And Ask of me, (saith the Father to Christ his Son,) and I will give thee the Hea∣then for thine InheritancePsal. 2. 8▪ Hence is the Son called the Lords Christ,Luk. 2. or his AnointedActs 4.  Psal. 2. 2, 6 and his King. But how is Christ in that considered? 1. Not as God, for so hath he no Superior, so is he not substituted, and so not receiving from any, but having in
himself all power originally: Not therefore as God. 2. But as Man is this understood of Christ, as he is the Son this day begotten, so is this by the Father given him, that he have the Heathen for his Inheritance.Psal, 2. 7, 8. And to the Son hath the Father committed Judgment, because (or as) he is the Son of man,John 5. 22. 27. and he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained.Acts 17. 31. Thus as man, is Christ in this consi∣dered. 3. Yet not simply as man, for no man, no more than man, were capable of that Rule. The first man Adams Dominion, although large,Psal. 8. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thou hast put all things under him, yet was that limited to the lower creatures, not reaching to Angels which were above him, he being made a little lower than the Angels; but there was to be a man, indeed more than man, a second A∣dam, Christ, whose Dominion was in that enlarged, and that Limitation in the other withdrawn: For, repeating that to Adam, thou hast put all things under his feet, (to which there was before an Exception) it is now thence thus ar∣gued as to Christ, in that he hath put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him,Heb. 2. 6, 7. no, not Angels; Christ being set at Gods right hand, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion.Ephes. 1. 20, 21. Angels and Authorities and Powers being made subject unto him.1 Pet. 3. 24. This Kingdom therefore thus given unto Christ, is understood of him as the Mediator God and Man, as God he hath that power in himself originally, as man he receiv∣eth it, and as that man who is God he exerciseth it, Christ therefore the Mediator, God and man, is the King, and this his Kingdom, that of his Mediatorship. Thus hath been shewed what this Christs Kingdom is, and how he is in that considered. II. See next his work in that, Reigning and Subduing; these respecting his Subjects, and those as
Good, and Bad. 1. As to his good Subjects, over them and in them is his Kingdom in righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. He calling them by his word and Spirit, and ordering, ga∣thering, and perfecting them by Grace for Glory. 2. But as to Enemies and rebel Subjects, these doth he tread under his feet, these are Satan, Sin, the World, and Death. Of these the last only Death is here named, that answer∣ing the Resurrection here principally intended, this also be∣ing the last of Enemies: For when all other cease, and have no more that they can do, Death still holds. In Death, Satans power over the Godly ceaseth, and he that is dead is freed from sinRom. 6▪ And as to the World, the utmost that this can do is to kill the Body, and after that hath no more that it can do:Luk. 12▪ But death after all holds, and that until the Resurrection, which being an hindrance so far to Gods King∣dom, it is therefore esteemed and reckoned in the number of Enemies, although to those who are Gods, many ways happy, and being an enemy it shall be destroyed, and the last of those which shall be destroyed. As to these Enemies being destroyed. 1. By Christ our King are they already in himself over∣come, and having spoiled Principalities and Powers he made shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it (his Cross) and in himself.Col. 2. 1 2. All these are by Christ meritoriously vanquished for us. 3. And in us also is here power through Christ by San∣ctification, yet but gradually and imperfectly over Sin, it not reigning so in us as formerly,Rom. 6. 14. and over Satan also have we our victory by Christ; He the Prince of Peace brui∣sing Satan under our feet,Rom. 16. 2 and over the World our great Enemy, is our victory by Faith in Christ:1 John 5. . And even Death although terrible, yet is it not so to Gods Children,
over which we can in Christ insult triumphantly.1. Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. 4. In our Souls also separated in death, have we our victory over all these our enemies, only what then yet re∣mains of Deaths dominion, as to the body for a time in the Grave. 5. But in that great day of the general Resurrection, shall the last enemy Death be destroyed, the Soul returning and the body quickned, and both joyned to live for ever in Glory. Thus of Christs Kingdom and the work of it, that taking up this world to the Resurrection, he shall reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. II. See now the state of the Church after the Resurrection, and thenceforth to Eternity. This is here expressed, by 1. Christs then delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. 2. The Son himself then subject to him who hath put all things under him. 3. And God then All in All. I. Christ then delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. Obj. This with what is also said of Christs reigning, till he haih put all enemies under his feet, may seem to limit his Kingdom and his Reign to one certain work and to a cer∣tain time, as if that work being done and that day or time over, then and thenceforth were his Kingdom to cease and determine, which were contrary to that said of his King∣dom never ending.Luke 1. 33 Res. For clearing this; the Kingdom of Christs Media∣torship (so here considered) is two fold. 1. His Kingdom of Grace. 2. His Kingdom of Glory. These answer the double state of the Church (Christs Kingdom) as here and hereafter, now Militant, after Trium∣phant. To the Church here on Earth militant, answers that called Christs Kingdom of Grace; to his Church Trium∣phant in Heaven, answers his Kingdom of Glory.
I. As to his Kingdom of Glory that shall never end, so shall he reign for ever and ever: This is the voice from heaven, Rev. 11. 17. and how can that Christs Kingdom end, when ours with him shall never end.Rev. 22▪ II. It remains then that this be considered, as to this King∣dom of Grace. Under this is the state of the Church here Militant, this is only for this world, and with the world shall this end. Grace makes way for Glory and gives way to Glory, and shall end in Glory, of this Kingdom of Christ is to be under∣stood this, his delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. And how is that? 1. This Christs delivering up the Kingdom to the Fa∣ther, is answerable to the end, for which that Kingdom was by the Father to him his Son committed. That was to order it and to establish it,Isa. 9. 7▪ to order it as to his good Subjects, and to establish it as to his Enemies the Rebellious. As if a King should send his Son with power to reduce Rebels risen up against him: which being done, those ene∣mies subdued and all ordered and settled in peace, then he returns and delivers up the Kingdom to his Father free from all disturbances, every thing being cast out of his Kingdom that did offend,Mat. 30. the Father then taking to himself his great power and reigning.Rev. 11. And thus shall this Kingdom of Grace be then by Christ delivered up to his Father in peace. 2. This Christ delivering up this his Kingdom to his Father, implies that happy state to which the Church Militant shall be translated, being to that end by Christ delivered up, and put into the Fathers hand, translated from Grace to glory. The Ark of the Testament was a Type of the Church Mi∣litant, that having had but a Tabernacle and a Tent habi∣tation, having no other foundation than what Pins and cords could give it, and for movings and removings, which were
frequent: It had its Staves ever joyned for portage, be∣side its being sometimes even in the hands of Enemies; whereas the Temple was a Type of the Church Triumphant, having firm foundations:Heb. 11. 10. And as the Ark after many wandrings and long unsettlements, was at length placed in the Temple in rest, no more to be carried about or removed, therefore the Staves taken out,1 Kin. 4. 6, 7, 8. so shall Christ deliver up his Church Militant to his Father, to be ever with the Father settled in his Temple in heaven. To which may allude St. John's seeing the Temple of God opened in heaven, and that there was seen the Ark of his Testament,Rev. 11. 19. and to that end shall the Kingdom of Grace, the Church Militant, be by Christ delivered up to his Father, to be triumphant∣ly settled in glory in the heavens for ever. 3. But this is not all intended in this Christs delivering up the Kingdom to the Father, this reaching even to very Government also. For this way and manner of Christs Government of his Kingdom of Grace, which is now in the world shall cease and determin, it not being consistent after with Glory. This will appear if it be considered, That Christ the Mediator governs his Kingdom of Grace here in this world, by his three great Offices of his Mediator∣ship, Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly. 1. As our Prophet, Christ here rules his Church by his Word the Scepter of his Kingdom, he also is in that descri∣bed with a sharp two edged Sword out of his mouth,Rev. 1. 16. 2. 12. his word being sharper than any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit:Heb. 4. 12. He is also descri∣bed riding on a white Horse, and out of his mouth a sharp Sword smiting the Nations and ruling them with a Rod of Iron, with that name the word of God.Rev. 19. 11. 13. 15. By this his word Christ our Prophet here rules and orders his Church, and for that is the outward ministry of the word here necessary, being profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and instruction in righteousness,2 Tim. 3. 26, 17. which after in heaven shall
not need, all being there taught of God.Is. 54. Which being taught of God, may be understood of Christ himself personally, even he himself applying that to himself, It is, saith he, written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of God, every man therefore that hath learned of the Father cometh to meJohn 6. 4▪ All teachings before under the old Testa∣ment were by men only; but under the Gospel have we bin taught by God himself, God the Word made Flesh and dwelling amongst us.Joh. 1. 1. Conversing with Men, and teach∣ing them personally. 2. Or this being taught of God may be understood of the manner of teaching, our being taught by men, is by the outward ministry of the word, but God teacheth inwardly, and effectually. Or thirdly, in that our being taught of God, may be our differing way of know∣ing now and hereafter, now by the word teaching and hea∣ring, and learning of others, and that but imperfectly, which shall be in Heaven otherwise; our way of know∣ing then being, a being taught there of God himself imme∣diately, so as Christs prophetical Office, as to its outward mi∣nistry (a way of teaching here necessary) shall there cease as needless, being all then taught of God; so as to Christs prophetical Office. 2. As to Christs priesthood. Here he Expiates for Sin, satisfying Gods Justice in his Blood, making reconciliati∣on for the sins of his People, and having offered one Sacri∣fice for sins for ever, he is set down on the right hand of God, from hence forth expecting till his Enemies be made his foot∣stool. Heb. 10▪ 13. Till then therefore is this work of Christs priest∣hood necessary, but after, not so, all Sin being then done away, and peace, and reconciliation with God by him made perfectly, that work therefore of Christs priesthood then to cease also. 3. So also, as to Christ our King, he here Reigns in midst of EnemiesPsal. 110. subduing them and defending his, prepa∣ring them also by Grace, and gathering them for Glory; But then shall all this cease as needless, then shall no Ene∣mies
remain, all being subdued, and then shall all Gods Chil∣dren be perfected, and gathered, and setled in Glory. That therefore of Christs kingly Office, so far as it is only consistent with Grace, and inconsistent with Glory, shall cease. And so shall this kingdom of Christs Mediatorship, as to the manner of its Government here, be delivered up to the Father. But, what then? shall this conclude Christs Kingdom and reign, then to cease and end? No, in no wise, for so far shall it be from that, that in comparison of what is till then, his Kingdom shall be then but as in a manner beginning, and he thenceforth to appear unto all to reign more gloriously, and that for ever. This is set forth in that Parable of a certain Nobleman going into a far Country to receive a Kingdom, against whom, his Citizens rose up rebelliously, saying; we will not have this man to rule over us. But he after returns, and then receiving the Kingdom, rewards his good servants, and causeth his Enemies to be slain before his face.Luke 19. 12. 14, 15, 16 17. In that, is Christ's now absence from the World, and his return, and his then receiving his Kingdom, for the good of his, and destruction of Enemies; Then when returning, is the Kingdom said to be received. So, in the Lords Pray∣er, in our petition, that his Kingdom may come, and his will be done as in Heaven, so in Earth; In that appears his Kingdom to be come, when his will is done in perfect obedience, and that is done in Heaven, our Pattern for it. In Heaven there∣fore is his Kingdom come, and there perfected. Nor doth Christs delivering up the Kingdom to the Father exclude his own then also reigning. For as the Father, who com∣mitted that Kingdom to his Son, to be here governed, did not in that devest himself of the Government. For even he himself, the Father, acts still in that with his Son. For setting Christ at his right Hand, I (saith the Father) will make thine Enemies thy Footstool. So, the
Sons after delivering up the Kingdom to his Father, he doth not in that denude himself of the Government. But as the Father by the Son now reigns, so shall the Son after, with the Father reign also for ever. It is the voice of Heaven. The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.Rev. 11. 1 And such are those lowd Accla∣mations there, saying; with a loud Voice, worthy is the Lamb, which was slain to receive Power and Riches, and Wisdom, and Honour, and Glory, and Blessing, and every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, heard I saying, Blessing, Honour, Glory and Power be to him that sitteth on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.Rev. 5. 9. end. Thus of Christs then delivering up the Kingdom to the Father; with whom, yet, in that he reigns for ever. II. On that Christs delivering up the Kingdom to the Father, follows that then shall the Son himself be subject to him, that put all things under him. This of the Sons being then subject, is not to be under∣stood of him as God; for so is he most high.Dan. 4. 17▪ 25. 15. And most high is Gods proper Attribute, nor can he be God, who is not most high, therefore, none higher, no, not among the three sacred Persons in the blessed Trinity, none be∣ing there before or after another, none greater or less than another, but the whole three Persons Coeternal together, and Coequal. (Athanas.) to make therefore the Son, as God, less, or under, or subject to any, were to deny him to be God. So, as this, of the Sons being subject to the Father, is to be understood of him only, as man. Obj. But so the Question still holds. For why should it be said of Christ, as man, that he should be then subject, the Kingdom being delivered, as if not till then subject, whereas, as man, he is ever so. Res. This Christ being then subject to the Father, the
Kingdom being to him so delivered, is to be understood, as to manifestation, and its then so appearing. As a Deputy or Lieutenant, supreme in Government, of a Kingdom under the King, while he is vested with the Kings authority and power, and in his place and stead, he commands in chief, and is as the King himself, who is in him personated, and he, as the King honoured of all, yet in all that with owned subordination and subjecti∣on; which subjection then appears, when his work is done, his Commission determined, and the Government delivered up. While Christ acts as supreme by that Power delegated by the Father, and all things to that end put under him, that his Subordination, though so as man, yet appears not to all so clearly as after, when that Kingdom and Go∣vernment shall be by him to the Father delivered, then shall the Son himself appear subject to him, who hath put all things under him. In which Christs being then so subject to the Father, is not intended any lessening or diminishing of his greatness. This making much more to his Glory, and Majesty which is in that manifested. For, Observe, that God the Father having put all things under his (Christ his Sons) Feet. It is on that inferred, that in that, he hath put all things under him (the man Christ) he left nothing, that is not put under him.Heb. 2. 8. But here comes in the Text, an Exception to that, that when he saith that he, the Father hath put all things under his Feet, it is in that manifest, that he, the Father is excepted, which did put all things under him. Therefore it follows that the man Christ is next unto God above all things; This shewing the high and exalted Glory, and Honour of Christs humane Nature next un∣to God himself, above all created beings and Glories what∣soever, even above Angels who are commanded to worship himHeb. 1. 6. 13. And he having by himself purged our Sins, being
now set down on the right hand of the majesty on highHeb. 1. So as this Christs being subject to the Father, is as if said, subject to him only, or alone, and his being in that next to God himself, above all others whatsoever, which is not a diminishing, but a magnifying of his greatness and Glo∣ry above all. III. And then shall God be all in all, or that God may be all in all. This is the last and highest consideration of the state of all things, after the Resurrection to Eternity, where God is to be understood personally for the Father; this appea∣ring by his relation to his Son here mentioned, he also be∣ing here expressely named and distinguished, God even the Father v. 24. Here also, is this God the Fathers being all in all made a special work, and the great end of Christ so delivering up the Kingdom to the Father, that he, the Father may be all in all. This premised, see now how God is all in all, and what is in that intended. This may be understood so. 1. As to acknowledgment. He seen and known and owned so of all, that he is all in all. 2. All in all also, in respect of dependence on him. 3. And in respect of our happiness also, in him and by him. I. This may be understood of Christ the Sons delive∣ring up the Kingdom to the Father in peace, God the Father thereby, and thenceforth being acknowledged all in all. For there are Enemies (as was said) to be destroyed, who rise up against God to the disturbance of his King∣dom, and obscuring his soveraignty in the World. 1. Such are Atheists denying God and his Governance of all things in the World, and others lessening what they can, Christs Glory; and will not have that man to reign over them.
Let such consider in what rank they stand, even as Enemies to God and his Kingdom, whose end shall be destruction. 2. The grand Enemy of God and his Kingdom, is the Devil, called Prince of the Air, working in the Children of disobedience.Ephes. 2. 2. He would be accounted the God of this World2. Cor. 4. 4. laying claim to all that here is Gods, as his, even all the Kingdoms of the World, and that impudently to Christ the Heir's own Face, all this Power (saith he) I will give thee, and the Glory of them, for that is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it, if thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.Luke 4. 5, 6, 7.. 3. And let it be added that, as God hath his Christ to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given.Math. 28. 18. So hath the Devil his Antichrist, usurping the same universal Monarchy, and that even in the ame words with Christ, All Power in Heaven and Earth is given meAnton. Puc∣cig. concil. Lat∣er Sess. 7. and in the same words as did the Devil to Christ, that all the Kingdoms of the World are his, with power to give it to whom soever he will deposing and disposing all at plea∣sure, nay, not sticking at the very name of God, to be so calledConcil La∣ter. Sess. 4. and opposing and exalting himself above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of God, shewing himself, that he is God; But him shall the Lord consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy with the bright∣ness of his coming, even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan.2. Thes. 2. 4. 8, 9. And the Devil that deceived them shall be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone with the Beast, and the false Prophet, and shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever.Rev. 20. 10. So shall it be with all the Enemies of God, and his Kingdom. Then shall those Voices be heard in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever. And we give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty, because thou hast taken to thee
thy great Power, and hath reignedReu. 11 16, 17. or shewed thy self to Reign, so as God the Father having the Kingdom by his Son delivered to him in Peace free from all Competition, he shall then be as to his Kingdom, by a general acknowledg∣ment owned all in all. II. As to dependance on him, shall God the Father be then to us all in all. Our dependance on God is Mediate or, Immediate. Dependance on God mediately, is such as is here in this World. Immediate dependance on him is what shall be here∣after, and in both, is God to us all in all. 1. Here in this World is God to us all in all, by a medi∣ate dependance on him. In him we live, and move, and have our being.Acts 17. 2 This is by constant influences of Providence, without which we could not subsist one Moment, he also sustaining us mediatly with Meat and Drink and Cloaths, giving us Rain from Heaven and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with food and gladnessActs 14. 1 which yet without Gods special Blessing, would avail us nothing. That our Cloaths are comfortably warm, is from God Job. 37. 17 that our Meat nourisheth, is from him, otherwise we may have Meat, and not have a Stomach to eat, or what we eat might be rather hurtful, and our Table made a Snare, and that which should be for our welfare, become a Trap,Psal. 69. 22 so is God here to us, as to our outward State, all in all mediately, by second causes and means, so it is also in our spiritual State. In that are we now by his Words and Sacraments supported in Grace, yet not that without his Blessing on those Ordinances, so as in all concerning us here, in any kind is God to us all in all mediately: which is to be understood so, Ordinarily. 2. But in Heaven, it shall be otherwise, God shall be then to us all in all, immediately, not there needing what
here we do, worldly Injoyments, which we now call ne∣cessaries, God himself being all that to us immediately. There shall be no Night there, and they in that State, need no Candle, neither light of the Sun, for the Lord God gi∣veth them light, and they shall Reign with him for everRev. 22. 5., so also as to our everlasting Worship of God, that shall not be there as here, by Ordinances, Word and Sacra∣ments, nor is a solemn House for Prayer there, as here ne∣cessary. Therefore in the description of the heavenly Jerusalem, St. John observes that he saw not any Tem∣ple there, it needed not; For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it.Rev. 21. 22. And to this seem those words of our Lord Christ to en∣cline, Joh. 16. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. In that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: Ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto you in Proverbs, the time cometh when I shall shew you plainly of the Father. At that day ye shall ask in my name, and I say not to you that I will pray the Father for you: For the Father himself loveth you. Where observe, 1. That here and before we find Christ in this discourse with his Disciples speaking much of the Father, insomuch that occasion is thereby given to some to desire him to shew them the Father:Joh. 14. 8. And here he promiseth that tbe time shall come when he shall shew them plainly of the Father, that time being called that day. 2. He minds them that there was a time, when even he himself was not so expresly known in the world, nor his name then so much used in addresses to the Father. Hitherto (saith he) that is under the Old Testament, ye asked nothing in my name: It was then understood that Christ was to come, and when he was come he was by his miracles supposed, to be that Prophet that should come into the world:Joh. 6. 14. And of old also sometimes, yet but rarely, were Petitions ex∣presly in his name or for his sake. Cause (said Daniel in
his prayer) thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is deso∣late, for the Lords sake.Dan. 3. But now under the Gospel our Lord here shews, that thenceforth all addresses should be to the Father by him, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name he will give it you: Ask and ye shall receive, which is now the concluding style of all Christian prayers, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 4. But he tells them withal, that there shall come a day when addresses should be to the Father himself also, and in that day (saith he) ye shall ask me nothing, and though ye ask in my name, I say not to you that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loveth you: In all shewing how in that it was, and how it is, and how it shall be. Yet understand not this as any way abating our depen∣dance then on Christ, our dependance on Christ ever hold∣ing, he being yesterday and to day and the same for ever.Heb. 2 1. For as now so then, and ever shnll Christ be head of all, If man had not fallen, Christ had been over Angels and men the head of all gloriously; and now is he the head of the glorious standing Angels and of men redeemed: So shall he be of both after in glory, ever the head of his Church his Body, and that not only in this world but in that also which is to come.Eph. 1.  22. 2. As the head influenceth the body in all its parts; so doth Christ the head, the Church his body, from whom the whole Body fitly joyned together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to that effectual working in the mea∣sure of every part, making increase of the body unto the edify∣ing of it self in love.Eph. 4.  16. So is it here in Grace, and so shall it be after in glory, in both, Christ filling all in all.Eph. 1. 20 21, 22, 23. 3. As now our dependance on Christ is such, that by him it is that we have access to, and acceptance with the Father, and by him all our goodJoh. 14. 6 Ephes. 1. 6. so shall it be then also: He leads us then by the hand to the Father, and presents us to him in glory. 2 Cor. 4. 1 Jude 24. Behold I and the children which God hath given me:Heb 2. 1 And as the Father shall be then to us all in all in immediate
dependance on him; he himself in himself being all things to us, so shall it be then as to Christ also, he with the Father both being to us all in all, which is to be observed that like dependance is then on Christ as on the Father. In the descri∣ption of the heavenly Jerusalem, that there is no night there, and they need no Candle neither light of the Sun: For the Lord God (understand it, as of God essentially, so personally also for the Father) He the Lord God giveth them light,Rev. 22. 5. the same being spoken of Christ also. I saw no Temple (saith St. John) in that holy City, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the City had no need of the Sun neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof,Rev. 21. 22, 23. intimating the glory of Christs humane nature, Phil. 3. 21. and of his glorious body above all created glories: A glory which heaven wanted till Christs glorious body had ascended thither, this being now an excelling light, ad∣ditional to what was before in heaven: St. John also speak∣ing of the immediate dependance of glorified Saints in hea∣ven: on Christ as on the Father; They are (saith he) before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sitteth on the Throne (the Father) shall dwell a∣mong them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them nor any heat: For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of water, and God shall wipe all tears from their eyes.Rev. 7. 15, 16, 17. The Lamb shall lead them and they shall follow him wheresoever he goeth:Rev. 14. 4. And from Christ shall all then own their good past and present, and that in a new Song to his praise for ever, saying: Thou art worthy, for thou wast slain and hast redeemed us to our God by thy blood, out of every Kindred and Tongue and People and Nation, and hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests,Rev. 5. 9, 10. so as our dependance ever holds on Christ, then and there more perfectly as our state shall be then more perfected and ca∣pacitated for it, more than here in this world it can be.
Thus in way of immediate dependance, shall God be then to us all in all, that not excluding Christs being so also, but as the Father then reigning Christ shall then also reign with him, so the Father being all in all, so shall Christ be to his also, and our dependance then on both immediate and for ever. III. As in our dependance, so in our happiness also shall God be then also all in all. In that of the Fathers being all in all, is happiness inten∣ded in the highest, in our fellowship with the Father and the Son is our joy full:1 Joh. 4. So is it here in Grace, but then in Glo∣ry much more, when we shall be present with, and have full Communion with both immediately. The difference of our satisfactions here and in heaven, is described by present and absent in that case compared: While we are here in the Body we are absent from the Lord, but after we shall be present with him, and here we walk not by sight as after. Our absent and distant sight of God is here, that by faith, which is a seeing God in a glass or by a perspective, which is for a distant object, and that a seeing darkly: But then shall our converse be with God himself im∣mediately and being present and seeing Face to Face, seeing and knowing even as we are known.2 Cor. 5 8. Knowledge is the happiness of a rational Soul, and our im∣mediate seeing and knowing God that beatifical Vision,1 Cor. 13. 12▪ the top of all happiness. It is not for any to attempt a description of what in that shall be, that being beyond all humane Apprehension or Comprehension:1 Cor. 2. For eye hath not seen, (and strange things have many seen) nor ear heard, (and more is heard and spoken than most have seen) neither have entred into the heart of man, (and what cannot the heart and imagina∣tion fancy?) We may imagine Glories that never were, or can be supposed real, as Gates and Streets and Windows and pavements of Agats and Carbuncles and pleasant Stones: Isa. 54. 11, 12. Revl 21. 10 20. Go to then, let Eye and Ear and Heart, and all together
put themselves to the utmost, yet is all that short infinitely of what God hath prepared for them that love him: All which is in this, Gods being then to us all in all. Use. I. Now for Application. Here you have the differing states of the Church here and hereafter, and how we are to conceive of Christ in both, which was that herein principally intended. Thereby asserting the greatness of Christ our Lord against Socinian Principles, lessening him as far as they can and dare, acting therein covertly to be the less observed. In which use is by them made dangerously, as of some other Scriptures, so of this now before us, which occasion my now insisting on this more particularly. Whence is groundlesly inferred, That Christ as to his person is less, and the Father great or than he, being to him subject and Christ but his substitute, that his Kingdom being delivered up to the Father his Reign shall thenceforth cease, and God the Father onl shall be all in all, Christ being thenceforth of no farthe use for dependance on him. But all this on grounds mistaken, (and it is to be feared by some wilfully. Whereas Christ (as you have heard) is not in this cosidered as God, for of God can nothing of all this be in an wise conceived. But that this is said of Christ, as the Mediator in whic he is God and man in one person, and here considered that man who is God. That this Christs Kingdom by the Father committed him to be settled, is the Kingdom of his Mediatorship; far as to the manner of its Government, and as it respec his Church here on earth, which being inconsistent wi
the following state of Glory, is to be therefore first delivered up to the Father, he being then All in All, and to be thence∣forth by him ordered and settled in glory everlasting. But not so as that Christs so delivering up that his King∣dom of Grace, answering his Church as here Militant, and that the Fathers being then All in All, should conclude Christs Kingdom thenceforth determined, and all depen∣ance on Christ as formerly to end: But that Christ as to is Kingdom and Glory and greatness, and general depen∣ance shall be for ever as he was, Reigning with the Father, nd with the Father depended on by all, for ever and ever. This is the substance of all in that spoken, nothing in at grounding what is by some therein blasphemously as∣rted. Use II. Here we also see the Church in midst of Enemies, as eep among Wolves, subject to troubles, and sufferings every kind, Sickness, and Pain and Death. But, for comfort, Christ our King hath here his Kingdom, and now Ruling in midst of his and our Enemies (our E∣mies being his Enemies) and he ruling in the midst them, by whom they shall be all vanquished, and delivered. Use III. That this being done, then cometh the End, the World ending. For the Church is the World made and continued: for t, was the World made, that thenc Christ might ga∣r out for himself a People prepared for Glory, and perfecting that work and number, is the World yet tinued, and not till then ending. But that Work finished, and that great end attained, for which
all these things are, then shall the World end. Let the wicked of the World consider this, they are the men of the World,Psal. 17. 14. they bustle it out here, as if all were theirs, and for them alone, taking up all till there be no more place in the EarthIs. 5. 8.: whereas not they, but the Godly are those of God here regarded, the o∣ther being of no other consideration in the World, but as Enemies to God and to his Christ, and so for De∣struction. Use. IV. And when all this is done, then cometh the End, then follows Glory and happiness to Eternity. This shall be to all generally, and perfectly in the Ge∣neral Resurrection, when Soul and Body shall meet again and joyn, never to be after parted, but both stated in Glory everlasting: and this shall be, and even now is thi daily to some, those blessed Spirits separated from this Body of Corruption, called the Spirits of the just made perfectHebr. 12. 23. whose Bodies till that great Day and blessed Change are laid up in the general Wardrobe, the Grave. And although the State of the Dead be termed a being out of mind, (Ps. 31. 12.) and the Grave place of silence, (Ps. 115. 17.) and the most sumptu∣ous Tombs and Sepulchres by Kings and Councellors buil for themselves, but desolate places (Job. 3. 14.); ye is not the State of the Dead to be in all that esteeme unhappy, but blessed to them that dy in the Lord, tha being so declared by a Voice from Heaven, and commanded to be Written, and so to be understood. heard a Voice from Heaven saying unto me (saith John) write, blessed are the dead, which dy in the Lor from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, for that they re from their Labours, and their Works do follow the Rev. 14. 13
In which happy State is this Saint (I doubt not so to call him, his Life and End considered) whose Ob∣sequies we now celebrate; of whom (I know) it is ex∣pected that something be spoken, which I must not o∣mit, both for doing thereby right to his memory, and for others good. HE was born at Drighlington in Yorkeshire, and at Peterhouse in Cambridge Educated, and after in the Parish of Watlass in his own Countrie preferred and beneficed. There that great Strafford (then Lord Viscount Went∣worth) designed for the chief Government of Ireland, taking notice of his Piety and Parts, and of his good re∣port generally; he brought him over with him, for be∣ing near him in his devotions. Having thereupon given up that his Preferment in England, he was after in Ireland plentifully provided for, and setled in the Deanery of the Cathedral of the blessed Trinity, commonly called Christ Church Dub∣lin. But here after a while was he, as were all, surprised with that general Calamity and Deluge of Evil, over∣whelming the whole Kingdom. That grand Rebellion breaking out on the 23th. of October 1641, wherein thousands of poor Protestants, were cruelly murdered. Thousands also naked and famished escaping but with the Skin of their Teeth (miserable Jobs sad expressi∣on of himself in his Sufferings.Job. 19. 20) These came in dai∣ly from all Quarters, flocking and swarming to Dublin, a City of Refuge then for those miserable sufferers. Of those poor Creatures woful objects of Compassi∣on, so many in fresh numbers had been continually by
this charitable Person fed, clad, and relieved, that he was himself thereby brought to streights, the course of his Revenues here being every way stopt. By which, and by the Dangers daily drawing nearer even to the very Gates, he was at length enforced from hence into England for security and subsistance. But there also not long after was he (as by some fa∣tality) overtaken with Evils unexpected, as great and general, by which Church and State were together o∣verturned. As if one fleeing from a Lion should meet with a Bear, and going into an House and leaning his Hand on a Wall, a Serpent should bite himAmos 5. 19.; for he was by the disloyal party there taken and cast into Manchester Goale, where he continued untill he was by exchange of three or four Officers thence delivered. And having thus weathered that Storm, he considered of some more private retirement, and freer from danger, which he thought might be best found in London: there hiding himself in his Chamber (Gods advice to his in times of Evil) until that Indignation (also read Tyranny) were overpastIs. 26. 20.. After that monstrous and horrible Murder of that Royal Martyr, whose innocent Blood was a filling up the full Measure of the wickedness of that evil Generation: This worthy person at London happened on a Gentleman sick and on his deathbed, to whom he administred spiritual comforts, together with the holy Offices of the Church on such occasions. By that dying Person he was told that he had bin som∣times one near in attendance on that late Sacred Martyr King Charles 1. in his solitude. That to him had bin by the King delivered and committed to his Charge and care to be preserved, those Papers which he said he knew to have been written by the Kings own Hand, and which were after published with the Title of .
This is here observed for obviating Malicious spea∣kings detracting from that excellent Work, breathing Pie∣ty and Devotion, and vindicating the sincerity of that great Soul in all his actings and occurrences therein mentioned; Malice suggesting to the World that although that work carri∣ed the King's Name, yet was it not (said they) his own, but by some of his Chaplains composed, intending thereby the lessoning his Majesties great and excelling parts; and the rendring that most excellent piece less regarded, that thereby their own wickedness might be less observed. Whereas the contrary to that false assertion appears now in this: and the Royal Author of the precious Work found to be the King himself: that being declared by one dying, whose advantages then by it could be then nothing any way, and those being his last words which may be concluded se∣rious and sacred; he averring those very Papers to have been written with the King's own Hand which he well knew. And that they were by the King himself delivered into his hand and committed to his charge and care for preserving them as now they are. This also in Manner and Form as is from that dying Mouth declared being after attested by this grave Prelate, whose words pass with all that knew him for unquestionable. And now to return to what concerns himself. His Sufferings were of long continuance, from 1641, to 1660. but by the glorious Sunrise of his sacred Majesty Charles the second in his happy return were all those mists soon scattered, for which the year 1660 may be ever reckon∣ed happy; then was the face of all things in Church and State changed gloriously, his Majesty returning to his peo∣ple and to the Throne of his Royal Ancestors. Then were our Judges restored as at first, and our Counsellors as at the beginning. A description of happy timesIs. 1. 2: then was the Church out of Confusion and deformity thereby returned to her for∣mer Beauty and Order. and then were the breaches in
Gods House repaired, its scattered Members recalled, and fit persons sought out for supplying and filling up those va∣cancies which the wickedness of those dismal times had occasioned. Among those was this pious Person sought, found, and brought forth, and by his sacred Majesty returned into Ireland. Where An. 1660 he was appointed to sit as Archbishop in the Metropolitical Chair of this Province of Dublin. After an. 1663 on the decease of that learned and worthy Prelat, Primate Bramhall, he was removed and promoted to the Archbishoprick of Armagh and Primacy of all Ireland. In which succession he was numbred by common Computation the 97th, but otherwise the 102 from St. Patrick, justly accom∣pted the Apostle of Ireland as to its general conversion. Nor did his Honors there stop, but those were after follow∣ed with (what he accompted justly an addition to the grea∣test) His being also chosen Vice-Chancellor of the University of Dublin. This he held to his last, whose deserved praises in that and in all, hath been elegantly celebrated in that learned speech, in name of that University, at the Hearse of him their late Vice-Chancellor, to which I refer. Nor can I, neither must I, pass lightly over this now mentioned Colledge and University of Dublin: whom I have the honour to own my Mother. An honour is this place to this City and Kingdom, this house having sent out per∣sons considerable in their several capacities. Hence have proceeded some sitting at the Helm in the chiefest places of Government and State. Some being for Seats of Judicature, and others for military Conduct, at home and abroad emi∣nent. And for the Church this one house hath yielded more than fifty Bishops and Archbishops (not to speak of lower dignities who were also of excellent parts, and to be re∣membred) and this within the space of 85 years, since 1593. the year of this Colledge being first planted, the
like, if I mistake not, not being found in the Register of any one House in the adjoyning famous Universities, tak∣ing in all their time together, some claiming more then 800 years Antiquity. Among whom let our famous and Learned Primate Usher be before all remembred. He was the first Scholar that lodged in that House, and that was there entred; he was the first Graduat that thence proceeded, the first Fellow, first Proctor and first Divinity-Professor of its own Stock. And was after Vicechancellor more than 40 Years to his Death. And let this House and City also, partake of his Ho∣nours, and be in him honoured. It is accompted an Ho∣nour to a Place, its having to boast of some eminent Person or Persons thence descended. Of Zion it shall be said that this or that Man was born in herPs. 87. 5.: in this City was this man Born, and in this Colledge bred, and here only. Strangers speak of him abroad as an Honour to his. Country, and to the Church, and to the World also, So, SpanhemiusIngentes t virtutes, sum usseri, non vtro tantum O notae sunt sed  nostro, & ubi cun{que} terrar pietati suum d cus, et erudit nisuum, preti constat. usserii nomen pietatis nobis et virtutis nomen est; Quanta Genevae nostrae nominis tui sit cla tudo, veri Episcopi imago, te merito Hibernis tuis pretiosum; Britannum venerabilem, exteris omnib admirabilem facit (Frid. Spanh. Dub. Evang. Part 3. ep. dedic. Jac. Uss.), Gerardus VossiusSumma sum viri & undecun{que} doctissimi merita de Ecclesia & tota Republ. literaria, ut quo de viro rerum divi rum humanarum{que} peritissimo, nihil possum diceretam sublime, quin ejus id virtus superet. (Gera Voss.), Bochartus and Sim∣pliciusmagne visseri Geogr. Sacr. P. 226. Synop. Scripr. P. 140., Morusexcellentissime vir d seculi nostri Athanasium tuum pectus Bibliotheca spirans, tu Britanniae quod Augustinus Hpponii vale, ma imum Britanniae decus., Paulus Testardus, Blessonsisseculi & Ecclesiae decus eximium., Aren∣oldus Boetiusomnigenae ac reconditae erudition laude, linguarum Orientalium peritia plane inclytus, (Bootius de Armach.), &c. And at home our learned Prideauxlocupletissimum so dae eruditionis & totius antiquitatis Gazophylacium, de Mill. Ann. Apoc., Davenantvir singulari pieta et omnigenae eruditionis laude cumulatus, ad pacem exhort., Sr. Roger Twisdenin quo cum incredibili doctrina rar purioris antiquitatis cognitione, (quam norunt & Tagus & Ganges forsan & Antipodes) Mor eximius candor, & in instruendo imperitiores mira suavitas, seria quadam & Episcopali mixta gravita cetare dignosuntur; a quo non parum, me in hoc opere promovendo adjutum profiteor, utpote qui lutoh rentem saepius extraxit, & deviantem in viam reduxit. Hist. Angl. Script. xepi. lect., Sr. Henry Spelmanliterarum insig Pharus., Mr. SeldenReverendissimus Antistes Jacobus usserius Archiepiscopus, vir summa pietate, judicio sing lari us{que} ad miraculum doctus, et litteris severieribus promovendis natus. Marm. Arundel., and others.
And even among those of the adverse party although principled generally against speaking well of those in pro∣fession contrary, yet are some found even of them, ad∣mirers of him. I mention only Henry fitz-Simons a learned Jesuit, who Anno 1599, being a prisoner in the Castle of Dublin, he being there as a Bear tied to a Stake, and wanting some to bait him, (they are his own words) he then challenged any of the Protestants to dispute with him, for which was singled out this our James Usher, then but middle Batch∣elor in this Colledg of 6 Years standing, which were the Years of the Colledges then standing also. The Jesuite at first Sight of that his Antagonist despised his Youth, as did Goliah David1. Sam. 17▪ 42.. But buckling, and the question be∣ing de Antichristo; after that days Trial of him, the Jesuit would have no more to do with him, not well liking such baitings; yet giving an accompt of some passages of it,prodiit qui∣dem. semel Octo∣denarius praeco∣cis sapientiae ju∣venis, de ab∣strusissimis rebus Theologicis, cum Philosophica studia non esset emensus, nec. E∣phebi segressus, disputandi avi∣dus. Britanno∣machia mini∣storumpraefat. after concludes it thus of him, that he was Acatholicorum Doctissimus. I conclude this with (what had bin indeed instead of all) the great honour which he had by the famous University of Oxford, who in a solemn convocation ordered 16 eminent Persons, of whom 6 were then Doctors, together with the Vicechancellor and Proctors of the University, to have at the charge of the U∣niversity, his Effigies cut; and that with an elogium fitting him to receive, and the University to give, both to be prefixed to his Annotations on St. Ignatius his Epistles then in the Press. To the Act of the convocation in that, I refer, Die Lunae viz. 10. mensis Martii Anno domini 1644. In eadem convocatione procurateres nominabant egregios viros, ut effigiem Reverendissini Jacobi Primatis Armachani una cum Elogio illius, quamfieri potest meritis pari, nec non hujus Aca∣demiae digno S. Ignatii Epistolis, quae annotationibus ab eo illustratae propediem divulgandae, praefigendam curent, publico universitatis nomine et sumptu, viz. Doctorum Fell Aedis Christi. Bayly divi Johannis, Clayton Col. Pemb. Sheldon. Om.-Animarum, Zauch Aul Alban, Turnor & Morton & magistrs Laugh∣ban & Barlow Col. Regii, Sugge & Crofts Col. Wedham. Goad divi Johannis: Newman, om. animarum. Tillesley divi Jahannis & Lee Col. Merton▪ un cum Vicecancellario & procuratoribus, vel majorem partem rum (ex registro. Archio univers. Oxon. the Elogium being this.
Jacobus Usserius Archiepiscopus Armachanus totius Hiber∣niae Primas, Antiquitatis Primaevae peritissimus, Ortho∣doxae religionis vindex  errorum malleus, in con∣cionando frequens, facundus, praepotens, vitae inculpatae exemplar spectabile Rob. Pink. Vicecanc. I add that most learned Person's first Work, de ecclesi∣arum Christianarum successione & statu which was by him published an. 1613. and was by Archbishop Abbot of Can∣terbury presented to King James with these words, see Sr. the eminent first fruits of the Colledge of Dublin. That House was then of twenty years standing, and that learned Work the first that came from any there. And he himself, the happy first fruits of that University. All which concerning this learned Person, I borrow from and owe to that short collection of his Life, given by Doctor Bernard in his Funeral Sermon Apr. 17, 1656, ho∣ping the enlarging that, may hereafter be the work of some happy pen: that nothing of those precious Fragments be lost, some Baskets yet remaining to be filled. If his me∣mory be now by time almost worn out here among us, let this serve in some sort to refresh it, or if envy in some would have it lost, and his esteem lessened here; let it be remembred which was spoken by our Lord of himself, and true of others, that a Prophet is not without Honour save in his own Country and in his own HouseMatth. 1 57.; and let it suffice that it be left to Strangers to value what is ours, which we our selves do not. But know that therein you suffer your selves to be robbed of an Honor to this University, to this City, and to this Church and Country. And from such beginnigs, what may we not after expect. To pass times intervening, the present shews it hope∣fully. 1. In our illustrious Chancellor James Duke of Ormond now the fourth time Lord Liuetenant of Ireland. He was
first our Chancellor of this Uniuersity, and after by that fa∣mous University of Oxford ambitiously sought for, and now of both together Chancellor. 2. You have seen the late Vice Chancellor, the lear∣ned Prelat; whose memory is at present before us prin∣cipally. 3. You have a prudent, careful, and learned President and Governor second to none, if equalled by any before, for government and parts answerable. 4. And as to the present stock of Fellows and other Gra∣duates and Schollars; these for Learning and Ingenuity, their number and standing considered, not needing to give place to any; envied they may be, but not neglected. And wherefore all this? All said in this is intended, as an inducement to all well affected to Piety and Learning a∣mong us, to promote and encourage such happy begin∣nings. We may hear those Sons of Prophets now say, as did those sometimes to Elisha2 Kings 6. 1. 2. Behold the place where we dwell is too strait for us let us go therefore over Jordan and take every man a beam and let us make us a place where to dwell. In order whereunto, let it be remembred. That the Army in Queen Elizabeth's time an. 1601 after the over∣throw of the Enemy at Knisale, that being the shutting up of that War, contributed l. 1800 towards the beginning of a Library, till then here wanting; for which end Do∣ctor Chaloner (the industrious promoter of the building of this Colledge, by exhorting others, and himself withal there∣unto contributing) Also that learned Person after Primat Usher of whom so much hath been now spoken, were both chosen; and sent into England with that money given by the Army for choosing and buying books accordingly. These then met at London, Sr. Thomas Bodley on the like work for his Library at Oxford; each helping the other in what was in that to be done; so as Sr. Thomas Bodleys Fa∣mous
Library in Oxford, and ours here began together. And herein this our Library owes it self to our soldiery, learning by Arms promoted. This was seconded an. 1656 by that Army in Ireland commanded then by Henry Cromwel (let not what may be good be forgotten; but the good be gathered into Vessels, while what is bad is cast awayMat. 13. 48.; then did that Army (on the per∣close of their work in Ireland as to the Rebellion there) contribute about. l 2200 for purchasing learned Primat Ushers Library; which being then in England it was by that great Cardinal of France eyed, and by the French Embassador in England pressed for earnestly, for other ends, to be by them purchased at a greater summ then was here given. Hereby was that pretious Stock of Learning preserved for Ireland, whither it was after brought: And by his Grace the Duke of Ormond then Lord Lieutenant and Chancellor of this University, was An. 1661 ordered to be laid up in this Colledge, as an addition to the Library here where now it is. And now pursuant to both those, let there be a place left for this present Army also, on this their great and general settlement, they therein gathering the fruits of their Labors, and that more abundantly than ever had been in Ireland before this time. Let it not be said, that those other have done so much and these nothing. This is what hath been of old accusto∣med; that out of spoils in War, some part should be dedicated to God as an acknowledgement of his hand in that work: so did Samuel the seer; and Saul the Son of Kish; and Abner the Son of Ner and Joab the Son of Zerviah; David also the King and the chief Fathers and Captains over thousands and hundreds and Captains of the Host1. Chr. 2 26, 27., we find the very Sums also re∣corded, which besides that of the spoils had been by them of their own store so offered1. Chrs 2 3. 10. 9. together with the satis∣faction and comfort received by them in such their bene∣ficence R. 9. 10. that the people rejoyced for that they offerred wil∣lingly to the Lord and David the King also rejoyced with great
joy; blessing the Lord for giving them a heart so to do. And what in this Kind is said to one, is said to all. That all con∣sider the occasion offered, the enlarging this place for Lear∣ning and Religion in which all are concerned, by which a general Blessing may be expected, this work carrying in its self a blessing to Church and State. Pardon this Digression which I desire may be, to that end for which it was inten∣ded, prevailing. As to this great prelat, to whom I now again return: We have seen him at the highest that this Church of Ire∣land could raise him; see him now as to his Qualifications thereunto. In him appears what the great Apostle St. Paul wishes for and requires in a BishopTit. 1▪ 7. 8. that he be blameless, hos∣pitable, sober, a lover of good Men, just, holy, holding fast the Faith (Orthodox) these I but name only without fur∣ther application as to him, who may rather seem to be in that, named or pointed at, as by his just and owned Chara∣cter; Add his Learning a fit application for such. His parts were more in substance, then shew, ordinarily. His value was much intrinsick, not overlaid and set forth for ostentation. He was a vessel full of rich liquor, which must be pierced if tasted, and then found Fragrant, plea∣sing, and refreshing, I was at his Table with others, when a point of Learning passing from hand to hand, he for a time hearing and silent, at length the matter was by him∣self taken up with variety of learning and reading and de∣termined to admiration; so as a learned prelat present, brake out into this expression; my Lord I thank you I am now here both Fed and taught, I know not but his papers may afford something posthume worthy his parts, and the worlds perusal. This his being as to himself reserved seems to to be a natural disposition in him, being of a qui∣et Spirit like Isaac among the Patriarks (Abraham and Jacob) of less noise in the World than they; and as the patern to all,Mat. 12. 19. our Lord Christ, not striving nor his voice heard
in the Streets seeming to be rather blamed by his friends as was our Lord also by his,John. 7. 4. go (said they) over Jordan that thy Disciples may see the Works that thou doest, for there is no man that doth any thing in secret and he himself seek∣eth to be known openly: if thou do those things shew thy self to the World; so was it with him generally, I except when the Church came to be concerned. Then was he up and dischar∣ed the duty of a true Prelate, the Zeal of Gods House ea∣ting him up; he being thereupon sometimes passionately troubled, where any thing fell short of his expectation that way. Careful he was of his Episcopal Charge; as in what was in his own Diocess of Armagh under his ordina∣ry care, so throughout his Province; that others in like place subordinately, should see to their work also. He did encourage well doing in all the Clergy, exhorting the back∣ward, and reproving what was amiss; and that general∣ly in mildness, but sometimes where cause required, sharply, yet that oft with tears. Not long before his end being fastned to his Bed, and a visitation then being held by his Surrogate, for his Dio∣cess of Armagh, he desired in the return, to understand the state of the Churches there; to which this accompt was given him, That therewas no Church there, without an able and learned Minister: and that the duty in every Church was performed duly by a Refident Minister, or an able Resident Curate with competent allowance. This I had from a learned Person, whose that work was under him principally, which accompt was by him recived with much satisfaction, as what was to be shortly after given by him to the great Bishop of Souls. As to Charity; Piety, and Beneficence, this is a principal Qualification, and becoming that sacred Order above o∣thers, concerning which as to this pious Prelat, something hath been already spoken. His charitable relieving those poor stript Protestants in Ireland while he was there, An. 1641 feeding the Hungry, Clothing the Naked and provi∣ding
all necessaries for the Sick; and that so liberally, and so long, as that he was himself at length brought neer to his mor∣sel, and thereby enforced to seek elsewhere what to eat; of which before Also in times of his retirements in Eng∣land, his own Stock, and store being short for helping o∣thers as he desired; He made it his work to stir up others to that good Work, for relieving the necessities of poor Irish Sufferers, flocking daily to London for help; especially for the distressed of the Clergy; and those particularly of England suffering for a good Conscience. Hereunto were charitable Persons by his sollicitations moved to large Contributions: they choosing him the first mover, to be therein the Almosner and Dispenser of their bounty to such as he should judge fitting: this he discharged with all faithfulnes. And among others was thereby releived that Worthy and Learned Prelat of Ireland Bishop Chappel that excellent Provost sometimes of this Colledge of Dublin. After his return into Ireland, God having blessed him in his Substance considerably, he would not be unmind∣ful of that place in England where he was Born. And at Drighlington in York-Shire, his Native place and Coun∣try, he erected and endowed a Free School, endowing that with a large yearly Revenue for ever. And in Ireland, Beside what was by him piously contributed to∣ward the repairing and adorning the two Cathedrals in Dublin Christs Church and St. Patricks, There was added his Care and Bounty towards his Cathedral at Armagh. As to Armagh, That had oft fatally suffered almost to utter desolation: that place Seated in the Province of Ul∣ster, being in troublesome times subject to frequent incur∣sions and attempts of Enemies. It had suffered by Fire and Sword An 890. 893. and 919. 1166. and 1179. and 1189. and lastly 1642. when Sr. Phelim O Neile in the head of an Army of about 7000 Rebels assaulting Lisnegarvy (now Lisburn) and being shamefully repulsed by a few not exceeding (if so many as) 200 Brittish a∣mong
whom that Noble Person Sr. George Rawden was Eminent above any: the enraged Rebels therefore in their return revenged themselves in the cruel murthering a number of poor Protestants yet in their power. One also of their chief Officers of the O Neiles, destroyed Armagh, and consumed that great Cathedral with Fire, which sa∣crilegious Act of that wicked person escaped not divine Justice, he soon after falling distracted and dying miserably. The repairing that vast Pile and Cathedral of Armagh was a chief care of this pious Prelate, its Arch-Bishop; towards which, that being the Metropolitical Church of that Province of Armagh, contributions had been in all former times on such occasions made for it in the several Diocesses subject to that Metropolitan; the like therefore was now also proposed, which being done, and the re∣turn made, it was found very short of what was hoped for, and not answering the sixth part of the charge herein necessary. Thereunto were also applyed other small Reve∣nues of the Church, which comings in, being limited to certain days of payment as they became due; those also coming in slowly; and some failing; and all short of what that great Work further required: therefore for present advance of Mony to answer the constant carry∣ing on that Work, and to supply what was every way ne∣cessary in all, it cannot be reasonably judged but that this great persons Bounty was in that considerable; refer∣ring for particular to accompts taken of the whole. But now by his care is the whole Fabrick perfected and the Service of God in its several Ministrations restored, and that constantly attended to the just praise of his Piety, Care, and Beneficence. As to his otherwise dispensing charitably to the need he reserved himself in that unto himself, (as in other his great parts) which were not for common observation; charity being in that properly ordered, so as that the left hand should not know what the right hand doth, yet by that faith∣ful
hand by him in such occasions ordinarily employed, I have assurance that he was full of good Works and in that way constant and forward, not expecting solicitations and addresses toward it, but enquiring secretly for the Poor and Needy, and sending them oft help, they knew not whence, and that as occasion was for it, liberally. One Person being instanced (but not named) to whom at one time out of his own Purse, he sent one hundred Pound. I say out of his own Purse; to difference what was so by him done, from what, by his honourable place of his Magi∣sties Almosner of Ireland, he faithfully dispersed. Faith∣ful he was in that his publique trust, not suffering any part of what came in that way to mix with his private. But depositing this in that faithful hand that received it, to be forthwith disposed to its proper use, as the comings in, which were Slow, would allow it. I have perused those accompts, and found the comings in to be sometimes by 20 Shillings, or such small Sums at a time, sometimes more, but never above 23 Pounds, and that but once, those comings in also being uncertain and but as occasions were for it, by its double Branches of Fines or Deodands, the whole sum of both put together making up but 169•. 18s. 1d. and that in 15 Years from 1663 to 1678. Yet was this, whatsoever it was in common esteem suffi∣cient to cloud his private Charity, all by him done, being commonly interpreted only on the publique accompt, which was no trouble to him, but well answering his de∣sire of being in that work as to himself private and un∣observed. As to his private Estate and Fortunes, God blessed him in that abundantly. A Blessing promised to the Chari∣table, yet is not that allways so in this Life. God reser∣ving some retributions, and the greater, to another; here also Providence ordering commonly, that all things be alike to good and badEcl. 9. 2.; and that Love or Hatred, (of God to men in their several States of good and evil) appear
not by any thing before them, Prosperity or AdversityEccl. there are wicked prosperous and good fuffering. Good also abounding in outward happiness, and wicked miserable. Abra∣ham, Isaac and Jacob among the Patriarchs, had the blessing of abundance. But it is to be observed that the prosperity of the good is more subject to Envy and De∣traction, then is that of the wicked commonly; So was it with Isaac. He was prosperous and was there∣fore maligned and troubled, although peaceable and qui∣et, and thrust away by his ill Neighbours the Philistins, which being by him expostulated with them, the answer was, because we saw certainly that the Lord was with theeGen. 26. 28.. This seems the condition of this Patriarch also (for in that rank of a Patriarch in the Church, is the Primat of Armagh also esteemed) Gods thus blessing him, if it be not a trouble to some, yet is there from that what is ob∣jected for a Crime; that in England he had laid out what he had acquired in Ireland, and not there rather where he had it. This is observed. But to the contrary it is well known that even in Ire∣land he laid out for a settlement for one of his Children, no less then 4 thousand Pounds at once. And the like Sum of 4 thousand more towards the settlement there of ano∣ther of his Children. He was also on purchaseing not far off, an Estate sould after for 6 thousand Pound, which he might have had cheaper, but refused to deal in it, under∣standing part of it to be Abbey Land. For in all his layings out wheresoever, he was ever careful not to medle with any concern of the Church, nor with Tithes, nor with what did belong to Abbeys, having oft observed the evil of that to their Possessors. That therefore of his not laying out of his Substance in Ireland, is a causless detraction, the contrary appearing considerably. But, wherein is the evil of his providing a settlement
also in England, as in Ireland; and whether in that were not his considerations prudent and provident. He had in Ireland seen and felt the prodigious evills of that fatal Year 1641. How it was then with others, and with himself also; and that holding 20 Years after. He might have remembred that Year 1641, was not the first of that kind in this Kingdom; that being but a repeating over and over again what was oft before; although never in so high a degree of mischief in any age till then. He might have considered, that it might be so again, as then and before; the same effects likely following where the same causes are in being. Solomons observation of times generally, may be so here: The thing that hath bin, is what shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be doneEccl. 1. 9.. May it not therefore be thought advisa∣ble and convenient on such considerations, that there should be a laying up in store, where is more security to answer such accidents; I wish there be not some here this day alive, who reflecting on this, may not find cause hereafter to say at least, that he was in this, provident. I wish I may be in this a false Prophet. And if there be any whose hopes are better, I should willingly say to that Amen, as did the Prophet Jeremiah in somewhat a like caseJer. 28. 3. 4. 5. 6.▪ but And now to come from this great Prelates Life to his end. A little before his last distemper he found (he said) his Heart filled with Joys and Comforts in God, extraordinary above all that could be imagined. Such are found in Gods Children sometimes after great Trials and Sufferings, to refresh. Sometimes under such Sufferings to sup∣port, as an Angel sent to Christ in his AgonyLuke 22. 43. after which we hear him not complain any more, as thrice be∣fore of his Cup.Heb. 5. 7. And sometimes this is before and intro∣dustory to some great change, preparing for it. The fifth of May last a Sacrament Day in this Church he would be then a publique Communicant, and that,
not withstanding his Phisitians desires to the contrary, not by his going abroad to expose himself to inconveni∣encies; his Distemper having already gotten some hold of him. He was a strict observer of his Phisitians pre∣scripts and councells at all times now only excepted, pre∣ferring Gods service to his private Condition. He was always a constant frequenter above others, of the pub∣lique service of God, not omitting any occasion for that, where any competency of Health would permit. After that, and from thenceforth he was confined to his House by his indisposition encreasing. But, there he found the Church; the Church at his house (i); His House being an Oratory for constant and frequent Devotions; publique in the use of Church Offices, and in private Prayers also; many resorting thither principally for serving God. And when he seemed to be confined to his Chamber: yet then (although not well able) would he step out to be in the company of those worshiping God in the next room, parting from them with a blessing to that meeting. After a while that liberty was denied him, not to be restrained only to his Chamber, but to be also fastned to his Bed. Then notwithstanding some hopes given by his Phisitians, he gave himself to prepare carefully for that change which he did foresee more then others, This he did by Prayer, and for the Church was his Prayers particularly; and desired others Prayers also with him and for him. Also by private Meditation in which he was frequent, complaining sometimes of being in that distur∣bed by some not observing it. He desired also the Sacra∣ment which he received together with the Church Absolution, being exceedingly satisfied and comforted with both. His Pains encreasing, his Patience also en∣creased and appeared to admiration, hardly complaining otherwise, then by a Groan now and then stealing from him, and being once observed by some gestures to be troubled, he was asked where his Pain was, where (said he)
even from Fingers ends to my Toes ends, and yet shewing in all, little trouble (i), only turning to me, he said (Credo resurrectionem Carnis) as if not willing others should un∣derstand his Pain, and shewing how he found in that, sup∣port under all sufferings, his Faith and hope of the Resur∣rection, some wishing him ease, he desired (he said) Pa∣tience rather, that being a Grace and from Gods Spirit, ease being natural; oft he had in his Mouth that of the ApostlePhilip. I desire to dissolve and be with Christ; to dissolve, not (as commonly) to be dissolved, this signifiing obedi∣ence and submission (which is well) but the other willingness and desire to be with Christ. This also he had sometimes, I am not ashamed to live nor fear to dy. And in that his last; his Lips were much for blessing; for his last benediction was the resort to his Bed syde great and daily, of all sorts conditions and degrees of Men. Blessings are not in vain, and at such times especially, dying Blessings and Exhortations are serious and prevail∣ing. And in all he had the happiness of being sensible to the last. And whereas one dyeth in his full strength, his Breast full of Milk, and his Bones moistned with Mar∣row Job. 21. 23.. His end was with the blessing of a good old age the 78 Year of his ageJob. 5. 26. then carried to his Grave in a full age, like as a Shock of Corn cometh in, in his Season so to be laid up till the Resurrection.
Oratio habita in obitum Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Jacob Archiepiscopi Armachani, totius Hiberniae Primatis, Vicecancel larii Academiae Dubliniensis, &c. Aug. 30 1678. HUc confluxit Academia Dignissimo Vice-cancellario extremum officium praestitura, officium tanti viri memoriae debitissimum. Dùm ver consummatissimum Praesulem Stylo delineare jubet nunquam nimìs officios gratitudo, vereor nè idem mihi accidat, quod pulchram absolutam{que} faciem pingentibus solet, qui talem rar ò nisi in pejus effingunt. Praesul erat cùm eruditione, tùm vitâ primitivus; primaevam tàm veritatem quàm pietatem exprimaevis Patribus depromsit, quibus illos adeò faelicitèr expressit, ut si isdem vixisset saeculis, inter sacra illa veteris Ecclesiae Lumin suo merito emicuisset. Theologiam suam non ex impuris Scholasticorum lacunis hausit, non ex turbidis recentium Systematum rivulis, sed (sicut genuinum Ecclesiae Anglicanae filium decebat▪) limpidissimum Sacrae Scripturae fentem rectà adijt, verúm{que} ejus sensum per piae Antiquitatis canalem per sanctissimorum Patrum monumenta, Conciliorúm{que} Generalium Acta in propriam mentem derivavit. Haec sòlida illius in rebus divinis cognitio, quâ nulla Christiano Episcopo dignior, nulla Christiano populo uti lior, Theologicas hujus seculi argutias non tàm ignoravit, quàm subli mioribus studiis intentus contempsit. Dolendum tamèn, quòd magnam doctrinae partem summa ejus modestia nobis invideret; suam enìm scientiam tàm studiose celavit quàm alii ostentare satagunt, beato servatori similis qui vel ipsa sua miracula palam innotescere saepè inhibuit. Invitâ tamèn modestiâ, eximiam, quam animo texit cognitionem, mores apertè loquebantur quàm consummatus Theologus fuit, expressit vita; nam in verbi tantum theologari non est Christiani Doctoris, sed Histrionis; quid enim turpins quam Christianae vitae artem professum, in ratione vitae peccare? ille magni hujus Praesulis instar, summum Theologiae apicem tetigit, qui non tàm magna locutus est quàm vixit; qui, cùm per in gravescentis aetatis incommoda, sacra rostrarariùs ascendere valeat, vitae exemplo, omni eloquentiâ potentiore, perpetuò concionatur. Margetsoni nomen tùm primùm elucescere caepit, cúm prudentissimus Straffordiae Comes non calamitatibus quàm virtutibus major, illum a Sacris esse elegerit. A laudato viro laudari quis non vehementèr cupiat? at tanti Judicis calclum obtinuisse maximis laudibus majus videatr. Permagnus ille & Ecclsiae
& Monarchiae vindex, postquàm integerrimum Sacellanum variis Ec∣clesiasticis muneribus priùs exercuisset, tandèm Aedis Christi Decanat fidos ejus labores remuner abatur Quem non diù tenuerat, antequàm im∣manissimae rebellionis flamma improvisò erumpens, at{que} hanc insulam longè laté{que} depopulans, piam suam beneficentiam ergà miseros exhibendi peram∣plam occasionem ministraret. Quàm multis, diris iis temporibus, omnibus bonis exutis, nudis, & penè fame enectis, suis succurrebat opibus, adhùc su∣persunt testes. Nemo magis frugalis erat simul & munificus, nihil ferè in seipsum impendebat, ut omnia pauperibus, infoelice illâ tempestate heu nimium auctis, elargiretur. Quùm verò universas ferè facultates, in illos quos barbarus gladius in extremam redegerat miseriam erogasset, ne{que} in hac regione ipsum aut tutum aut innocentem ampliùs manere liceret, se in Angliam convertit; ubi Remp. simul cum sacro suo Capite, Ecclesiam unà cùm Sacerdotibus foedissimè conculcatam, tristissimis conspexit oculis. Tunc autèm conspicua ejus in Regem & Ecclesiam pietas, illum latere non sine∣bat, eximius splendor Gemmam detexit; confestìm igitur de carcere in carcerem rapitur: putabant scilicet Rebelles, sese continuis vinculorum an∣goribus piam ipsius magnanimitatem tandem effracturos; veruntamen ani∣mosa ejus virtus, omnia vinculae sprevit, in{que} extremis angustiis hostibus superior, inter carceres & catenas de iis triumphavit. Quamobrem exire permittuut inexpugnabilem Heroē, quem tamdiú frustrà incarceraverant; & non citiùs ferè exierat, quàm pristinum succurrendi miseris officium re∣peteret. Cromwellianâ enim tyrannide pacem priori bello vix minùs saevi∣entem miserrimae Genti inferente, plurimi Nobiles & Generosi, qui à Re∣giis partibus stabant, Margetsono nostro, tanquàm illibatae integritatis viro, suarum Eleemosynarum Dispensatore, cùm palàm non ausi sint, clàm utebantur. Quàm autèm gavisus est venerandus Sacerdos postquam in Pau∣perum sinus suas effudisset opes, in alienis similitèr effundendis occupari. Hic genuiuus Christi Discipulus undi{que} peragravit beneficia spargens; nul∣la longorum itinerum taedia, nulla viarum pericula, non praerupti Cambriae montes magnanimo seni obstabant, quò minùs concreditas sibi eleemosy∣nas alacri spiritu circumgestaret; ad pios scilicet Symmystas suos, alios{que} praeclaros viros sublevandos, quos fidele ergà Principem Ecclesiam{que} ob∣sequium in durissimam pauperiem reduxerat. Tandem ab exilio redux Au∣gustissimus Carolus secundus Doctorum Marget sonum pro tantis meritis, tot{que} pro Regiâ causa exantlatis laboribus, Archiepiscopali Dublinii Ca∣thedrâ
dignum censuit: in quâ per paucos annos sedentem, moriens Dig∣nissimus Hiberniae Primas Bramhallus (quo nemo Ecclesiae fortior propug∣nator, nemo Ecclesiasticarum personarum acrior Judex) illum pro succes∣sore suo in Sede Armachanâ, illustrissimo Proregi nostro commendavit; qui nefas duxit tanti viri gravissimo judicio suum non apponere calculum, nec dubitandum quod illis ambobus, omnium fidelissimis Principis servis & Achatibus placuisset, ipsi serenessimo etiam Regi apprimè placiturum: Regiis ergò literis in totius Hiberniae Primatum evehitur vir, inter tan∣tos in illum congestos honores, humillimus. Mutatâ enim fortunâ, ut ple∣rum{que} accidit, non mutavit mores; idem erat summus Metropolitanus qui anteà privatus Sacerdos, idem pectoris generosum honestum, idem vitae justissimus innocentissimus{que} tenor, eadem animi simplex & ingenua mode∣stia, eadem vultus gravis & verenda suavitas, eadem lenis & decora af∣fabilitas. Prudentiâ non fucatâ, sed sincerâ & solidâ, arduam adeò Provinciam sibi commissam administravit, non more Romani Episcopi, anathemata in repugnantes fulminando, verùm tranquillam exercendo potestatem; quae vividiore saepè impetu in hominum animos influit quàm vio∣lenta soleat: sic quidèm caelestia corpora silento placido{que} motu, sine ullo turbante strepitu, salutares suos influxus in hunc mundum inferiorem po∣tentèr demittnut. Erga clerum, comis simul erat & severus, adeò ut illum amarent paritèr ac vererentur, si quam ex illis pro aliquibus culpis inere∣paret, quos omni culpâ vacare ardentissimè cupiit; vix ac ne vìx sine obo∣rientibus lacrymis id praestare potuit, Cleri vitia ipsius praecordia adeo∣intimè tangebant. Si praesens Ecclesiae status ullo modo periclitabatur ne¦mo aut fervidiore zelo, aut efficaciore eloquio illius causam in supremo hu∣jus Regni Concilio agebat: haec cura magno Ecclesiae Patre verè digna il∣lum praecipuè exercuit, ut Ecclesiae reditus à Sacrilegis manibus conserva∣rentur, purá{que} Protestantium Religio publicis legibus stabilita, tàm à Pon∣tificiis quàm à Presbiterianis insultibus tuta consisteret. Alia obitèr age∣b, hic ejus labor, hoc opus erat. Sola Academia in partem curae quan∣do{que} veniebat, cujus Vice-cancellarius esse, magna animi demissione digna∣tus est; ità nimirùm propiorem occasionem captans; ingenuarum Literarum studia favore suo & potestate fovendi. Quantopere Collegii honori, nec non Sociorum Scholarium{que} commodis invigilavit, testantur non pauca be∣neficia à Prorege Concilió ipso imprimis intercedente nobis impe∣trata. Adeò ut in ipsius obitu non tantùm amantissimum Ecclesiae
Patrem verumetiàm faventissimum Academia Patronum amiserit. Quandoquidem verò ingens, quod tulimus, damnum aliter resarcire non possimus, integerrimae vitae ejus exemplum, tanquam charissimum deposi∣tum, semper in honore habeamus; cum{que} illo per fatorum leges diutius frui non liceat, illius saltem virtutibus perpetuo fruamur. Imitemur fir∣missimam illius pietatem, quae ne{que} prosperae fortunae blanditiis corrumpi, ne{que} adversae procellis de statu suo deturbari potuit. Imitemur invectam illius in Regiam Majestatem fidem, magnanimam{que} in vera Religione constantiam, in quibus, horribili belli civilis tempestate omnia undi{que} concutiente, penitus inconcussus perstabat. Imitemur effusam illius er∣ga pauperes charitatem, cum adhuc Decanus esset; nec credendum, ipsi in summis honoribus constituto, manum contractiorem fuisse; sed potius Do∣minici praecepti memor, eleemosynas suas tam secretò sparsit ut sinist non noverit quod dextra fecerat: quod tamen adeò clanculum praestare nquivit, quin privata liberalitas haud paucis innotuerit. Ne{que} deeran quidem publica munificentiae opera, quae-egi non poterant; cujusmodi, in∣ter plurima alia, schola ab ipso munifice fundata, Sacra Aedes Ca∣thedralis ab ipsis ruinis resuscitata, Palatium{que} Archiepiscopale haud ex∣iguis sumptibus commodius ornatius{que} redditum. Imitemur deni{que} ferven∣tissimum illius zelum pro Ecclesiae Academiae{que} incolumi prospero{que} statu, nec non ejus verè Christianam patientiam sanctam{que} fortitudinem; seda∣to immoto{que} animo ut omnes injurias & calamitates, ita ultimi morbi do∣lores & taedia pertulit, ne{que} mors pedetentim appropinquans illi formi∣dabilis erat, piâ quippe praemeditatione, continuis{que} devotae mentis in caelum aspirationibus eam sibi familiarem rediderat; adeo ut nemo pectore magis praeparato vultu{que} alacriore letho occurrere potuerit: videbatur quâ∣dam gaudii impatientia mortis adventum praestolari. Molliorem senectam molliusve lethum vix mortalis habere potuit, sicut Judaei de Mose fe∣runt, osculo oris Dei, abs{que} corporis luctâ aut dolore inter caelestes ejacu∣lationes piam animam mollissimè exhalavit. Jam{que} vale Reverendissime Pater, miraculi instar est vitae iter, Si longum, sine offensione percur∣nere; Tibi autem haec rara felicitas a Deo donata est; ne{que} aliam majorem nobismetipsis vovere possumus, quam ut perseverante sanctitate Tibi simil simus, qui sanctissimam vitam pari exitu clausisti. FINIS.
