K444 12304548 59206
PALLANTUS AND EUDORA A Tragoedie. Written by Mr. HENRY KILLIGREW. MART. Victurus Genium debet habere liber. LONDON. Printed for Iohn Hardesty at the Black-Spread-Eagle in Duck-lane, 1653.
The Publisher to the Reader. WHen this Play came first abroad into the World, it found the approbation of the most Excellent Persons, and best Masters of this Kind of Writing which were in that time, if there were ever better in any time; Ben. Johnson being then alive, who gave a Testimonie of this Piece even to be Envy'd. Nor doe I know more than One Objection, that was ever made against it, Which was, The indecorum that appear'd to Some in the Part of Cleander, who being represented a Person of seventeen yeares of age, is made to speak words, that would better sute with the age of thirty. But the Answer that was given to One, that cried out upon the Monsterousnesse and Impossibilitie of this thing, the first day of the Presentation of this Play at the Black-Friers, by the Lord Viscount Faulkland, may satisfie All Others; and if the Considerablenesse of the Answer, and Answerer, be duly weigh'd, may serve no lesse for an Ornament and Patronage to the Author. The passage was thus. This Noble Person, having for some time suffered the un∣quiet, and impertinent Dislikes of this Auditor, when he made this last Exception, forbore him no longer, but (though he were one he knew not) told him, Sir, 'tis not altogether so Monsterous and Impossible, for One of Seventeen yeares to speak at such a Rate, when He that made him speak in that manner, and writ the whole Play, was Himself no Older. I shall say no more of the Worth, or former Opi∣nion had of this Piece, it being in hand, to shew what it Merits, or Merits not. A few things I have to adde, concerning my present Publication, which are these. That this Play never saw the light in its true Shape till this day: a for∣mer Impression there has been of it, but One, not onely deform'd with all the Errors of an Uncorrected Presse, but what might else proceed from a false and imperfect Transcript; the Originall Coppy being then (together with the Writer of it) in Italy. Who was so farre from consenting to the printing of his Book at that time, that he had not then Corrected those parts of it, which he was forc'd to passe over with lesse care, by reason of the hasty calling of it out of his hands, by the Entertainment for which it was desig'nd. So that (I may say) the former Impression is no better than a Corrupted Fragment, or Foul Draught, of what this Play was intended, and differing so much from what it now is, that if the Corrections, Expungings, and Additions, be consider'd, it is al∣most the one half otherwise. This hath made me likewise impose a New Name upon it: for it is a Creature now wholly at my Disposition, and belonging to me, not as to a Plagiarie, but a Susceptor, or Foster-father, that has taken up this Child long since Ejected by the True Parent. And my desire, is to have it shew as little Affinity and Resemblance as is possible to its Anti-type; whose Prejudices it can no way better remove from it self, than by shewing them False, and Despising them. MART. Multum crede mihi, refert, a fonte bibatur Quae fluit, an pigro quae stupet unda latu. The Persons of the Play
The King a Usurper. Timeus his Sonne. Polyander Minetius two Lords. Comastes a buffonish Lord. Coracinus Argestes Servants to Timeus. Harpastes Melampus two Villaines. Cleander the true King of Crete, a Youth. Clearchus a stranger prince. Pallantus first Prince of Crete, dis∣guis'd. Aratus Phronimus Eurylochus three great Lords. Haimantus Admirall of Clearchus Fleet. Acates Tutor to Cleander. Flamen. Poet. Waiters. Guard. Souldiers. Eudora Sister to Timeus. Rodia her Woman. 2. Ladies Hianthe Sister to Cleander. Melissa her Woman. 2. Ladies Chorus of Priests and People. The Scene CRETE
PALLANTUS and EUDORA A TRAGEDY. [ACTUS, 1. SCENA, 1.] A Banquet set out. Loud Musick. Enter the King, Comastes, Aratus, Polyander, Phronimus, Eurylochus, and Menetius. King. NO happiness like the Fools, Comastes? Com. No, none Sir. Hee's mirth it self, and the cause Of it in others. They say, all pleasure Is a shadow; then that which we enjoy, Is onely the shadow of a shadow, Hardly the Picture of what he embraces. Our delights are faint, thwarted with fears, Disgusted by the conscience, and after An hour of pleasure, succeeds a week of Repentance: in which time we live by Rule, And not by Nature; laugh not, though the jest Be good; nor rage, though at a just cause; But sickly whisper out our sayings, As if they were our last. When the Fool lusts With his whole soul too, and sins till hee's weary; Knows no conscience, but his Want-that-way, nor Remorse, but Disability. King: Ha, ha, ha. Com. Nature never shew'd her liberality More, than to those she was sparing of her Best gifts to. She houses Wisdom in a Body full of decayes, such as requires Her whole strength to bear up the ruine; Measures his legs with the Spiders, gives him Pale, and wan looks, scarce alter'd from the earth He was made of. Where to the Ideot, she Bestowes a body, equal with the Bulks Of Trees, and armes as thunder-proof, makes him A strong, a large, and healthy Fool. King Ha, ha, ha. Ara. Fit Lectures for such a Schollar. King Well Comastes, Thou shalt not want for a Coat, if that will do't. Com. Send me a Mind too with it, and you have not A greater present for your Neighbour-Princes. King Come my Lords let's sit. And fill up our Cups, Make them like our joyes, still full and flowing. Thus it should be my Lords in a state that Knows no troubles: let unhappy Princes, Whom losles do afflict, and fears a ffright, Make Annual-Feasts; but we whose even affairs Do follow one another, and do keep Their just Periods, though the Reines are loose,
And their Guide sleep, seeming rather so to Have faln-out, than so caus'd: each day shall Be a Triumph, each hour a Feast. Ara, We may chance to find one out for Funerals. aside King A health to all, and a long peace. Com. You are melancholly Aratus. Ara. You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you— Comastes strikes Arates on the shoulder. Poly. O let his Lord-ship alone. He's one of those Which say their prayers backward for the State. Ara. You are the Foxes that thrive by it. Phro. Aratus your anger is unseasonable, And the King marks it. King How now Aratus, What's the matter? Our Table should know no frowns, And then least, when we our self forbears 'em. Ara. Royal Sir, I ask your pardon. He wak'd me Something rudely, and got a froward answer. King What, all dead? Fill another round, our Wine Moves not. Here Polyander, to thee— What think'st thou of Comaste's happiness? Poly. I think Sir, 'tis as dull, as foolish. There cannot be a sence of pleasure, where There is so little sence. Greatness is the Centre Of all happiness, and felicity, Like our Lands at first, is ty'd to the Crown. Kings comes near unto the Gods, and are like them Both in power and pleasure; do command all, Enjoy all, are miserable onely in having Of too much, and wanting what to wish for. Theirs is the dazling happyness. 'Tis idle Therefore to prefer Private joyes before The Crown-pleasures. The King may throw by his Greatness when he please, and be poorly happy; But the Begger will nere sigh unto a Scepter. King Why I Polyander, ther's some life in this, A little heaven even in the apprehension. Aratus art not thou of this opinion? Ara. Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Fools there. Kings are more miserable, than they seem Happy; flatter'd by themselves and others, Into a joy that is not, and what they feel, They rather do imagine than find so. Yet I grant too, a King may be happy, But not then as a King. Felicity Is a Purchase, and no Inheritance, Nor has the Prerogative more than one life In't ever, it dyes still with the Buyer. Troubles are the good Kings profession, In the Wars the first Dart is thrown at him, Where oft times his happyness is in a Glorious death; or perhaps his God-like Raies Are pluck'd from him by some accursed hand, And so falls less happy, being after Vainly wish'd so by a poor revenge he Knows not. Com. Very Grave, and unseasonable! Thus your Lord-ship gets the reputation Of Singularity, which the Vulgar Suspect to be Wisdom. Ara. Sir you see How this place and my freenes are injur'd. King Mirth, onely mirth Aratus. He means Thy speech would better have become a Councel,
Than a Banquet. Timeus welcome. Nay Keep your seats. Would thou had'st been partaker Enter Timeus. Of our Mirth. Time. Sir, when my actions, or my age, Shall make me worthy of your ease and pleasures, I shall be a thankfull sharer: but till then, Your Troubles will become me better than Your Sports, and Cares will sit more lovely on My Brow than Roses. Sir, those that are about you Seek to drown your Vertues. Ara. Your Highnesse meanes None here? Time. I name none here my Lord. King. Nay Timeus, Thou nere look'st friendly on our pleasures. Time. I must confesse Sir, I had rather see you Bloudy than thus Wet; nor are my Wishes Impious, Polyander. Poly. My Lord. Time. How basely that Smile became thee. I had Rather thou had'st answer'd me with a Blow Than such a Look. I thought to have ask't thee Something, but I see thou art unworthy Of a brave Demand. Thy Skill lies onely In the Curiosity of a Meal, To say at the first touch o'th' tongue. this is A Chian, this a Falernian Wine. Streight by the colour of the flesh to know, Whether the foul were cram'd, or whether fed, Prethee Polyander, how sat the Wind When this Bore was slain? Were not these Apples Pull'd the Moon Encreasing? Degenerate! I have seen thee put thy face into a Frown, And were't so constant in that look, as if Thou had'st no other. Poly, Sir, when you shall find, Or make a cause, I'le put them on again, Here they'l but sour the Entertainment. Com. You see, my Lord, they are not drownd, they live Still under water. Time. Like thine, Beast. King Prethee Timeus let us enjoy our Mirth While the Gods give it: the time will come, That we shall wish for it, and not have it. On my Conscience thou could'st be content To have Enemies, onely that thou might'st cut'em off. Time. I am sorry, Sir, if I have offended Against your Mirth, it was not my intent. I came to bring you News. King News? What is't? Good? Time. 'Tis as you shall esteem of't Sir: There's A Stranger Prince ariv'd. King Hither? Time. Yes Sir. His Visit's forc't by a Storm, as he pretends. King. What ere the Occasion is, he shall be Welcome. The time's far spent. Aratus, it Shall be thy Employment. From us fairly Salute the Prince, and tell him, though the Seas Have been Unfriendly, the Land shall Court him. Ara. Great Sir, you highly Honour me. Phro. So, now we have time to speak: What think'st thou, Exeunt all but Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus. Aratus of these passages? Arat. Well, bravely well. Eury. Your speech strook desperately at the King: He will not swallow it without some touch of jealousie. Ara. 'Tis no matter. He cannot crosse us now. We have not tan'e so many yeares to build A Work up, and then to have it ruin'd With a push. No, he that will shake't, must first Overthrow a Kingdome, a Prince, a Law, so large The Extents are: Nere did Plot thrive like it, It has infected with the Holy Sore
The greatest part o'th' Realm, and catches daily; Like some Unheard of New Opinions Streightned at first, and prison'd in the brests Of two or three, gain strength by Time, and Eares, And daily fed by curiosity, Thrust out at last the Old, and most Receiv'd, And grow the whole Religion of the Place. When we have call'd our Party forth, the Work Will seem done, the thin Numbers that are left, Not deserving the Name of Enemies. The Tyrant then will see himself no more A King, but onely the Wretched Cause of Warre, His Power being ravisht from him. Phr. While the fruit's thus ripe, why doe we let it grow? Eury. And spoil perhaps? Arat. We will no longer, onely A little Ceremony detaines us To Crown our King, that past, our actions With our thoughts shall then contend in swiftnesse. Phro. How sped your visit to the young Prince? Arat. Most happily: O had you seen with me The Dear Cause of this our Danger, how Cheap Would you have thought the Greatest for his Sake, And stood contemning Life, thinking your bloud Ill-stored within your veines, when that his service Call'd it? sure 'twas some such Shape and Sweetness Which first slav'd men, and gain'd a Rule, before there was A Kingdome. Eury. You forget your Message to the Prince. Arat. 'Tis true; pray bear me Company, we may get thankes For our Complement another day. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Harpastes. Harp. Devill, whether wilt thou hurle me? The Ship Sunk under so much Ill, nor can the Earth Bear us both together: the greatest Hills Presse not her face with half that Load; one thought Of Goodnesse made me lighter than the Waves, And in an instant taught me how to swim. Enter Melampus to him. Melampus! Melam. Harpastes! Harp. Are we onely scap't? Melam. I hope so. Harp. Then the Storm has plaid the Hangman, And sav'd us Innocent. Melam. Innocent! What's that? It has sav'd us so much labour, and a broken head perhaps. Harp. The Wrack was great, and full of horror. Melam. How the rogues pray'd, and roar'd above the Waves. Vow'd whole heards of Off rings for their safety. But Neptune sav'd 'em Charges, and took the Verier Beasts. Harp. We scapt miraculously. Melam. I hope you'l burn no Bullocks to the Sea. Harp. No, my Vowes were of another Nature. I vow'd to live well, and change my bloudy purpose. Melam. Thou did'st not mean in Earnest? Harp. I did then, but I no sooner toucht the shore, And safety, but my Old thoughts return'd. Melam. Come, wee'l goe claim our Hire, and swear we kill'd him Before the storm. Our Fellowes dead-pay will Fall to us. Wee'l demand for losses, I, Enter Pallantus. And our dangers too. Harp. If my Eyes deceive Me not, here comes one will deny the payment. Melam. 'Tis he, how the Devil scapt he? Be resolute, and second me. Pallan. How now friends, amaz'd at what's past? Dangers Ore-blown are Dreames, no more to be esteemed of, Within this hour you would have given a world,
To stand thus had it been yours; let not smaller Losses then afflict you. The greatest Riches Are trifles after such Deliverance. Our Birth-day was not half to us so happy, As is this Minute, then we had no sence Of Life, now we perceive and joy in't— They assault him, and he kills 'em. What mov'd these Villaines hatred? Sure they know Me not: Nor did I ere see them before This Voyage! They could not hope for Money: There's more in't. Let me see—What's here, a beard? Black patches? Sure 'tis their trade they are so He searches 'em. Furnisht. Both are of the same profession. He finds a Letter about the last. I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus, receive this man the bearer into your Company and Counsell, and if your secret practises fail you, assault him openly, and by violence perform the Murder; let the one or the other be done speedily, my imploy∣ments here for you are many, and instant. Your Lord and Friend, Timeus. Art thou the Lord, my wonder then is o're! Thy l' reachery was ever greater than thy Hate, And that too was something more than Malice, Above the search of Innocence, a Knot Unto the subtil'st Traitors, a Rid de To thy self. Were not thy Home-Cruelties Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors Out for lives in Forrain Kingdomes? I have Lain hid so long, am now so New Form'd by Art, No friend can know me, Hate, thy Eyes are more Percieving far than Friendships. I have not Dared to Name my self, because with it I doe Name my Father, and yet thou hast me perfect. Him, with many more, that were to Good to look on So much Ill, as thine, and thy fathers Lives, Were made away—Some God give me temper, Or too much Rage, instead of a Revenger, Will turn me a Stock, a Fool. Hear me yee Banisht Gods (for I may justly fear If that your powers are absent any where, 'Tis from this place where Tyranny doth raign) On this Altar I doe vow, to be your Martyr, If not your surviving Instrument, Nere to let fall your Vengeance, till it light On those which slew the King, your King, the Image of your Goodnesse. Which kill'd the Prince, And dared to say that he was lost, lost indeed. Which on the Princesse doe intend a Rape, Their Marriage is no better. Which slew My Father, and last resolv'd on me. Had I a thousand lives I'd' gage them here, And think your judgement yet not bought too dear Enter Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus Arat. In the name of wonder what are thou? Pall. Why? What am I Sir? Arat. Nay, I know not, Nor does any but an Antiquary, Or a Conjurer, certainly, Th' art no Man, Or if thou be'st, I am sure none of the Last Edition Pall. Were your Troop absent, I'd make you find I were without those helpes. Tis so long since you saw a Man, a true One,
That you know not when you meet one. Your Lordships Glass shewed you none this morning. Eury. Whence camest thou? Ara. I, that I'd fain know, here's no hole open In the Earth. Pall. From Sea. Ara. From the bottom sure, Above Water nothing floats like thee. Phro. Of what profession art thou? a Soldier? Pall. Yes. Ara. Thou shouldst be hang'd for thy very looks If thou wert not, they are excusable aside In no Calling else. Pall. I know ye all, but At this time will not be known unto you. These are some insolent Scoffers, that breath Their Wits on all they see weaker than themselves Against they meet the Fool next, I wrong my self To talk to'em. Eury. Dost hear? Pall. None of your wit yet. Eury. Thou bleed'st! Pall. Was't that made me such a wonder? I do so. Eury. And much blood is spilt upon The Ground. Know'st thou the cause? Pall. Yes, I was Assaulted by two Rank Rascals, which I Let blood, and cured. Phro. Hast thou not kill'd, and rob'd'em? Pall. Sir your thoughts are base. And you do ill thus To insult upon my Innocency. Rob'd'em; Money's more below my thoughts, than Earth: My Education has been Noble, and Though the Midwife wrapt me not in Purple, Nor Princes Gossipt at my Birth, I have Dared to be as Honest as the Greatest. My Word hath commanded more, than all your Lands and Money. Those Deeds which I have done, Dishonesty dared not to have look'd on. They would have frighted your Lordship, if but Told you toward bed-time. Phro. I never saw Such fierceness! Ara. I begin to admire this fellow! Eury. Where hast thou bestow'd'em? Pall. behind there. If you search' em you may find more. What Money They had, the Sea wash'd 'em clean of before their deaths. Phro. Why, were they cast away? Pall. Yes, but it seems they search the villaines. They had a Land-fate. Ara. Who's here, rogues limbs? Their two heads a piece? Phro. Here's a Paper speaks 'em Most notorious Villains. Eury. They were proper men. Ara. They were so. Did'st kill'em both, alone? Pall. I told you once so, and am not proud of't To boast it o're again, and tell you how I did it. Ara. Trust me th'art a brave fellow. And I admire thy stoutness. Thou look'st As if thou hadst been Nure'd in perils. Darest thou with us confront a Bold One? But as Honest, as'tis Great. What say'st thou? Canst thou like of us? Phro. Thou shalt not find us As we appear'd at first. Pall. While ye talk thus I can. And in your Business, if Honesty Go yok'd with Danger, it cannot fright me then. No, though all the Monsters of Sea and Land, And Hell to boot, were fram'd into one Horror, I'd face it, Charge it, and wager a life I'd Conquer it. Ara. Thy words go high as thunder. Pall. Pardon my words, if my actions bear up Equal. Arat. I believe they will, And dare promise thou wilt do wonders. Let meimbrace the—Th'art welcome to our Friendship. Mine eyes did look on thee unworthily Before, me thinks th'art Comely now, thy scarrs Are so many Graces, not set by an
Effeminate, but by a manly, and A War-like skill. Business cals us hence, thou shalt not Part one Minute from me. Thy wounds needs help, Come, thou shalt Heal before me. Exeunt omnes. Enter Clearchus, and Haimantus. Cler. Have you commanded all the Mariners Aboard, each Captain to his charge, bid the Souldiers fill the Decks with their full numbers, And display their Colours, left nothing wanting That may add to the Glory of the Navy? Haim. Sir, all things are in their Pride and height. The Captains Bravery seems to lend brightness To the day, and like the Sun, throwes raies, and light About 'em: Nor lookstheir Gold less awful, Than the Souldiers Steel. On the Ships appear The Joy and Riches of a Conquest, and yet they Keep the Order of a joyning-battel. There wants nothing to make a War-like, Princely, And well-commanded Navy, but your Presence Sir. Clear. I would not have them think us such Poor Men, That we are drove to seek for their Relief, To sue for Bread and Water; but rather That we come like Noble Woers, full of Rewards and Presents, able to return All favours we receive, and equally To honour Them, that honour Us, as Great As they. It shall appear, that he that is Master of such a Fleet, may style himself Prince, though Lord of nothing else. Haim. The people Flock upon the shore, and with one Voyce say, You come to fetch their Princess. Sir, you have More than their Consents already, you have Their wishes too. Clear. I marry Haimantus, Such a Jewel would make the rest look dim! There are two Ladies in this Isle (if fame Say true) the wonders of the World! When Nature Made them, she summon'd her whole God-head, And unwearied wrought till she had done, Form'd each limb as if she had begun there: She seem'd to practise on the World till then, And what like beautiful she fram'd before, Were but Degrees to this Height, these the Ascent, From which she now must fall! They made her Older Than the labour of a thousand years— Enter a Servant. Serv. Ther's a great train, it seems from Court, coming To your Highness. Clear. Come, lets meet'em. As Clearchus is going out, Arats, Phronimus, Eurylochus and Pallantus meet him. Ara. Sir, the King congratulates your safety, And is glad of your Arrival, though the Cause Were dangerous, You would have Oblig'd him Much Sir, if you had been bound for Creet. Clear. The King is Royal, and chides me kindly. He binds a Stranger ever to his Service. Ara. His Majesty expects you'll honour him With your Presence this night at Court. Clear. My Lord;
I shall wait upon him. But I must fist Entreat, you'l favour me with your Company A ship-board. I shall not need to excuse A Souldiers Entertainment, I doubt not, But your Lordships knows it well; Coursnesse and Plainnesse are the Praise of it. Arat. Sir you are The Envy of your Neighbour Princes, you So farre exceed them in a Brave Command; I nere was happy in the like sight before. And my Lord, they that can boast the strangest, Have not seen one so Common, and so Rare. Your Navy lookes, as if she wore the Spoiles Of a whole Land, or came to purchase 'em. Clea. My Lord you'l make me proud. Your presence yet Will adde unto its Glory. Enter Timeus, and Coracinus Exeunt Omner. Time. Found dead upon the shore! Cor. I my Lord, Thrown into a Cliffe. Time. Were they drown'd? Cora. 'Tis believ'd not, my Lord: for many fresh Wounds Were found upon their bodies; and yet their Clothes Were wet. Time. 'Tis strange! Were there but two? Cor. No my Lord. Time. That's stranger yet. Reward the Men that found them, And bid'm make no farther enquiry After their Deaths, nor speak of it. Let it Exit Coraos. Die with you too, doe you hear? The Villaines Have rob'd at their return, and got their deaths That way. I nere could spare 'em worse; the State Stands in greater need of theirs, than of the Sword of Justice. Rodia. Rod. My Lord. He calls Rodia, and she Entern. Time. Is your Lady to be spoke with? Rod. Alwayes, My Lord, by you. But now she's coming forth. Enter Endora. Time. Save you sweet Sister. End. O y'are welcome Sir. Time. Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces Had their hands to day about you! You look Fairer than your self, and move in the Sphear Of Love and Beauty; Cupid has taken His Stand up in your Eyes, and shootes at all That come before him! Pray Venus he misse me. Eud. When doe you grow serious? Time. These are the Fair Look Must captivate the Stranger Prince in a Free Country? And th is the Dresse that must inchant him? ha. Eud. There is no Charm in't certainly; it pleas'd Me the least of Many. No, 'tis your Fair Mistresse, that beares those Love-Nets about her: If the Stranger'scape her, he's safe. Time. 'Had better Kill his Father, and then gaze upon the Spectacle, than look upon her with the Eyes of Love. Eud. Nay then you are unjust. Would you have him stronger than your self was? If he for that be guilty, the same Doom Must belong to both alike. Time. But I have Prevail'd so far, that he shall be free, both From the danger of Love, and seeing. Nor must You make up his entertainment. Eud. I was Commanded to be ready, and Attend there. Time. But now the Commissions alter'd, And runs in the Other Sence. Eud. I shall be
Content to obey either. May I not Know the cause? Time. You may. We would not feed The Prince here with hopes to get a Wife. This Was the Storm that drove him in. Nor must you Onely for this time forbear his presence, But while he staies. He's unworthy of you. Eud. If you know him so, I shall then without Excuse denie his Visits. But I think This businuesse may be borne a Nobler Way; Nor will the End Fail, though the Meanes be Fair. Leave it to me: If he Sue with Honour, He will take an Honourable Answer; Though he gain none from me, I'le get his Love, And send him home no lesse a Friend, than if He were a Husband. By my Restraint, you'l Onely procure unto your self, the markes Of Jealousie and Rudenesse, and fouler Staines, If that the Crime were nam'd to the desert. Besides, it does proclaim in Me too such A Weaknesse, as I am much asham'd of. Had he a Face adorn'd with the Graces Of both Sexes, Beauty, and Manlinesse, And these (after the Custome of the Roman Princes in their Statues) Engrafted on On the body of some God, I could look on, Converse, I, and neglect him too, when I Have reason for it. Fear not me then. Time I doe not, I know thee strong, the Honour Of a Kingdome may lean with safety on Thee. But he will linger here too long, besot The State with Feastings, and in this Jollity Give Opportunity to Treacherous Practises. He must be us'd Ill, there are Reasons for it. Eud. Is there then a Policie In Rudenesse? Why doe you not rather send A Defiance to him? Proclaim him Enemie? This were Nobler far, than to receive him In your armes, and then Affront him; say Health, And wish Poyson in the Cup. Are you so much Below him? Time There are greater thoughts in hand, Than Curious Points of Gallantry. If he send Any Present to you, you must return it Back with Scorn. Eud. Pride is ill becomming, And hateful, even to the next Proud man does Practise it. Time. Then take'em, and laugh at him. Eud. No, where my thankes are too much, I'll rather Return Gifts for Gifts. I should shame to be A gainer on such a Score, which the Meanest, Honest Purchaser would blush at. Time. He'l take Those Gifts for Favours. Eud. They will not prove so; Yet He will deserve some, as he is a Stranger. Time. Not from You. Presents the State will send him. You hear my Fathers Will. You must not see him While he stayes! Eud. I doe, and shall eas'ly keep That I doe not care to break. Time. Farewell. Eud. Must you be gone? Time. There's a little business Calls me. Eud. If it be but a little, stay. Time. Onely the Welcome of the Stranger. Eud. 'Tis too much to hinder. I see a Causelesse, and a Needlesse Rage Hid in your breast. The Prince may be Noble, Valiant; if you receive him then with Scorn,
Hee'l prove a stronger Enemy, than those Unworthy Ones you fear at home, whose own Actions daily ruine, and whose ill-made Knots, will loosen faster than they tie 'em. You have prevail'd with me, I'll not be wonn To see him now: but let it not Appear By your Default, and that my Retirement, Is onely in scorn to him: which will be Made plain, if that you change not this Face you Have put on. It becomes you at no time. A Prince should alwaies Smile, or look indifferent. He has no need of Frowns, as other men. Life and Death are in his breath, and if any do Offend, his Revenge is known, and need not Be declar'd by Face-expressions. Where there's Power to Punish, 'tis Tyranny to Rage. Anger is no Attribute of Justice, 'Tis true, she is painted with a Sword, but looks As if she held it not. Though Warbe in Her Hand, yet Peace dwels in her Face. Learn once Of me, and when you have no Cause of A Distemper, express none. Now you have made All sure, doubt not; but receive the stranger With fearless and confident Imbraces. Time. I will, or at lest I'll tell thee so, when Thou perswad'st me thus. Farewel Eudora. Exit Timues. Eud. Thy subtile Plots will ruine thee at last. Valour and Policy do seldom meet; Yet here they are in their Extreams in One; But do most strangely Divide the Owner. Make him Dread none, and yet confirm him not Within a Guard. Exit Eudora. CHORUS. What can our Wishes deprecate, When Vice is seen, both Law, and Fate? When for the good o'th' Commonweal, The Councel's cal'd, to Plot a Meal. And Beasts brought in with solemn Cry, As Spoyles got from the Enemy? Whose life's the Table, and the Stage, He doth not Spend, but Lose his Age. The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be Set to Adorn, not to Fore-see: And as his Crown, he thinks each thing, Runs round in a continued Ring. But Sacrifices Crowned be, And Garlands fit for destinie. Fates thus we fear have writ this Latt, That Wint shall lose, what Blood hath Gott.
[ACTUS 2. SCENA 1.] Enter Clearchus. IS this your Royal Entertainment? A common Host would have given one as Civil, Have shewn his Guests their Quarter, and then left'em To stumble out again. My Receivers are Are all vanish'd—An undeserved Affront Will trouble me—Neither of the Princesses Were in the Train; they might have trusted 'em, I could have gag'd a Kingdom for their security— One passes by him reel∣ing, and by and by after another. Last of all Me∣lissa, they all make re∣verence to Clearchus, as they pass. Enter Comastes. Was not that fellow drunk? Now they begin To Muster up again. Here I stand like one That learns to make his first Honour in a Dauncing School—Sir by your favour. If your Business calls you not, pray let me intreat Your Company a while. Com. Troth and't like your Highness, I am in hast, in very great hast, The King has sent for me, and I know he's thirsty till I come. I would your Highness were as resolute, and as well Arm'd this way as I, He shewes a great Gob∣let. you'd be the welcom'st man—He loves a Royal-Drunkard to admiration; he never saw one yet, but in a Glass. Sir, have you any business with him? You need no other Orator than such as this; such a Mouth without a Tongue, will perswade any thing. Yet this is o'th least, fit onely for Physick-dayes, when he would not surfeit; a meer Toy that troubles the Wayters with often filling. But I have One, as high—Here's nothing to measure't by; but 'twas that made me so In∣ward with him; I alwayes use to Petition him with it; 'tis bigger than any of his own, and pleas'd him above Measure. The first time he saw it, he commended the Gallan∣try of my Mind, and said it was a Noble Emulation in me! He has a Daughter Sir, a beau∣tiful Lady, my Hopes, unless some Neighbour-Prince do Reel betwixt us. Your High∣ness comes the right way, he hates a dry, In-land Traveller; but that you Kiss the Cup, when you should Drink; and have too much Bounce, and Down-with-him in you; which are things he surfeited of, some sixteen years since, and still the very Names turn his stomack. Besides, your Navy and Attendants are too great, he'd have esteemed more of you, had they been fewer, enough onely to lean on, when you were Overtaken; or if you had wanted those, and borrowed his unto your Chamber, it had been better: Where he finds Worth, the Pomp delights him not. Your pardon Sir. Exit Comastes. Clear. Why here's a fellow now! With what Licence He belies his Master, or speaks Truths Altogether as Unpardonable! Sure He has his Patent for't! I find at my Return from Travel, I shall want Names For all the Monsters I have seen. Enter Aratus to him. Ara. Though your Highness be here a stranger, I may demand of you where the King is. Clear. If none know more than I, my Lord, y'ave lost Your King. Arat. Sure he is not well, I hope he is not: with a safe Loyalty, I may wish, he hath a Dangerous Cause, Rather than none, to take him from a Prince, The first Night of his Arival in his Court.
Clea. My Lord, I have found much Honour in you, One that knowes to shew more Civility To a Stranger, than he can deserve, And y'are unhappy onely at this time In an Unworthy Choyce: but if still you Can continue this Noblenesse (though the King frown) I shall gladly make some stay; at least Till I have satisfied a Strangers Curiosity, And may seem rather to have left the Place, Than to have been thrust from it. Ara. Believe me Sir, Both your Reception, and this Necessity, That you are drove to seek so mean a Service As mine, doth shame me much. 'Tis not the use Of this Kingdome to be thus Uncivill, Nor is't our Custome, as it hath been this day, To Coop our Ladies up, as if the sight Were Dangerous; their Beauties will indure The Test, and we dare trust'm to't. 'Twas Unkindly done, I know one Look of theirs Would have given a Welcome to a Young Man, Above the highest Cost. Clea. My Lord, you know To speak a pleasing Language. Ara. We have two Princesses Sir, Few Nations can shew such Jewels; Yet onely one is Orientall, The other's Artificiall, but an Excellent Gem too; One of them, the True One, I doubt not, but I have credit to shew Your Highnesse; but 'tis not to be purcha'st, That happy Opportunitie's already past, And the New Owner Esteems it above His Wealth, his Life, I and his Honour too. aside. Clea. Yet, my Lord, blesse me with the sight. I can Rejoyce at so much Excellence, though Another doe possesse it. And no doubt As much of the Owners felicity, lies in Strangers Admiration, as in his own Possession. Ara. All but Jealous Men think so: and they count Themselves Rob'd of all happinesse in their Wives, Others receive; engrosse as Covetously Their Beauties, as their Persons, and think themselves Cuckolded by a Womans Commendations. But my Lord, I'l leave you. I was going To the Princesse before I met your Highnesse. I know few words will gain so easie a request. Tomorrow, and daily, I'le wait upon Your Highnesse. Clear. My Lord, you have engaged me Your Servant, beyond my hope of freedome. Exeunt severally. Enter Hianthe, two Ladies, and Waiters. Hian. Nay, you must bear it patiently. My Dominion extends no further than These Roomes, and beyond them I grant nothing. How will you endure the Strangers Delayes, That thus hardly brook his Coming? The King In Complement, will not permit the Winds To serve sooner than a Moneth, were that all His stay: but here must be Masques and Triumphs Before he goes, and the Subject yet not known For the One, nor Ornaments made for the Other. Perhaps a League must be Concluded, And then I would not live to be so Old,
As to see the End of't. The Meanest persons Require a Month to fit themselves, a Prince Cannot turn in lesse than a Season. 1. Lady May we not see the Garden, Madam? Hian. No, nor the Day, but through a Window. 2. Lady We'l petition to him, under the title Of distressed Damsels, that must passe the Hour of their Age in Imprisonment, Unlesse he'l travell to his own, or some Other Country, to gain 'em Freedome. Hian. He'l think we are held by some Enchantment, That his Absence, and not his Sword, must gain Our Liberty. O Melissa welcome. Enter Melissa. Now we shall see the Shew, though but as sick Persons, by Relation. Say, what hast thou seen? Mel. The scurviest Entertainment—I did not Think it possible, so short a Time could have Prepar'd one so ill: 'Twas thought on before, And paines taken to Order it so much For the Worse. This was the first day that ere Me thoughts the King, and my Lord Timem, Lookt like the Father, and the Son. The King Had on his Old Councell Face, which all hope't He had forgot, and this was the onely time These many Yeares, he should not have worn it. They both imbrac't the Stranger as coldly, And carelesly, as I have seen our Common Fencers doe, that are immediately To Fight with one another after. This Behaviour in the Great Ones, was presently Observ'd like a New Fashion, and in An instant the whole Court was in't, from the Bravest, to those that follow a Fashion Onely, when 'tis to leave off something, I mean Our poorer Gallants that go in Quirpo, And look not as if they were Hot, but wanted A Cloak. Marry their wits were not so Changeable As their Faces, and having but One Sute Of Complement, and that now Unfashionable, They were fain to supplie it with Leggs, and Silence. Hian. How lookt the Prince at this behaviour? Mel. Much above it, in my Opinion, two foot Higher than my Lord Timem, though not Altogether so tall. These sour Looks, were All the Without-door Shew, which ended, In a solemn March, they returned all into The Palace. The Strangers seem'd, rather to Follow with a silent Consent, than on Invitation. There the presse shook me off, To find this out for your Highnesse Mirth. She shewes a Rol of paper. And at my return, as I least expected, I found the Prince all alone, where any body Might have seen him for nothing. The Grecian, And the Trojan Captains in the Hangings, Were all his Company: with whom he seem'd Well suted, had they been alive, his Looks Were as Daring as theirs, and standing so, Bred much Comparison. Hian. Know you the reason Of this behaviour? Mel. No Madam, yet If I would, I might have learnt of many: The whole Companie were Politicians. There was one Yeoman-Statesman inform'd most
About him; and his Conjectures, go for Currant Truths next Post into the Country. Hian. Well, now tell us what you have got there for Our Mirth. Mel. A precious piece of Poetry, Which I have been the Patroness of from The first Non-sense in't, that is, from the first line. There's much mirth intended in it, and I Doubt not by your Highness will find it. The Author himself is an Embleme of The first Comedies, in which One acted All, And will make you laugh, though you saw him Every day. I have brought him along with me, He stayes but till his admittance be granted. Hian. No prethee Melissa, 'twill be too much. Mel. I beseech your Highness. And do but smile Upon his Learning. Domine, Domine. The Poet enters rudely, and seeing the Princess, steps back as rudely. Look, look. I told you what you'd do. You are So forward. Poet. I can presume. Hian. Ha, ha. Mel. Hold your peace with your presuming. You should Let the Princess speak. This is the Author, Madam. Hian. Lad. Ha, ha, ha. Mel. What think you your Play Will do, when one Scene of your self breeds all This Mirth? Poet. Hum. Hian. Melissa. Mel. Your Highness— Hian. Prethee discharge him, I am notable To look so much laughter in the face, and Contain my self, to save my Modesty. Mel. So, 'tis well Sir. The Princess has taken Notice of your Worth, and commanded me To reward you. Attend to morrow, and You shall receive it. And pray see that her Highness have all your Labours, as you call em. Exit Poet. Hian. Oh 'tis well we dress us not. Here all take Papers, and sit down, we'll chuse our several parts. Enter Clearchus and Haimantus. 1. Waiter. Who were they past by? 2. Waiter. I know not; but certainly They understand what they do, they went on With so much Confidence. Clear. Where are we now? Haim. Certainly in no danger Sir. Mel. The Prince! The Ladyes and the Princess rise up amazedly. 1. Lady. The Prince? 2. Lad. The Prince? Clear. Madam, our bold Mistake has thrust us on Too far, to retire without Excuse, which We shall hardly make, unless your Favour Meet us. We are strangers that thus have err'd, Unfortunately I must not say, that Were a Rudeness greater than the other; Yet we ought to esteem this your Disturbance A Fault, though to us a blessed one, and Hath confer'd a happyness, our best Deeds, Could not have deserv'd. Mel. This Entrance was Exeunt Clearchus and Haimanius. Something abrupt, and beyond the Intent Of our Poet. A strange accident Hian! Was it the Prince that spoke? Mel. Yes Madam; but 'Twas improper here. Hian. Art thou sure 'twas he? Mel. I am Madam. Her Highness is troubl'd, I see a Prince is too high a Personage For a Comedy, and spoyles the Mirth of't. Hian. Melissa, I have something to impart to you. Exeunt Hian and Ladyes. When the Company leave me at Night, Attend me in my Chamber.
Enter Aratus, and Palantus. Ara. Madam, a little of your Company, I beseech you. Mel. My Lord Aratus save you. Ara. A proper Salutation for so fair A Lady, whose beauties are Destructive. Mel. Your Lord-ship's very Conceited. 'Tis the First Jest, I dare say, was ever made on that Poor saying. Ara. What do you look at? Do you want She looks as she speaks of Palant. and A∣rat. hinder her. A Servant? Mel. Bless me, my Lord! what Thing To fright us have you there? Ara. Why I pray? Because he's Black? The fitter for a Lady. Mel. For a Lady! I never saw such a Devils Play-fellow! Ara. He's white within, all Snow, and Milk. Mel. They are put into an Ink-bottle. Ara. What, you'd have one that spends more Milk bout a His Face, than he suck'd in's Child-hood; that dresses Himself in Gloves, as if one Part were too good To do service to the other; and dares not Shew his hands for shaming of his Mistresses, Nor commend Hers, because his own are Whiter. This'is One neglects his Outside, beyond A common Cleanness, and bestows that Care Upon his Mind, there wastes his four Hours Of Dressing. And what the other do's exceed In Spruiseness, he'll make up in Service. Pay Respects unto his Ladyes Vertue, Not unto her Muff. And if at any time Danger do approach her, fearless he dares Beat it back, or make it Welcome by his Noble Fall. Himself in Presence guards her, And his Memory in's Absence. Come, pray Spoyl not his Hopes among the Ladies. He's a young Courtier, and wants a Mistress. Mel. I am turn'd when I hear reason. I beseech you my Lord, let me be she. Ara. I thought 'twould come to this. You make the furthest Way about, the nighest to your Ends, Love, By discommending. Pray let him salute You then. Mel. Not unless you'll stand by me. Ara. Well, I warrant you. My friend. Pall. My Lord. Ara. Pray draw near, here's a fair Lady, gladly Would salute you, Now you're at Court, you must Lay by your War-like thoughts, and Plot how you shall Overcome in Complement, and Conquer in Civility. Pall. My Lord, I should be asham'd to pretend So much unto the Souldier, as to make My self Unsensible of so great an Honour, as this Lady does me by her Fair Salutation. Though I am Unworthy, I can be Proud to be her Servant. Ara. What think you? Mel. I know not what to think of So much wonder! What Rarities shall I be Mistress of, and none Envy me? Ara. Well, to leave you in that Rapture; may I Speak with the Princess? Mel. Yes, she went hence but now. Ara. May I adventure to go in? Mel. You may, But call my Servant along with you. Ara. You are longing again, but not a bit, Exeunt Omne 'Tis Sweet-meat, not a bit.
Cleander discovered sleeping. A Song. VVHile Morpheus thus doth gently lay, His pow'rfull Charge upon each part, Making thy Spirits even obey, The stiller Charmes of his Dull Art. I thy Good Angel from thy side, As Smoak doth from the Altar rise, Making no Noyse as it doth glide, Will leave thee in this Soft Surprize. And from the Heavens will fetch thee down, A lively Vision to expresse, Thy Right unto an Earthly Crown, " No Power can make this Kingdome lesse. But gently, gently, least I bring, A start in Sleep by suddain Flight, Playing aloof, and hovering, Till I am lost unto the sight. This is a Motion still, and soft, So free from Noyse and Cry, That Jove himself who heares a Thought, Knowes not when we passe by. Enter Acates. Aca. There he sits, and sleep hath seised on him, Which seldome does so when the Season calls it: But still he takes it when it comes, not when 'Tis due; when Wearinesse, and not the Warnings Of the Night doe prompt him to it. He sayes, To Sleep, because the Day is gone, is to Perform a Duty, not a Necessitie: And to Eat at a Certain Hour, to Satisfie the Time, and not his Hunger. Nature is the Mistresse of his Faculties, Which are averse, and refractory to All Custome; will admit no Lawes, but what Themselves Enact, nor strictly observe them Neither. 'Tis a strange Distraction for sixteen Yeares, a Deeper Melancholy possesses him, Than does those, that have run the Miseries And Sinnes of a Long Life. This desolate Happinesse is all that he enjoyes, And this I am Commanded to take from him. Cleander, what ho Cleander. Clea. Why are you thus Cruell in your Care? Did you But know the Felicities you have wak'd me from, You'd have rockt my sleep for ever: Thought it A greater Mercy to have kill'd, than thus To have Disturb'd me. I was wrapt into The Companie of Men, of Gods, if compar'd With those we here converse with. Enjoy'd the Most Excellent things, by a Heavenly Vision, Shew'd more Excellent and Glorifi'd. Sa Crown'd a King ore all, and with a Trait'rous
Call, you have Depos'd me! Alas, how fading Is my Happinesse, which a Small Noise, or Motion can dissolve, and turn to nothing. Aca. Let that Reason make you scorn'em, and aim At Lasting Ones. Clean. Were their longest life but Three Minutes, and that time Uncertain, They were yet to be preferr'd before those the World Holds in highest Estimation. They are pure And Celestiall Pleasures, to be fed on Onely by the Phansie. I'le in, and again Invite them with a Slumber. Aca. I must for bear Exit Cleander. My Remedies, 'tis dangerous applying Exit Acates. Physick in a Fit. Enter Polyander and Menetius at one door, and Comastes to them at the Other. Com. Polyander, Menetius. well met. Have yee Seen the Thing yet? Poly. What Thing? Com. The Thing that haunts The Court. It hath something like a Man, and pretends To be One. He comes to the Ladies, like A rough Water-Dog among a Flock of Foul, And they flutter as fast from him, scatt'ring Feathers as they passe, I mean their Fans, and Such Moveables. The Guard dare not mingle With him, he's too boyst'rous for their Company. One Glance of him, as he past by th' other day, Broke the Kings Draught, which a Cubit-Cup could Nere do—See, see, here he comes, with as many Enter Pallantus. Patches, and such like properties, as would Furnish a Casheerd Companie to beg with. Sure he was Scar-Bearer to some Armie. Let's observe it what it does: look, look, its Pleas'd with the Hangings. Poly. He cannot be thus By Nature, nor by Accident! 'has studied To appear horrid! Mene. Danger is not so Dreadfull in it self, as it shewes in him. Com. Well, I cannot forbear, I must enter Parley with it. What Rare things shall I know, If I can get it speak! I'le enquire the fortune O'th' Kingdome for the next thousand Yeares. That's not worth the asking. I'le enquire when The Dissolution of the World shall be, And where it's Treasure lies. He cannot choose But know the very Heart o'th' Earth. If I Can't perswade, I'le Conjure something from him. Bo, Bull-begger, What art thou? Who let thee loose? Where is any Gold hid? My feares were just. Nothing but a Charm will do't. Anaell, Mafo, Rachimas, Thulnear, Vemoby, Savan, Vernesa, Elty, Famelron Ausculta & obtempora madatis meis. This was not terrible enough, it must be More powerful yet. I adjure thee by those Bootes, Thy Velvet Eye, the Taylors work about thee— Pall. Peace Fool, the King will hear, and thou't be Whipt for bawling. Com. Prethee good Devill, something Exit Pallantus. O'th' other World— Mene. Ha, ha, ha, Poly. I hope 't has Satisfied your Curiosity Comastes? ha, ha, ha. Com. Nay, I'le not leave him thus; be baffl'd by A Goblin. I'le follow it to the place Where it shakes the Chain, that's certain, Exit Comastes.
Men. Ha, ha, ha Come let's see the End o'th' Conjuration. Exaunt Omnes. Enter King, and Timeus. King. But these are things for the following Age Timeus, we are hedg'd in beyond all fear, If Loyalty can prove destructive, there is Yet some danger. Time. Because you see a Calm enwrap all round About you, you conceive 'twill be as Lasting, As 'tis Pleasing; Tempests, Sir, may contradict you, Even while you think so. Evils are silent now, Not done away, they Couch, and lie in-wait, Sedition walks with Clawes bow'd in, and a Close Mouth, Which onely she keeps for Opportunity Of Prey. Y'are not to suppose, that all Shut Eyes Do sleep; they are ne'er more watchful, than when thus They counterfeit neglect; securely they Pry into the Depth of things, by seeming Not to observe the Face, and Out-side, Your Ruine yet appears not, and you think Because it Lurks, y'are Safe. Enemies Reconcil'd, are like Wilde-Beasts brought up to hand, Th'ave more Advantage given them to do Mischief. King. Can the Urnes quicken their Ashes into Souldiers? Can the Graves and Tombs send forth a Race Of Enemies? From those that Live we are safe, They have no will to hurt us; and those that Sleep in the forgotten Dust cannot. There's Nothing remaining to our Care, but to Give thanks; the gods are favourable, and if We could be grateful, our Felicity And safety were both summ'd and perfect. I tell Thee often, thou let'st thy best dayes pass, Without receiving of that Fruit, that should Be crop'd from 'em. I did expect thou should'st Have urg'd me to thy Nuptials, such Cares Befit thee best, how the Triumphs should be Ordered, and Hymen's Torch well lighted. Time. Pray Heaven no other Flames break out, But such as Mirth shew forth. But Sir, I must Be bold to tell you, a few flattering Lords Guild o'er the Defects and Ruines of your State; They make you call a Lethargie, Security; And that a Kingdome, which like to Childrens Houses on the Sand, rear'd up in Sport, and Toying, will become a Prey unto the Wave That first approaches it. They can perhaps Judge well of Meats and Wines, good Table-States men, Souldiers at a Banquet, strong to overcome A Charger, or a Goblet: but Kingdomes Safeties, are not ow'd unto the Palat, And the stomack: if these were State-Affairs, Your Councel were most sound, and every Breast, A Synod. If Musick could now raise Walls, And Cityes as of Old, your Realm would be Impregnable. King. Hast thou yet done? Not all The Ghosts that I have made, have been thus Cruel To me; nor at yet their Graves have threatn'd Half these Evils. Thy Mothers Labour, was A Conception, to the pains thou hourly Bring'st upon me. Time. Sir, I am sorry. Yet
'Twas my Love that so did dictate to me; My desire that your sports might follow one Another, and succeed so just, that they Might seem to bring the season on, and not The season them, that thus they might continue, Ever; but 'twas then that they might continue, And not fail by Treason—But Sir, I will No more. I shall hereafter think't more Piety, Hand in hand to fall in Perils with you, Than my self to bring them. King. What would'st thou have? The Power I have, is wholly thine. If that I never did deny, was not thought given, Now I do. Use all the Means thou wilt, by Lawes, Or our Prerogative, to remove thy fears. Time. Sir, I thank you, humbly thus Low I thank you. Nor will I in a Complement return You back this Power, till I have made you safe. I shall work like a Resolute, but skilful Surgeon, that dares feel, and search a Wound, And if he find Dead-flesh, dares cut it off, Exeunt Omnes. Or more Corruption, will not spare a Limb. Enter Clearchus habited like a Flamen. Aratus, Haimantus, and Pallantus. Ara. My Lord, Cupid put his Hood-wink on you Heuses to Aime with, and then you could not Miss the Mark. I fear, the second View will not Prove so Ravishing. The most Excellent Things Scarce please twice. Clear. My Lord, think not so; For were the World dark about her, or I blind To all things else; in Her I could find Variety enough; and so long as Her Beauties were not Eclips'd, I could not Envy him that were so plac't, as to behold The World as in a Map. Ara. These Habits then My Lord, will secure your Visite. Me thinks Your Highness becomes them Rarely well! Y'are a Person now most Sacro-sanct, Twice Holy, made so by your Dignity, And Order. We'll go before Sir, and inform The Princess of your Coming. You'll draw less Suspicion likewise if you walk alone. Exeunt all but Clearchus. Clear. The King of Crete is a Usurper. His Son's a Villain, by their Masters Blood They have reach'd the Diadem, and by The Violation of his Daughter, Seek to support their Greatness: but this last Evil is still i'th' Forge, not yet Compleated; And the fair Princess looks on her Destin'd Nuptials, as her Rape: her Lover, as her Murtherer. Fates, I hope, have in their Blest Decrees Writme the Rescuer of this Royal Virgin, The VVinner, and the VVearer of this Jewel. And neither the Error that threw me Unawares upon her close Retirement, Nor yet the Flame conceiv'd from Her fair Eyes, VVere meerly Casual, but things of a Deeper And Diviner working. Love, who art Ruler Of the Destinies themselves, if Youth, And Greatness powerfully do invoke thee: If a Vertuous Mind, a Spirit bold, Affections pure,
And Constant Faith, are Oblations gratefull To thy Altar, favour my Present Hopes, All these I offer to thee. And proudly Do exchange my peace and Quiet, for the Troubles, and perturbations of a passion. Crown but the End, and let all the Doubts, The Suff'rings, and the Dangers, that ever rackt A Lovers Soul, be made my Portion. possesse me then with the Fulnesse of thy Deity: let not thy Shades and Flourie Bankes Withhold thee, make Paphos but thy Refuge, The Heart's thy Native Soyl, thy Mothers Lap's A Banishment to it. But idely I invoke The God, while favourably he beckons me To Recieve my Vowes, and the Happinesse I Sue for, does Attend me. The houre's already past That Calls me to the Princesse. Exit Enter Hianthe, Aratus, Mclissa, two Ladies, Haimantus, and Pallantus. Hian. May I ever hope to see such Happinesse? Arat. To injoy it long, Madam, and know no End Ofit. Hian. Can I be no way assistant To the Businesse? Ara. Onely in your Prayers. 'Tis our Task to Subdue the Men; but the Gods, Who must with piety be conquer'd, we'l leave Unto your Goodnesse: And yet, Madam, me thinks The present Opportunitie prompts us With a Meanes, to adde both Strength and Reputation To our Affaires. This Gallant Prince (whose Visit You expect) is not, I find, a Stranger To the Interests of Crete, nor lightly resents The Tyranny it groanes under. The power You seem to have ore him, may improve This Compassion into a Zeal, to re-instate us In the Libertie we have Lost. Hian. My Lord I'le use my best Endeavours, if I find him fit To be Engag'd; Leave this particular to me. Enter Clearchus, who puts off his Disguise with the help of Haiman∣tus. Ara. Madam he's now ariv'd. That's he, in the disguise. Hian. So fell the Cloud from off the Trojan Lord, Not able to Contain the Raies it held, But being pierc't dissolv'd at Once to Air, Exposing to the Worlds Astonisht Eye, A Lusture rivalling the Mid-day Sunnes. Clear. Sure I was Rude, and Barbarous, before This Nobler Fire did touch my Heart, and from The Wild Inhabitants of the Wood Differ'd in Passion onely, and not Reason: That without more Amaze I could behold Such Brightnesse; and with a Readie Speech Excuse The Fault my Error had committed. I cannot now find out a Word to sute With my Desires; nor does the whole Store Afford me One, but what must prejudice Her Excellence, and my Estimation of it. Pardon Madam, that like the Ascendants To the Altar, by Degrees I thus approach you, Pausing at each Step, and bowing to that Nearnesse. Rashnesse was my Crime before, and should I Throw that Blot a second time upon my Actions, Rudenesse might be justly thought my Nature,
And Barbaritie my best Knowledge. Hian. My Lord, that which you call your Crime, was the Incivilitie of the Court, that left A Stranger to commit an Error So unhappy to himself. I dare not Undertake to Patronize the Act, Nor yet to Excuse it; I shall believe I have Obtain'd much, If I may be thought wholy To Disclaim it. Clear. Madam allow me then To beg your Pardon, for the Presumption With which I made this Visit; that I thought it A Hard, Nay Injurious Treatment, to be forc'd To Quit this Isle, before I had the Honour To look upon you: for since I have beheld Those Wonders of Beauty you are Mistresse of, I find my Voyage was too Short, my Hazards Too Slight, and Few, to be rewarded with so High A Favour. Hian. My Lord, had you directed Your Words to my Misfortunes, I should have Acknowledg'd then, you had seen a Raritie, One in the perfection, and Excellence Of Misery; but I have no pretence, No Title unto ought besides my Troubles. Please you, my Lord, to with-draw unto a place That admits not so publique an Accesse. Your Visit to me is not without all Danger. Exeunt Clearchus. Hianthe, Melissa, and the Ladies. Ara. If I would set a Spectacle to the World, It should be such a Close, Where Vertue Ador'd Vertue, and Greatnesse bow'd to Greatnesse. Me thinks the Heavens doe open, and the Clouds Are spun into a Thread, to let down some God Unto this Meeting! Let us withdraw, The Power is now descended, and all within Is Sacred and Mysterious, and if we prie Into these Secrets, our Curiositie Will be punisht. Exeunt Omnes. Chorms. VVHile this Old Poppy thus doth sleep, And doth in Vice, as Age, grow deep, Benumming all the Plants are nigh, Into a Drowsie Lethargie. Behold a Nobler Branch appeares, As farre from's Manners, as his Yeares. O shed Thou then thy Influence, And we'l resume fresh Beauties thence. The Fiercer Sweetnesse of his Face, Presents a Rigour, mixt with Grace; And though there were a Want of Bloud, His Worth would make his Title Good. Vertues so Grown, in so Few Yeares, Make Him even Such, become their Feares. On then, and cause the Scepter bee Thought but Reserv'd, not Snatcht from Thee.
[ACTUS 3. SCENA 1.] Enter Aratus, Phronimus, Eurylochus, Pallantus. Aratus. ARe all things ready for the Ceremony? The Crown, and Robes? Phro. They are, there's nothing wanting If the Prince were come. Eury He's now come. Enter Clearchus and Haimantus. Ara. Your Highness is welcom: but I fear it may Appear, to a strange Place, and Persons! What Do you think my Lord? Are you not fallen, Into the Company of so many Traitrous and lost Men? Clear. Say not so Sir, You have not Warrant, though you rank your self Within the Number. The Place and Persons Rather appear to me, as if some Holy Rite, Or piece of Sacred Worship were intended. Ara. My Lord, you understand it right, 'tis a Piece Of H oly Worship and Devotion that is Intended by us. And I may truly say, That this our private Meeting, and close Counsel, Is more Just and Glorious, than the loudest Deed In Court, that all our publick Acts, Edicts, And Forms of Law, are dark and impious, Compar'd to it. Nay, that this Time, and Place, Made holy by our Purposes, hath the Gods More manifest and present, than the Altars, And the Temples, long since made Void and Empty Of a Deity, by those which sue for Favours, and requests for Him (who justly Heard) deserves their Horrid'st Vengeance. We are not met here, to Plot a general Ruin, For a private Injury; we know and teach, That the Greatest done by the King unto The Subject, cannot give him Cause to throw off His Faith; Kings are petty Gods, and may tempt us. Nor is it Want, or desire of Innovation That thus stirreth us; we are in the Best▪ Ill-State already. Nor Ambition, To strike at that Lawrel, which the Thunder Spares; no, we Reverence it, and know, that As Men are the works of Nature, so Kings Of Jove. But 'tis our Oath, the Sacrament We took, which still holds us, though our Lord be dead, Until his Successor release us from it, By taking of a New One. We are not Subjects, but Slaves to Him we now Obey, And therefore as Slaves, we ought to hate our Master: He was born less than We, and hides The Private Man, under the Publick Gown. The Purple which he wears, was dipt deep in The blood of Innocents to colour't so. But I vainly waste my self in Words, here Are no Minds to be perswaded, nor Ears To be instructed. The sins we are to punish
VVe all know, and the gods remember. Our strength then is all we are to speak of. VVhich is more than three parts o'th' Isle, sixteen Years Undisturb'd Provision; so carelesly VVas that secur'd, which was got by Blood. There's but one Lord-ship, small in respect Of others, the Tyrants Own Possession, That will be Cordial for him; but they are So besotted with their Fortunes, that their Greatest Aid, will be but in their VVills to Do him Service. They may offer up their Lives Like so many Sacrifices for his sake, But not like Souldiers, they are Unworthy Of that Name. They may Dye, but never Conquer. VVar was never talk'd of, but in their Banquets, Nor dare they Fight beyond a Brawl Phro. And if we would count part of our Strength In their VVeakness, we have no Opposition. In the City where They and their Vices Are daily seen, nothing is so Contemptible. And in Remoter Parts, where Majesty Is more reverenc'd, being known onely By the Power and Lawes, and where the name of King, Hears like the Name of God, even there, those sonns O'th' Earth, as I may call 'em, dare menace him, And pile hills on hills, to set their Bodyes, Equal to their Hates. Eury. Here we are thee my Lord; Can each of raise such Forces, which though They fail'd to effect it, yet could make The Kingdome fear a Conquest. Pall. Your Highness Is a Souldier, and though but Young, perhaps Have seen already, what others whole Lives Have not shewn them; yet wee'l play a Game VVe dare invite You to, though you were Accompani'd with all the Ancient Heroes. VVho had they leave but in their Aery shapes, To set on a Tribunal, Spectators Of the VVar, this their second Leaving of The Earth, should be more grievous to them, than Their former Deaths, and they would wish this Isle Might be their Elizium. Ara. You see my Lord, How each can bring his Forces in, and prompt The other; Those which have none on Earth, Can bring them down from Heaven, in stead of Men, Bring Manly Spirits, VVords, and Looks confirming More than Armies. Clear. M Lords, I must confess, with no small pleasure, I have heard the Justice, the Strength, the Courage Of your Cause. And for the first of which, although I never doubted; or from the other two (Meant ever to withdraw my Aid) however VVeak; yet I am glad to see the Enterprize So hopeful: For though most greedily I Should imbrace all Hazards for two such Mistresses As Justice, and the Excellent Princess, Yet where their Interests are Disputed, I cannot wish to see a Danger, what Ever weight of Glory I might purchase By it. My Lords, the small Force I am Master of, Either in my Person, or those Commanded by me, Reckon on till you see us Conquer, or lye Upon the ground. Ara. Our Designs are then succesful Above our wishes. Phronimus introduct.
The Priest, we are now ready for him. Though Exit Phronimus We need nothing to strengthen our Resolutions, Yet we'l take an Oath: 'tis good to have the Gods Along with us. A Sacrament is the Tie, No lesse of Loyaltie, than of Treason. Here let us all, before this Sacred Witnesse Phronimus returnes with a Plamen, bearing in his hand an Image. Of Faith and Perjurie, make a Holy Vow Of Loyalty to Our Selves and Cause. And as we draw near to so Divine an Essence, consider that 'tis not Gold or Marble That we touch, but a Moddle of a Sensible And Living Power, which has Vouchsaft to be Imbrac'd by One Hand, when the Vastnesse of Our Thoughts could not comprehend it. Here they all see to take an Oath, by Kissing of the Image. Exit Eurylochus. Now we are ready for the Prince. Eurylochus Conduct him in. Your Grace shall see a Stronger Perswasion, than any you have yet heard, The lively Image of Her you so much Serve. He Knowes not yet his Fortunes, but I dare Warrant He'l bear them bravely. He has read The Lives of Kings, though he never acted Any; and you shall perceive he's Princely-Born, Though not bred in Court. Eurylochus returns with Cleander. Royall Sir, y'are welcome! Start not at the Name, it is your Due, You Were born to the Title: and I doubt not, Though you never heard it thus appli'd before, 'Tis not altogether Strange unto you There was a Spark, which in the first Womb, After a Speciall Manner was infus'd Into you, and is another Soul Within you; as the One Informes your Body, So this Informes your Soul; we may call't The Difference of a King. That will tell you, We are all here your Subjects, and this No Strange Philosophie I teach. And though This Rich Perfume hath hitherto been wrapt In this Disguise of Learning, and defended From the air o'th Court, 'tis not decai'd, But grown stronger by such keeping; which when It shall be open'd, will cast a fragrant Smell ore all the Kingdome, and cure the Infections Of the Former Age. To open it we Are met, it is a Medicine we too long Have languisht for. And Sir, though it be a short Warning to so Great a Matter, you must Presently resolve to be a King. We Have no time now to instruct you in Your Right, and how you lost it. It was Yeares In doing, and will require Yeares to relate it. In the mean time, let what you see perswade you, Our Serious Lookes, Respects, and the Presence Of these Holy Rites. Clean. I need not excuse My want of Answer, there's nothing fit for me To say: Which way so e're I shall declare My self to this Purpose, will appear Foolish. Whether I Refuse, or Grant, both are alike Ridiculous. 'Tis not with Me, as with Elder Yeares, They may refuse Offers like these, And be admir'd for such their Moderation;
Or accept them, and for that Magnanimitie Be honour'd. But should I assume an Action, So many Yeares above my Age, I must Expose my self a Pagent to the Beholders Scorn and Laughter. My Lord, That which I have To say is, onely this. My Yeares are yet in Non-Age, My Actions not my Own, to Others Wills I am wholly Subject. you may Command me Even to Wear a Crown, and to submit to Accept the Highest Honours. Set me, if You please, on the Throne you speak of, and when You see a time again, remove me. Yet, My Lord, I'd have you know, I am not so Young, But that I understand I am a Subject, and that I have a King; that thus, though but in Sport, To Use his Titles is a Fault, But for Any to Acknowledge such a Spirit, As you, my Lord, have spoken, is no lesse A Traitor, than he which strikes the Crown from off His Head. Arat. You have been heavenly taught, and shall Be ever instructed in such Lectures. But the Treason which is committed, is Committed' gainst your self, your Spirit is Usurpt, and he that holds it is your Servant, As I am, or at least should be so. Sir, The time presses now, and we cannot use The Circumstances necessary to Perswade you; but what ever appeares Strange At this time to you, a few dayes use will Render most familiar. Sir, please you ascend, Yond place is provided for you—Submit Cleander expresses a modest unwil∣lingnesse. Now, and Command ever. My Lord, will you Please to honour us with your Assistance. Here they take off from Cleander his black habit, and put on him a Rich Robe, Clearchus, and the Flamen, set the Crown upon his Head, and the rest stand before him, and salute him King. Omnes The Gods preserve the King. Ara. We have now perform'd one part of our Duty, Which was to seat you thus, the next is, With our Lives to keep you at this Height. Clean. If I may yet take confidence to speak, And it will become me to say something of My self. I could tell you, how this Day hath Been familiar to me, and in a Dream I have seen these things so often, that did Not these Shouts confirm me, which were then still The concluders of my Greatnesse, I could not Yet believe, but that I have now suffer'd Is Aiery all, and the Shape I see meerly Phantastick. Flamen. It was a Good and Prosp'rous Omen, which presag'd your Quiet here. The Gods would not suffer you to rest in A Wrong place. Omnes May it be so. Here Aratus presents Clearchus to Cleander, seeming to inform him who he is, he descends and imbraces him, the rest pay their homage by kissing his hand, in the mean time Pallantus speakes. Pall. And shall I alone in such a Glorious Action walk unseen? And as a Fault,
Perform my Duties in Disguise? I'll rather Add a Trumpet, and a Flag to all my Actions. Here fall my Mist away, Now Thou onely barr'st me from my Joyes, to which I am not near enough, unless I can Imbrace. Give me leave my Lords, that as my life, So I may throw my Body at his Feet, I have a share in him, I though a Stranger To you. It was my Fathers purchase, With his Life he bought it, nor desire I To hold it by another Patent. May Such be the Noted End Successively Of all our Name, No Disease, but our Masters Cause to Dye of. Here let me Kneel, and pray All Happyness, and the Best things may fall, And then rise, and with my Sword, procure the Blessing s I have praid for. Know me my Lords, I am Pallantus. Phre. Eury. Pallantus! Ara. Pallantus! My dearest Friend, prov'd my nearest Kinsman! Could I be so dull as to imagine Such Valour could be in a shape so low As thy Out-side promis'd? Or so common, As to be met by Chance? That I could love Thee so, and yet have no Interest in thee? Where hast thou been so long Dead? Sir look vpon This Man, that turns our joyes thus from you, your Party is made strong by his Discovery, 'Has brought such Unexpected Aid within Himself! Y'are to receive him Sir, not onely As a Servant, but a Kinsman. Clean My Lord, I am as yet in a New World, and know No more, than if I now began to live, The most Common things, are Wonders to me. You must excuse me therefore, if I know not How to entertain such Accidents as these, But I shall make't my Labour ev'ry day To understand my Duty, of the which I think it no small part, to give the due Value to every worth I meet. Clear. Sir, as a new friend let me imbrace you, But this Alteration shall not give me leave To forget the former Favours I am Oblig'd to you for. What I receiv'd in Your Disguise, I shall be ever ready To pay unto your self. Arat. How it grieves me To see thy Beauties thus blasted in thy Youth, War hath been too rough a Mistress to thee, And set thy Gloryes in too Eminent a place. Had Venns been ith' Camp, she would Have cover'd thee with Mars his shield, although The God himself had wanted it. I can Remember when the Loveliest Face compar'd With thine, could not have taken from thee. When In the brightest Ring of Beauties, thou appeard'dst But well-set; and hadst thou been attir'd like One of them, thou might'st have wonne the Prize Of fairness from a Coure of Ladyes. Pall. My Lord, they are well lost: but those which were The Causers of it, shall receive Wounds as deep, If not so disfiguring, and afford their blood To wash the Scars they have made. Ara. They shall, And we will help to bath thee. 'Tis time that
We broke up our meeting, our longer stay May prove dangerous. Phronimus and Eurylochus You must post this Night to your Commands. Your Majesty must bear'em Company. And now without more delay shew your selves: We will be ready here at the first Newes. My Lord, your Navy also will require Strict watch and guard, on our first Motion That will be attempted. Clear. Haimantus, you Shall presently away, and take the Charge Upon your self. Ara. Pray do so my Lord. All we have to do, is to mingle our selves In the Court again. When once these troubles Sir, are o'er, a perpetual Calm will follow. Clean. My Lord, I never enjoy'd safety, so pleasing as these Dangers. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Timeus reading a Letter. —By the next Post I shall send your Highness the whole Design of the Con∣spiracy we have so long suspected; in the mean time, know Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus are the three great Diseases of the Kingdome.— But not incurable. I know which way To handle 'em. There must be some suddain Remedy apply'd, that will work strongly. This Night I'll send it. Be absent all ye Lazie Medicines which the Law administers, Ye are more treacherous, than the Villain Ye examine; and where there was none, give Time to act Mischief: Your Summons are The Traitors Watch-word, and drive him to take That Opportunity, which otherwise His Fears would have let slip. My self will be The Accuser, and the Judge. When Publick Means are dangerous, each Prince hath the Courts Enter Pallan. Of justice in his Breast—What Fiend is this, That causes such Antipathy within me? The Mid-night Ghosts take not shapes so horrid! I have not slept, since first he cross'd me! Pall. We are alone. The Gods have given this time For my Revenge. Time. What does he mutter to himself? Coracin s, Argestes—Kill that Dog. Cora. My Lord! Timeus. Kill that Dog—Cowardly Villains, It were a justice to leave you to the Worrying. Enter Coracinus and Argestes, they assauit Pak. but he worsts 'em till Time. assists 'em, and makes him retire, they all pursue him off of the Stage. Within Treason, treason, save the Prince, treason. Timeus, Coracinus, Argestes return, bloody. Time. He was a Devil! The Power of Hell was in His Arme; Night threw her shades about him To defend him! He could not thus have scap'd, Unless he had vanishd! Is he o'er-taken yet? Enter a Servant. Serv. No my Lord. But 'tis impossible he should Pass the Court. Sure he has taken Covert In some Lodgings there-abouts. Time. Let search be made, And give Command, That when he appears again, He that first meets him, without more Circumstance, Do ki'l him. Promise a Reward to him That brings his Head. Exit Servant. Enter Clearchus and Aratus to the rest with their Swords drawn. Clear. How do you my Lord? Time. Well. Ara. Is your Higness hurt?
Time. And may be again, if I look not warily. Would your Lordships Sword were sheath'd. Ara. Sir, 'twas drawn In your Defence: and if y'are Jealons of it, You wrong a Ready-hand to doe you Service. Clear. Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it? Time. No doubt he is. Clear. My Lord, you speak Very doubtfully. I hope you doe not think, But I am sorry for the Accident Time. I know not what to think. Your Disposition's As great a Stranger to me as your Person, Clear. I see, my Lord, you know to throw Injuries, Though to conferre no Civilities on A Stranger. Time. Injuries are deserv'dly plac't On an Intruding Guest. Clear. Y'are Unworthy. They both draw, and are held as under. And though I am incompast with all the Dangers I may Justly fear from so Barbarous A Place, which dares doe any thing it Lusts unto, Without regard of Lawes or Hospitalitie, I'd tell you so. And were you from this Dunghill That you stalk on ('tis no better) I'd pull down That Unmanner'd Pride within you. Time. Let me goe, Nothing shall priviledge him to talk thus. Clear. They hold you in your safety. Nor is the Distance 'Twixt your Life and Death, longer than this Space 'That parts us. If you dare, follow me, I'le stay you out a Dayes Sail at Sea, I Challenge you to a Princely Combate. Where come with all your power, that I may Destroy so many Brute-Beasts from off the Earth. Exit Clearchus. Time. Shall I be tyed while I am bated?— I'le send those tha shall o'retake you, and cut You off, before your Shipping yet. Argestes, Haste unto the Port presentlie, and in My Fathers Name, Command all speedy Power Be rais'd to stop the Prince. Bid'em fire his Ships i'th'Haven— Ara. O my Lord, consider A little more, before you lay a Blot Upon the Nation, which Future Ages Cannot wipe off. No Story can parallel Such a Fact. Your Highnesse mov'd him much, And gave him Cause of choller. Time. Does he help Your Lordship with Ships? that thus you plead his Cause. Shall I be Tutor'd by a Traitor? Ara. Sir, y'are happy if you can find a Tutor, When you thus much need one. And for your other Language, when I understand it, I'le return you An Answer, in the mean time, you must take it Home to you as you gave it Time. 'Tis well Sir, I shall find other wayes, than Words to Answer you. Enter the King, Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, and a Guard. King. How now Timeus! What, bloudy? Time. No more Than you see, Sir. The Sword rather left it On me, than drew it out. King. Who is the Traitor, That durst commit such Outrage? Time. He's 'scapt unknown. King. Unknown? that cannot be, when he has past Thus far i'th' Court, some must take notice of him. Can you describe him? Time. He was habited Like a Souldier; but his Lookes had more of Devill than of Man. King. Upon my Life I saw him! but 'tis two dayes since. He must
Be known in all this time. Enquire who brought in Any such Man, or was seen with him. Com. This can be No body but my Hob-goblin. And't please Your Highnesse, was he not in a Buffe-Coat? And had his Face all bedabl'd with Patches? Time. Yes, he had so. Com. Then doe I know him, He belongs to my Lord Aratus there. No body durst speak to him but he, He shew'd his teeth at every body else. He had like to have bit me once. King. Aratus, Doe you hear? They say, he, that committed Aratus stands in a study after his heat with Timeus, and minds not what's said This Villanie, belongs to you. Ara. To me, Sir? He wrongs me that thinks so. I maintain none That dare attempt such Insolence Poly. My Lord, I saw him with you. Ara. Who? pray make me know The Man. Poly. A black stern Souldier that follow'd you. Ara. I fear I understand you now! aside. There is such a One that followes me; but I never discovered any Disloyall Spirit in him. His Out-Side, 'tis true, was As you describe, not moulded after the Common Frame of Men, but threaten'd more than Any I have seen: Yet 'twas but his Out-Side That threaten'd so. Within he was Gentle, All a Courtier, to be wound and turn'd by The least Civilitie. I must confesse, When he was Injur'd, then he was High, and Lordly, Stormes rose in's lookes, and Thunder Was in his Voyce. King. And you knowing this, How durst you turn such a Wild Beast loose into The Court? Whom had I met, and chanc't to have Anger'd, my fortune had been the same. Lay hands on him. You shall find that such a Spirit The Guard lay hold of Aratus. Dwells in my Brest too, and when 'tis stirr'd, Will raise tempests as great. We shall find Other particulars beside to examine you of. Ara. Then the Gods send their aid, or all is lost! aside. Yet, Sir, hear me speak. The Jealousies you Have of me, I shall not perhaps be able At this present to Clear; and indeed I Know not so much as what they are. But Sir, To shew you in this last Accident how much I am Innocent. I will relate unto you, How first I met the Actor of it. 'Twas on that Day I was imploy'd on an Honourable Message from your Majestie to the Stranger Prince, On the Shore I found him, having lately 'Scapt a Ship-wrack, and as great a Danger On the Land; for he had been assaulted By two Villaines that were in the same Voyage With him, the cause of whose hate he could not tell, Having no acquaintance with them, but in The Ship; but as he had before the Waves, So in this Tempest too, as I may call it, He bore himself above. In the instant, While he was yet hot in his Anger, And their Bloud, we came upon him— Time. Pray Sir let me speak to you. There's a Wonder Discovered to me by this Relation! And under this Monster, he hath Spoke of, A greater doth lie hid; One that you'd rather Have in Chaines, than all the list of Traitors
I have nam'd. Sir, commit the Uucasing Him to me, and suffer me to proceed With Aratus, as I shall see cause. Exeunt all but Ti∣meus, Aratus, and the Guard. King. Take your way, I'll leave him to you. Time. My Lord, with the perswasion of your Innocence, I have procur'd your Freedom Of my Father; and do desire in Return Of this kindness (if it be such) to let Me see the face of this my Enemy Once more, if your Acquaintance (as appears By your words) be not too late to know his Abode. My Lord, I shall receive him otherwise Than you expect. The Relation you have Made of him, and what my self was witness of, Have turn'd my Hate into Admiration Of him, and if I can move his Love, as I have done his Anger, I shall be happy In his Valour. 'Tis not the first time that The Brav'ry of Enemies, have made them Friends, And that Wounds, have been the first Seals of Love, I do consider how much I injur'd him, And that on such provocation, he could not Have done less, At the first sight I call'd him Dog, And without more Circumstance commanded To have him kill'd. Ara. Now Sir, I must kneel to you, You have the goodness of a Prince. He shall Submit for his Offence, or suffer for it. And if you find not that Noble Spirit In him, I have told you of, in the most Dangerous Business you shall imploy him, Let him be punish'd for this his Ill-plac'd-Valour. Time. My Lord, I'll take no other Surety, But your Word; ever oblige me thus. Exit Timeus and Guard. Ara. But my Lord, though I can Answer, I cannot give Credit to your smooth Tongue. This last Accident might have lost all. I'll Hazard no more by my Delayes. And seeing They know not their time to strike, I'll teach em Both the How, and When to do it. Before To morrow this time, I'll ring their Dull Security such an Alarm— Enter Haimantus disguis'd like a Saylor. Haim. My Lord, Prince Clearchus Salutes you. Ara. Ha! Prince Clearchus Said'st thou? Come nearer friend. Haim. Do you not know me My Lord? Ara. My Lord Haimantus! I crave your Pardon. How fares the Prince? Haim. Well, and both He, And my Lord Pallantus (who happily made His Escape to our Ships from his Pursuers) Have sent me in this Disguise, to let you know, The Block-house is privately surrender'd To 'em: in which they now are, with three hundred Of our Selectest Men: and undertake With this strength to rescue the Princess Hianthe This Even, if the state of your other Affairs Will suffer it. Our Navy besides rides Clear, And disengag'd near to the Block-house, Where they can land what greater Force they please. Ara. Hum. The Gallant Prince, and bold Pallantus safe, The Block-house surrender'd, and the Ships at hand Both for a Reserve, and a Retreat—Why should They not attempt it? My Lord, tell'em, Their Design is Noble, and like Themselves, Full of Youth, of Fire, of Bravery, of Justice:
That where such Spirits as theirs move in any Action, all Designs ought to Follow, and Not Lead; they make the Period, and the Poynts Of Business. Say, I do not onely approve, Of this their Purpose, but will Assist 'em In their Retreat, and at the same time give A Divertisement, by some hundreds of Great shot pour'd into the City. Come my Lord I'll direct you a way to return less Hazardous than that you came in hither. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Hianthe. The time of their great Plot is now compleat, The hours are finish'd. O let it not You, Which look down, which favourablylook down Upon this Isle, want your Power which first Did strengthen it; let the same Hand that bid, Disclose it too! Shame not at so Glorious An Off-spring, when it is Heavenly, and doth Confess the Father, when none but Gods dare Call it theirs, nor without Blasphemy can Own it. Ye were kind Parents at the first, Shew your selves still so, and Rear the Child ye Have Gotten. Where Humane strength shall fail, there Hold it up, and make that Want, the Strongest. Enter Mellssa. Mel. Madam, I now met my Lord Ara us, Who intreats your Highness to keep within Your Lodgings this Night, and to fear nothing What euer Embroylments you hear abroad, Or near you. Enter Timeus. Time. Madam, I come to tell you, The Infection, which caus'd this your Retirement, Is now clear'd up, and vanish'd, and abroad You may safely bless us with your Presence: The Court has for these dayes suffer'd an Eclipse, But when it shall again shew forth its Beams, Your Beautyes, it will look more Glorious, By its short Obscuring. Enter the King, Co∣mastes, Minetius. King. Weil said Timeus. Now I like thee; here thy Cares and Services Are bent the right way; would I could see thee Once look pale in these. Can a young Man (when He may have leave to breath in such a Paradise As this) draw a common Ayre? an Ayre o'th' People? I am loath to change thy present thoughts: but The business I have to tell thee, will bring Thee peace, and more leasure for them. The suspition Thou had'st of a Treason, was not Vain; since It hath broke out; but 'tis already supprest. The two Chief of'em are taken in their passage, As they went to Head their Forces. And I Have commanded they be set so High, As to enjoy a Large View of that Land they Were Ambitious of, and then to strangle 'em At that Height. Time. Are there but two, Sir, of Note That you have taken? Flatter not your self, Had they been thousands, they had left more behind. Your Majesty counts that a Victory, Which they scorn to account a Loss; and think Y'are safe, when they are not indangered.
Is Aratus, Phronimus, or Eurylochus, Among them? Is Pallantus one of the two Are taken? King. Pallantus! Thou dream'st of the Dead, And the Ages past. Time. Sir, he's Living, And if my Aimes deceive me not, he has Lately Walk'd among us, and makes up the Knot Of Traitors—Ha! King. What can this mean! Look out! A vollie of Great Shot inter∣rupts their discourse, and they stand amaz'd. Enter Polyander. Poly. Sir, arme speedily, put your self within Your Strength, or y'are lost. The Block-house Is revolted, Prince Clearchus poures Men In Swarmes upon the Shore, Aratus has Seiz'd both the Gate and Fort that lead unto Great Shot still. The Haven, and thunders, as you hear, Upon the City. Time. These were the Evills I was a Prophet of, I saw them when They were Disguis'd. Sir, 'tis no time now to Stand, But Doe. King. Madam, we intreat your Pardon, That thus we have offended 'gainst your peace, And made you the first partaker of our Troubles, That ought to have Known them Last. Hian. Sir, your Trouble Is too sad to be excus'd. Mel. How likes your Hignesse the Serenade of this fair Evening? Exeunt all but Hian. Meliss. Hian. I like it well Melissa, but I fear; My Solicitude and Care are too great To admit a perfect Joy— A Tumult and noyse of Weapons are heard at the Door. Within. Stand, stand. Clea. Within. Gentlemen stirre not, if you'l save your Lives; We come to serve the Princesse. Enter Clearchus, Pallantus, and Haimantus, with their Swords drawn. Clear. Madam, y'are safe, fear nothing. If you please To put your self into our protection, You may for ever bid a farewell to This your Hated Prison. My Lord, Pallantus, Guard the Princesse, and make the Retreat with All the Speed you can. The Honour of bringing up The Rear in this Action, I can impart to none. Within. Arme, arme, arme. The Princesse and Melissa goe off with Clearchus and his Party, a tumultuous Noyse of fighting continues for some time after. Then enter at another door, as in sight, Timeus and his Party, who are beaten back by Clearchus and his Party. Timeus is struck to the ground by Clearchus, but rescued by his fol∣lowers; which done, Clearchus retires Orderly, and the rest remain. Enter Polyander to them. Poly. On the ground, my Lord! Time. Lower and baser yet, Viler in my Condition Polyander, Than this my Posture. Affronted, baffl'd, scorn'd, Wounded by Traitors, and by Dishonour Deeper. The Princesse in my very sight Born from me. Poly. My Lord, these Wrongs dictate Revenge,
And not Complaints, shew your Resentments with Your Sword And let what you Have call your thoughts To it, and not what you have lost. Time. Lead on. Exeunt Omnes. CHORUS. While He that should be Eye and Ear, Through Sloth doth neither See nor Hear, Behold like Thunder comes a Sound, Which doth at once Amaze and Wound; " That Dart sure hits, which Clouds did hide, " And safely Kills,' cause Undescri'd. " Where Dangers urge, he that is slow, " Takes from Himself, and adds to's Foe. Th' are come beyond a Whisper now. And boldly dare proclaim their Vow. " When the Prey's sure, to shew the Snare, " Begets not Counsel, but Despair. Like Lightning it awakes the Sence, Onely to see, and grow Blind thence. " 'Tis Love, not Faction, where the Good, " Conspire to spill Usurping Blood. [ACTUS 4. SCENA 1.] Aratus and Pallantus are discovered sitting at a Table, with Pen, Ink, Paper, and Mathematical Instruments before them. Aratus. BEsides this great Work, we must have two less On either hand of it; and which must first Be made, no less to secure the Work in doing, Than when 'tis done; two common Horn-Works Will be sufficient for this purpose. Would they Were finish'd. Pall. My Lord, commit the Charge of'em To me, I'll both hasten the labour, and stand Upon the Guard till they be done. Enter Clearchus and Hianthe to them. Hian. Do you hear the Rumour my Lords? Ara. No, Madam. What is't?—What Fatal Check can our Affairs Hianthe answers not presently, as one trou∣bled at what they are to utter. Receive, that it should want a Tongue to speak it? VVhich hitherto have been so prosperous, so sull Of fresh successes, that our whole Councels Have been imploy'd, but how to Entertain, And make best Uses of'em. Hian. 'Tis reported, That the King's taken. Ara. Horror and Amazement Seize me on the bare Relation! But such A Prodigie cannot be! So Divine A Person, was never thrown away so Cheaply. Though the Gods abound in all Goodness, They never Lightly yet Esteem'd of any; That were not to shew their Plenty, but their Contempt of Vertues. Excellent Lady, Say the Particulars of this Report. VVas there any of the Kings Age made mention of? Hian. No, the Account we have is this, That two Lords
That were in their passage to raise Forces, Are taken by a Troop of Horse of the Adverse Party. My Brother being yet In his Disguise, and not known, is conceiv'd To have past for one of their followers. They stand all silent for a time as confounded with the belief of this relation, Pall. first recovers, and speaks the following speech as to himself. Pall. VVhere are all our Great words now? Those Mighty sounds which made a trembling in the Aire, And caus'd no less a deafness with their fall, Than if Thunder, the Voyce of Heaven were turn'd Articulate, and spoke the Threats of Jove Unto the VVord? Chang'd to as great a Silence? Such when a Tempest ceases, is the Calm That followes, no noise is heard; as if the VVinds VVith Blasts were Breathless grown, and the Seas Sate down, and after so much Toyl required Ease. But a True and Noble Spirit, ought not To sink under Misfortune, but bear up The stronger; and if the state be Desperate, To attempt VVaies as Desperate to Change it. No Action can be counted Folly, VVhere no Counsel can be given for Any. Rashness is Bravery, or VVisdome then, when The Best Hope is but Destruction. I will do Something, And where the gods have given a Will, We ought not in their Service to sit still. Exit Pallantus. Hian. I was born, and bred up in Miseries, And the Misfortunes I have past, were not To excuse my following Age from more, But to prepare me onely to suffer Greater yet, and stranger. Clear. My Lord, Recollect your self. This Newes may be false, and all The Danger the King is in, may be from your believing it. Give not your self cause to mourn hereafter, All perish'd on a Mistake. If that this, The worst of Evils, be befalln, yet It ought not to be the reason of your Neglect, but greater Care and Vigilance. Though much be Lost, yet that Remains, may well Expect your best Thoughts to it. Look upon That Lady, too much swallowed up in Grief, Through our so low Dejection. If you have Lost a King, consider in Her y'ave still A Queen, and such a One, as for whose Service, You would not think your dearest blood too precious, Were it not frozen with your present sorrowes. Ara. My Lord, I thank you, and will follow your Advise. Pardon my Amazement, and if I seem'd dead, when the life of all my Actions Was taken from me. Yet 'twas not a Slumber I was lost in, but a Confusion of Various thoughts, not knowing which to follow, Till your Highness pointed me one forth. We'll act something now so speedily, that They shall not have leave to put an ill Design In practise. Madam, revive your gentle Spirits, happyer things attend you, than now You know, or hope for—The Newes— Hian. VVhat Newes my Lord? Ara. Such as is not to be nam'd Enter a Serv. who Delivers Ara. a letter, which he o∣pens hastily. VVithout a Sacrifice! O see Madam! Though we have lost, we are not yet Undone; There's a Check, but not a Total Ruine
Of our Fortunes. The King, Paronimus, and Eurylochu. are all safe, and never Were in Danger; this Night they will be here With their full Power. Hian. My joyes are then restor'd me, I shall see my Brother Clear. My Lord, who are they Are taken, and have given occasion for This Mistake? Ara. Two that stood boldly for our Party. More besides, their Name's there, and that they were Honest, I cannot now instruct your Highness. You may perceive, they, which have no such Cause Of joy as we have, do lament them much. We shall have a time too, I doubt not, both To mourn and revenge their fall. In the mean time, Let 'em rest in Peace and Honour. Such a Farewel, were I in their Condition, I should have expected. They have onely Out-stript us in the payment of a Debt We all owe unto our Master, ours is Due, Though yet not call'd for. Come Madam, we must Prepare to meet the King, and after that what E'er our souls can wish for. But where's Pallantus, absent from this happy Newes? Ser. He went forth my Lord a little before The arrival of the Letters. Ara. We shall meet him. Joyes of this nature will never come too late. Exeunt Omnes. Enter the King and Timeus. Time. Sir, though there are Troubles in your Affairs, Let none be in your Countenance. Your Eyes, Should like those blessed Twin-fires upon the Ship, Display a Prosperous Flame, a light of Joy, And Comfort round about; that they which toil In the Rage, and Fury of this Tempest, May from thence fore-see a Calm, and nourish Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Power, Destroying it your self, 'cause others would. The Souldier groans, just as you groan, their pulses Have the same Motion, and their Hearts do beat Both Hope, and Fear, according as yours doth. All Omen comes from you, your Passion is not A single Sadness, 'tis the Peoples too. When you confess a Fear, none dares be Bold, Courage is thought a Folly, not a Vertue. Your Mirth were now Discretion, and a Face Chearful as at a Feast, were Policy, 'Twould be one kind of Succour. King. Timeus I thank thee: But these Joyes come from Above, And are not to be taken when we please: No Man can pronounce, He will be happy. Yet I will struggle with my Thoughts, and strive To recover the Peace, that's fled from me. But let not this thing Discomfort you, Perhaps 'tis a course of Humours onely, And a little Physick may remove it. Time. With the Comfort and hope of this, I'll leave You Sir. And if the Genius that attends Your Person, smile upon us, no other Evil shall dismay us. Shall I bear any Commands from you to the Camp? King. Onely my Salutations. The Charge of all Do thou take upon thee. To morrow if This Fit leave me, I'll visit you, How every thing is irksome to me! Clouds Exit Timeus.
And Darknesse are before my Eyes, All things dissenting one from the other, Yet Conspire in this, that they present Death To my View. I have that Idle Comfort Onely left, That he that Despaires of All, Ought to fear Nothing. When things cannot grow worse, All fortune then is on His Side that Suffers. But my Injustice seconded with Murder, Doe forbid Successe. A Kingdome rear'd in Bloud Stands on a Slipperie Foundation. And I have been nourish'd in Peace thus long, That being grown Specious and Great, I may At last fall a Sacrifice worth Slaughter. Thoughts urge Thoughts; Suspition gets Suspition; Horror Horror; I have not that small Settlednesse Of Mind, as to think one thing twice. Were I But Innocent, I would provoke Misfortune, Call for Fate with as undaunted Courage, As the Lord and Ruler of it doth—Hold. An uproar at the door, Pallantus rushes in, and wounds the King, the Guard follow on him. I command you hold.—What a Nothing 'tis That I have thus much Fear'd, and labour'd To escape, when 'twas my Good! Childishly Dreading every Thought of Cure, then most Offended, When my Health was near. How Well I am After this Little Wound! Quiet of Mind, And Peace of Conscience, those Bless'd Companions, Begin to return unto me. I see Nothing but bloud can appease bloud in Sacrifice; That to the Guiltie there's no Ease, but Death, No Mercy, like the Crosse, Oh!—Hold in your Rage. As the King shewes signes of weaknesse through his wound, the Guard make offer to kill Pallan∣tus. Have yee not alreadie acted Mischeifes Enough by my Command, but yee must Voluntarilie thrust your selves on more? Y'are deceiv'd, though I have been hitherto A Tyrant, now I am Mercifull, and would Gladly behold things Just and Innocent. Cap. He faints. The Villain must not live. King. I Command you hold. My Power is yet Good. You are the Villaines, the True Causers of This my Miserie, and you should Lay Hands Upon your selves. How Ridiculous is this Your Furie? Suppose I should give way To your Desires, what were you the Safer, Or I the Better? You would have One Foe Lesse, And I one Sinne more, that am alreadie Loaden. Does not my Judgement affright you Rather? I was not onely Guiltie, your Hands were dipt in the same Bloud with mine, nay, Oft perform'd such Deeds, I onely durst but Wish. Had I given you my Commission, Obedience Here would not have Excus'd you. Your Loyaltie To Me was but at Best a Broken Faith Unto another, and when Yee observ'd It most, Yee were most Perjur'd. What can Yee expect? Yee see when I was Guarded By an Host, was thought Secure from what the Power of Earth or Men could doe unto me, One Man, as I may say, One Handfull of That Earth, broke through all my Safeties, and with A Single Arme has forc'd what a Million Could not keep: and when no Humane Meanes was found,
Yet there was a Miracle to Conquer me. The Guard rele. To you I turn now no more my Terror, In Return of this Favour you have found, Shew the like to These, and Others, that shall Be guiltie of that Name, Of Friends to Me. Though You are Nothing yet, this Deed will make You Powerfull: and You that have given them All, May demand back so Small a Part. Now you have been so much my Enemie, Change something to a Friend—How Vainlie I take Care for Lesser things, neglecting My Chief Concernments. O my Timeus! O my Poor Eudora!—Leave me not yet my Soul. Thou can'st not mount untill the Load be taken From thy Wing. Thou could'st inhabit here When it was Hell, now it is Paradise, O stay—and dwell— He dies, and the Guard run and bear up his body. Pall. Though the Fall be Great, it cannot shake me, When I know 'tis Just. The Malefactors Penitence takes not the Justice of his Doom away; though He be Chang'd, That remaines Unstain'd. He may die with Pitty, but not With Innocence. They mind me not, I'le take This Advantage of their Sorrow for my Escape; I will not trust their Obedience To a Dead Command. Cap. Leave your sad Embraces, Exit Pallantus. They'l bring no Comfort to you, though you persist In'em, till you are such as this you hold. This ground of Sorrow will afford a perpetuall Supply of Moisture, which your Eyes, like Sunnes, May draw up, and pour down for ever; but Never exhale a Satisfaction to you. Let us to the Prince, and there unburden Our hearts of this our grief, and if he have A Service that commands our Lives, all hazards Now will be welcome to us. 1. Guard. The Villain That committed this Sacrilegious Act's escap't! 2. Guard. We were too soft to obey Dying-Speech. Cap. His Entrance and Escape were ordained Both by Fate, 'twas not in Our Power to hinder Either. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Timeus. Give me a Power Mightie as my Rage, That my Revenge may reach unto the Clouds, And unthrone those Gods, that joyn'd hands with Men To commit so Black a Deed. It were but Justice they should loose their Deitie, that So would throw it off. Oh my Father! did I Unload thy Shoulders of the Kingdome, That thou might'st fall under a lesse Weight? And bereft thee of thy Jealousies, to Ruine thee with more Assurance onely? Where are all those Flatt'ring Tongues, that when There was no Need, would, in a Complement, Hourlie Suffer for Thee? Not One to die In thy Defence? Or by his fall to make Thine more Decent? What ho, Charisius, Erastus, Acmanthes, not one Voyce? How Dismall is this Place! The Graves where Death Inhabits are not so dreadfull! l I'le flie thee, Though I run among the thickest of my Foes,
They can present no Horrors like this Lownesse; The Cries, the Sword, the Trumpet in the Battell, Strike not so deep Amazement!— I walk like He goes out, as in search of some of those that had wont to at∣tend, and returnes again. Aeneas among the Shades, all is Hell About me! I see nothing but what my Phansie frames in Horrid Shapes! O yee vain fears Of Guiltie Men! All are Unreasonable, But yours Ridiculous. When you have contemn'd The greatest and most reall Dangers, You tremble at a Ghost, a Thing lesse than a Man, And when the Substance could not, the Shadow Frights you. There is no way but this to set me Above my Feares; when I am Lesse I shall Be Equall to 'em. Cap. O hold, my Lord! He prepares to fall on his Sword, and the Guard return, and save him. Offer not up your Self a Sacrifice, When there are so many, that gladly would Redeem you with their Lives. Let that thought Prevail with you, That you ought to Live for them, That so willinglie would Die for you. Y'are the Prop of thousands, and if you sink, You pull a Kingdome with you. Take your Sword By the Other End, and so holding it, Seek to appease this Royal Ghost. If you Cannot regain a Crown, yet win a Memorie By the losse of it: This Object makes your Grief A burden to your Honour. Lean on us, My Lord, and we'l conduct you to the Camp. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Polyander, Comastes, Menetius, and a Captain, at their entrance a Shout is heard. Poly. What Shout is this among the Enemies? Cap. 'Tis their Acclamations still for the Arivall Of their Fellowes, with whom they have now joyn'd Campes. Poly. I am glad of't. I hope we shall have Command, to trie the Fortune Of the Field to morrow. Would the Whole Knot Of them were there, that we might make quick Work, And like Alexander, untie it with a Blow. Com. I and a Wall round about 'em to keep Them to the Slaughter; that we may not be Troubl'd to kill a Thousand in a Thousand Places. I like not this pursuing, 'tis The greatest Evill, next to the being Pursued; the Wine nere tasts well when 'tis so Jumbl'd. Give me a Standing-Camp, that Flourishes like a Peacefull City, and wants No Necessaries. Here stand your Engins, There Victuall: on this hand a Palesado Defends you, on the other a Barecado Of Pork-tubs as impregnable: before A Fose is cut of some two hundred paces, And the Souldiers tipling in't, behind a Coop Runs out of the same length, and the Poultrie Tipling in their Trenches; whose bodies are Too delicate and tender to bear travell. Here a Man may, even among the Tents, forget To be a Souldier. Poly. Ha, ha, ha, On my Conscience Comastes, thou art wearie Of the Camp alreadie. Com. Yes faith, As your Selves are, if you'd confesse the truth.
Poly. Why, me thinks there's no Pleasure like the Souldiers, Who takes his Swing in all Delights, and sates Himself with 'em, as if he were near to Tast 'em more; and if Fortune be so kind To grant him a second and a third Fruition, Like Friends, which parted in the Morn two Dangerous And Hopeless wayes of ever seeing, they Meet With a Multiply'd, and Unexpected Joy. His very Wounds, are Pleasures, and Elizium Comesfaster on him, than his Death.— Com. When Honour is the Prize, and wrong'd Justice The Cause that thrust him on, he throws off One, That he may gain a Better Life, a Life Of Fame, which is Eternal even in Death. That he enjoy'd before was Fading, Sustain'd onely by the Infirmities Of One Weak Body, now 'tis supported By the Memories of All, the Charge of it Is committed unto a World of Men, Nor is't Extinguish'd before the Frame o'th' Whole Universe. None are so surviving As the Sons of Glorious War. Jove gave Life to Hercules and Theseus, but Mars Eternity; they breath'd from one, but gain'd Heaven by the other. These were the great Thoughts, Which when I was yet Young, and not able To effect 'em, did dwell in me; they did Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise my hand Against the Gods, if they slept at Perjury, And favour'd Injustice. Poly. Holloe Comastes! What Rapture's this? Com. To shew you how easie A thing it is, to talk like a Souldier, And be as brave a fellow as either of you. Omnes. Ha, ha, ha. Mene. Thou wouldst make an excellent Run-away-Souldier. Such a speech on the High-way, Were greater Violence, than Bidding-stand, A long staff would not get an Almes so soon. Poly. What saist thou now Comastes, to a jovial Round Or two, beyond the Court-Healths? Those at the Kings Own Table? Com. I believe I shall say more Than you at this, as well as at the Other. Poly. Captain, command 'em to bring some VVine in. Exit Captain. Come, in the mean time lets sit. Enter to 'em one of the Guard that was present at the Kings Death. Guard. My Lords, stand upon your Guard. The King's slain! Omnes. The King! They all start up upon the Newes, and draw their Swords. Poly. Thou look'st distractedly, speak it again! Guard. He's slain! My self was present at his Death. Poly. By what accursed Hand? Guard. That Devil, that Awhile since wounded the Prince, has Murder'd him. But my Lords, I lose the time, and Betray you In it. The Prince is come into the Camp, And commands you strait to repair to him. He finds the Army wavering in their Faith, The City Bands are already Revolted, And others begin to draw off. The Kings death, And a Declaration from the Enemy, Pretending that a Son of the former King's Preserv'd by Aratus, heads their Forces; Has almost gain'd them a Victory. without
A drop of Bloud. Poly. Away, we stay too long, Lead us where you left the Prince. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Aratus. Never did Justice shew her self so Eminent: This was a Deed, as if her own Hand Had wrought it! Who can complain the want of Providence? Or say, the Guiltie and the Innocent make one Heap in Judgement, when This is told? A Tyrant in the Midd'st of All his Strengths, guarded with Friends and Armes, What ever Power or Policie could make him Safe with, by a Single Hand strengthen'd with Justice, was snatcht from the midd'st of all! The Ligt'ning melts not the enclos'd Gold With half that wonder, leaving that Containes it! Nor doth the Plague, in a Multitude of Men, Make a Choice so Curious. Enter to him Cleander and Clearchus. Clean. My Lord, we may Sheath our Swords. This Gallant Act of the Heroick and The brave Pallantus, has not onely Remov'd a Tyrant, but, I may say, Dissolv'd an Armie, and Reduc'd a Kingdome. The Pretor, in the Cities Name, offers Allegiance. And divers Bodies, both of Horse And Foot, have left th' Enemies Camp, and are Come over to us. What can we attribute To this Noble Deed, that in any measure May reach the Greatnesse of it? We ought to Acknowledge it the Compendium of all Our Future Fortunes; and what over High And Happy shall succeed to us, to be The Consequents alone of this. A Benesit Of that Universall Nature, that like The Sunnes Influence, our Enemies feel The Good of it as well as we. Ara. Sir, you weigh This Action as you ought. And while you can look Thus Nobly on the Services are done you, You'l make this Isle a Land of Heroes, The Princes Eyes breed Vertues when they shine Upon 'em; and what ever has been found To be his Temper, quickly growes to be The Genious of the People. Clear. What thinkes your Lordship, If we drew out, and fac'd the Body of The Enemy, that yet holds together? And with Fear, or Forces, sought to dissolve'em? Ara. My Lord, what can we return you for this Gallant Forwardnesse? But the Force that now Stands against us, will not be worth your Highnesse Hazard, nor yet paines to face 'eur. A little Shame, and Obligation to their Late Master, Is all the Bond that holds 'em. And a few Dayes, if not Houres, will scatter 'em, without Our Swords. But this Message from the City, Will require your Majesties attendance To it. Please you to hear what their Demands Are to you. Exeunt Omnes.
Drums, and other noyses of an Assault. Pall. Within. Spare no Opposition. Bréak the Gates, add fire unto your Force. Enter Rodia, and another Lady frighted in, Endora after them. Rodia. O Madam, they break in upon us! Eud. O my Father, when thou art slain I cannot Fear what after does befall me! The same That was their Crueltie to Thee, will to Me be Pittie. A noyse as if the doores were forc'd, Pallantus and other Souldiers break in. Pall. Stand. No man advance to touch a Life, Or doe a further Violence. My Rage Has blindly lead me on to Violate A place no lesse Sacred than the Temples, And rudelie ere I lookt about, hath thrust me On the Deitie! So those that are led To see some Glorious Sight, eager and longing, Ask still as they passe, which is the way? and How near? till they are engag'd within its Splendour, which opening suddainly upon them, Makes 'em retire as fast again with Reverence! Eud. What stayes thee Monster? And makes thee pant thus Ore the Prey? Here I stand ready, and doe Invite thy Furie; Come, and save my hand A labour: if thou art Surfeited, I'le Whet thy Appetite. Th' art a Murderer, A Villain; these Name thee not; They are but Diseases of the State, Thou the Death. The Law Comprehends them within her Verge, thy Giant Faults doe so much O're-top Her, that Justice Cannot reach thee, and if there were no Gods. Thou then wert Innocent, and would'st stand Safe, Because thou art so Wicked. Thou hast Kill'd Thy King. O no, thou had'st no share in him! He was a King of Men, thou a Beast, the Foulest, and the bloudiest that ever preyd On Innocence. Pall. My Revenge, how false Thy Beautie was. Eud. How Monstrous thou appear'st! Thou represents unto me all Ill, I ever heard of! Pall. And thou all that I ever heard of Good! Eud. Thou mov'st like so many Living-Mischiefes! had the Priests beheld thee, They might have Divin'd, all these Future Evills So exactlie in thy Form, that what they told, Would rather have seem'd a Story, than A Prophesie, and have sav'd us from thee. Nature was never Guiltie of such a Work, Some Hellish-Power hath given thee Birth, and Spirit, And sent thee on the Earth to destroy all That's Fair and Holy. Cap. Sir, raise your Spirits. Can you endure such words as these? Souldiers on, And make Her feel those Evils She hath utter'd. Pall. Hold, hold, Thou Worse than she hath Named! darest thou Command, or move to such a Sacriledge? If thy Sinnes were told thee from the Heavens,
Thou'dst blaspheme the Voice that spoke to thee Withdraw, thy Rage is too Unhollow'd for This Place. Provoke me not with another Offer. I shall not swollow your Bitterness, Though guilded in the Name of Friendship. Exeunt Captain and Souldiers. Eudo. What next intend'st thou? What Master-piece Of wickedness wilt thou glory in alone? Know, thou canst not Force me; here within thy Reach I am as safe, as if an Army, All resolute to death, divided us. She shewes a Dagger: This Hand, something weaker than a Womans, Can resist all thy strength, were it as great In Mischief, as in Will. Pall. Though I seem all That you have Named, and Fouler yet, this is A sin I dare not do. O think me not Worse than you have said already, and then I may again wash off my Stains. The Beasts Are Noble, meek to Chastity, and humbly Lick the feet of Majesty. Judge me not By shew, our Eyes deceive us, and as oft Perswade us to the Wrong, as do the Blind- Mans feet; falsely do prompt us, All that is VVhite, is Innocent, and all that's Black, is Sinful without exception. Should those That look on you, be led so by the sense, They must kneel down before you, and adore you As some Deity, not being able To phansie so much God, as they do see In you! Such Formes their Powers have given you, That you may become a Rival in their VVorships. Eudo. VVhy talk'st thou thus? Thy Tongue hath no more power Than hath thy Hands. Pall. Neither intend Violence VVould you could entertain of me one thought Of Goodness, as hopeless as you think me, I'd undertake to make it good, and Better't Daily. Eud. Why delay'st thou? VVhat would'st thou have Pall. Forgiveness, Love, I dare not say. Eudo. Love! Thy Thoughts are more Mishapen, than thy self. In thy very Hopes thou art Cruel. This Base Imagination hath wrong'd me more, Than all thy Actions: In those thou onely Sought'st the Ruine of Greatness, in this The Ruine of my Name. A Rape were a Glory To thy Affection, and though it had Lost, It would have Got me Fame, the Honour of A Ravish'd Virgin. Did'st thou Woe me with the Highest Services, as thou com'st in my Fathers Blood, I could Reward thee, but could Never yeeld thee Love. I was too long A Princess, and lost the name too Late, To entertain so low a thought. Pall. The World Of Causes that part me, and Happyness! Eud. Love is soft, and full of Curtesie, A greater Opposite to Lust, than Hate. The Flames thou feel'st, are more preposterous, Than those which burn the Brests of Satyrs, or Of Beasts; which kill the Young, and in that blood Enjoy the Dam. Think'st thou that any is So bold in Lust, to imbrance the Fears thy Love Brings with it? Pall. My Youth, and Comliness how Are you obscur'd! Eudo. My Miseries have put A new Nature in me, chang'd that Calmness
I had wont enjoy, into the Looks, and Language of a Fury. How ill does Rage Become a Virgins brest? I will suppress it. And if it must break forth, dissolve it into Tears. An Age worn out in thought, cannot present One Comfort to me, I am so Wretched. Oh! My soul's more Earthy than my body, This War that is within me, I hope will Gain a Victory o'er my Life at last. Pall. Accursed that I was to be the Authour Of so much Miserie. Is there no way to restore That Peace which you have lost? If there be any, Despair not of it, though it be held within The jawes of Death, I'll snatch it for you: Though it were lost in the Darkest Mass of things, My Love would distinguish't in a Chaos: If it have no Being, but what your Thought Gives Life to, I'll Wish it for you, so strong My Phansie is to serve you Let it be Any thing to be done, I'll do it. Can I, The wretched Cause removed; bring ease unto You Sufferings? Here on my Knee I yeeld my Life, Unto your taking: or if you had rather, I'll offer't up my self. Eudo. No, and yet There is a way, and thou may'st do it. Pall. Is there a way? O my joyes! The Gods are Merciful! Name it, name it to me. Eudo. If thou wilt vow to do it presently. Pall. Need I an Oath to confirm I would be Happy? 'Tis my own Happyness, I thus Eagerly pursue in yours. Ev'ry sigh You give, doth make me breathless; and ev'ry Tear which you let fall, doth bow me nearer To the Earth, than all the years and Wounds that I have suffer'd. Yet I will swear, By all things Holy, all that I fear and reverence, To refuse no Labours, Death, to gain your Ease, And restore joy unto your Life again. Eudo. Now thou can'st not, thy last words have render'd Thee Unable. The Ease was Death, which yet I beg from thee. Pall. From what a Heaven of happyness Am I fallen? Eud. Assist me all my strength. Ye Gods this way ye have ordained I should Come to you: pardon that Fate then, which your selves Did give me. She makes an offer to stab her self. Rod. O my Lady! Pall. Stay, O stay that hand! Let that Goodness in you, which would spare Things Fair and Holy, preserve the Fairest, and The Holiest! The Angells would be proud to take Such Shape upon them when they Visit Earth, 'Tis such as Your self ought to look with Reverence on. Eudor. Ther's a Weapon hid within my Heart, which None can take away: it wounds deeply now. Death thou art a Lover, and dost Court me mildly. Ladies O my Lady: help, help. O my Lady! She faints. Rod. Give her more air. Pall. She's gone, my time's no longer. Our Lives were woven on the same Web, the Destinies condemn' me to see her Death, And then to follow. He prepares to fall upon his Sword. Rod. She breaths, stand off. Eud. My Brother, O my Father! Rod. How doe you Madam? Eud. Too well, my strength returnes to fast unto me. Pall. Were my Soul fled, that Voyce would call it back Again, it self would return, and choose this
Paradise on Earth. I'le not disturbe her With my Longer stay. Fair One, if your Lady Shall need any thing, you may have it with A thought; No lesse respect shall wait on her, Than if her Father still Rul'd all. The Guard Shall be at your Command, and attend onely For your Quiet, and your Safety. Rod. Souldier Th'art Noble. The Gods reward thy goodnesse. Exit Pallantus at one door, and Eudora led off by the Ladies at the other. CHORUS. HE who Unjustly sway'd the State, Lives no where now but in their Hate, There's Nothing left of him but Shame, Which both Preserves and Clouds his Name. When Civill-Beasts fall, let it be Call'd Slaughter, and not Victory. When that He dyes, that lived a Shade, His Sleep's Continu'd then, not Made. Arise thou Starre of Honour here, And in his Stead shine round our Sphear. Grace thou the Throne, and let us see, Thy Father once more Raign in thee. We'l now in nought but Love Conspire, And no brest burn but with True Fire. While that such manners rule the Throne, Live all by his, he by his Own. [ACTUS 5. SCENA 1.] Enter Eudora and Rodia. Eud. THis Quiet we enjoy, does strike Amazement In me! Sure they have Slain the Body with The Head, which makes this Generall Calm. Rod. Madam, 'Tis much more Innocent. And though that part Of it we find, by particular Command Be Order'd so; yet 'tis but an Image Of the Universall Peace that Blesses All the Isle. No Noise of Armes, Rapine of Souldiers, Tumults, Slaughters, are seen in any Place, but Securitie and Joy doe reign, As in a long and Setl'd Peace. The Conspirators Having brought about their Great Design, Desire to have it seen to all the World. They Sought a Change, but not a Desolation. Eud. Their Moderation is too Late; nor will It satisfie the Gods, when they have spilt So much Bloud, that they will Spill no more. Rod. O Madam, how farre you wander, and are lost In Error! and to all your other Miseries Is added this, your Mistaking of the Ground On which you Suffer: and whether with my Duty It will stand, to inform you of the Right, I know not: Yet while there is a Charitie In the Rudenesse, I shall be bold to tell you, This Last Alteration the State has suffer d, This wresting of the Scepter from your Name, Together with your Fathers Life; has not Befallen through the Impious and black
Contrivance of a few bloudie and ambitious Lords, greedie to assume the Royall Ensignes To themselves: but in the Name of Justice, And the Owner, they have made this Seizure. And there stands up a King, to Countenance, And Justifie the Fact; a King not known Unto the Latter Age, a Son of Him From whom, with the like violence, but more Injustice (pardon what I say) your Father Formerlie did tear the Diadem. O Madam! Your Innocence, or Pietie, Or both, though you stood for many Yeares, So Great a Person in the State, Kept you From looking in this Mysterie. And if You doubt the truth of what I have said, Or can suspect your Enemies Cause is pleaded By me: ask of the most Zealous to your House And Name, and you will find, I have not onely Declar'd a Veritie, but restrain'd by Manners And by Duty, conceal'd a Storie of the horrid'st Crueltie, that any Age or time can Parallel. Eud. If this be true, our Sinnes are mightier Than our Suff'rings; and had we a greater Debt Than Life, we ought to pay it. My Miseries Are due to me, I was a Partie, and Enjoy'd my Fathers Violence and Treason. Rod. You are as Innocent, as at that Time Your Age was; and onely doe offend, in these Your Teares, and too much Sorrow, which on this Occasion shew'd excessively, is not To Grieve, but to Repine. The King was Old, And taking his Latest Leave, and 'tis hard To say, whether he were First opprest with Yeares, Or Vengeance. My Lord Time us, 'tis true, Was Young; but waigeing so seaslesse and perverse A Warre, 'gainst Vertue, and 'gainst Justice, What wonder if at last he sunk in such A Quarrell? Eud. How ill these Words become thee To speak, and me to hear'em? Think'st thou, the Shame And Vices of our House, can bring a Comfort To me? Rod. I think their Shame and Vices, Madam, Ought not to oppresse your Innocence. Eud. As the Glories, so the Dishonours of A Familie reflect upon the Rest Of Kin. Rod. 'Tis the Error of the Blind Mistaking World, that placeth either, where They are not deserv'd. Eud. Can any shift off, With Honour, from themselves the Sad Calamitie That O're-whelmes their House? Rod. If that Calamitie Be the punishment of Particular Crimes, To dote on the Calamitie is to Allow The Crimes. Eud. None can be suspected to allow A Crime, that punish even their Innocence, For their Alliance to the Vitious. Rod, Nor none can be admired for Justice more; That punish Innocence on any Score. Enter Lady to 'em. Lady. There's one of the Adverse party, that seems Of Note, desires admittance to your Highnesse. Eud. See Rodia who it is. Rodia goes out as to see, and returnes again. Who is it?
Rod. Madam, I Know not! nor did I e'er see Any like him! His Grace and Forme admit No Paralell! He speaks like the Souldier That first broke in upon us, but him It cannot be, He was the Terror, This the Delight, And Wonder of those that look upon him! Eud. Whether will thy Unseemly Admiration Carry thee? In Men Beauty's the Least Part. Rod. Madam, it appears so in him! Yet where Such Excellence of Form is seen, the Beauties Of the Mind are seldome Common. He craves Admittance to your Highnesse, and will not Take it, before that it be granted. Eud. Admit him. It will not become our State, To deny Commands, much lesse when they Intreat. Rodia goes out, and returns again with Pallantus richly habited. Pal. The Kingdome owes a Sacrifice for your Life; All will joy to hear of it: which had it falid, Would have pul'd more Guilt upon us, then the Sinns Of a whole Age. Eud. It is my shame you tell me of, And a great Share of my Grief that thus I stay To Grieve. Pal. My Offensive Tongue can utter Nothing pleasing to you; so great are your Misfortuues, and your Honour so tender To you: Yet if my Bloud could Cure the Wounds I have given you, I would not stick to make A Balsome with it. Eud. Thou art not He Which gave'em me. Pal. If my Repentance can make Me Clear, I am not. Otherwise twas I Who blinded with the beauty of a Rash Revenge, tore from you all your Joyes, and with it, Lost my Owne. Eud. Th'art strangly Alterd If thou bee'st he! Pal. Nothing so strangely As my Hopes are. Which first appeared to me In a shape most Heavenly, and told me All should be as Blessed as their Form! That if I would strike one Noble Blow, I should remove the Numerous Wrongs and Evils Of a Nation. But treacherously hid it From my sight, that with the same stroke, I should Produce One Evill, out-weighing all the rest That I had Remedied. Eud. Why dost thou Colour thus Thy Cruelty with Outward shew of Justice And Compassion? Thou hadst no Cause for that Which thou hast done, The Wrongs were General Thou Urgest so; and of a Publique Nature, And came not in the Compasse of thy Private Vengance; but that thou hadst a Hand was ever prest And ready to act a Cruelty. Pal. Yet I had A Cause, pardon me that I say so, and being That I saw not You before I did it, A Just One. I lost a Soveraigne, as near To me in Bloud, as Love. And if this Cause Seeme Remote, I had a Father Murdered, Whose Death it became me to Right with Vengeance, As it becomes you to mourn ore yours with Teares. My self the First Prince of all this Isle, Was drove a Fugitive to other Countrys, My Wrongs and Innocence were my onely Guilt. Nor did my Persecutors here give ore,
They thought too Much was Left me in my Life; So Poore at that time, so Orewhelmd with Miseries, Twas hardly from a Death to be distinguish't. Their Injuries put a New One in me, And blew the Sparke unto a Flame, Consumd'em. Look on this—It may bring you Comfort, He gives her the Letter he found at the begin∣ning in the Villaines poc∣ket that should have kil'd him. With making you Out-of-love with the Subject Of your Grief. Eud. Pallantus! are you Pallantus. Pal. This is the first Day, I have dared to be so Eud. And to all the Treason and Injustice named, Here's signd, Timeus! Couldst thou be so Cruell, So foully Impious? Degenerate Brother! This hath made a Mercy of all that hath Befallen thee: Nay thou dost deserve To have thy Punishments out-Live thee; To have this Blasting Character engraved upon Thy Tombe to all Posterity. Here lies The Bloudy, Treacherous, and (to make thee Monstrous, to have thy Age joynd to it) The Young Timeus; that was subtle in His Youth. What remaines for me? That Happinesse The most Wretched do enjoy, is taken From me, A Worthy Cause of Sorrow. Now I can neither Live or Dye without a Staine. Pal. Can you find yet a Resemblance but of Justice Inmy Actions? Eud. I Know not how to Answer you. The Tongue that can defend such Impious Deeds, Must be as Wicked as the Will that did Commit'em. Had Equity poynted all Your Actions out, given you Rules to work by, Told you how much, how farre you must have gon, You could not have done more Justly. There wants Not any thing to Crown your Judgment, but My Death, the onely Surviving Issue Of that Sinful Race: I have a long time Loathd my Life, and now I loath My Self too, I find, I know not how, a Guiltinesse Possesse me; my Fathers Crimes, flow like his Bloud Within me. Pal. O say not so! Forbeare at length To prophane the Divine Goodnesse that dwels In you! It is a Sin, though You Your self Commit it. Shall Self-Slaughter be held a Sin, A Self-Slander not be Noted as a Greater Crime? If the first be Murder, So much the Soul's more Excellent than the Body, That the Last must be held a Sacriledge; a kind of Blaspheming of the Deity dwels in us. Take heed, while you would rather Dye, than bear A Staine, you pull not the Greatest on you By avoiding it. Eud. They that will preserve A pure and Spotlesse Soul; must punish even The least Affinity in themselves to Sin. Pal. Be yet advised. They that too Nicely Create Sin where tis not, Condemn their Innocence When their Judgment's Faulty. Eud. Why do you thus Reward me Good for Evill? VVhy would you VVith-hold me from Perishing Justly, That sought to sink you in all your Innocence? Could my Imprecations have drove you To Destruction, I had had but the End I aimd at. Pal. Y'are still a Judge too Cruell To your Self. All those Imprecations
I deserv'd, as I then shew'd to you. But doe you Ask, Why I would save you from Destruction? O you have set too High a Prize Happinesse in That your Question, unlesse Your Bountie too would shew the Way, that we Might Hope to Effect it! How should I despise The proudest Honours that attend the Sword, In which Robbers and Ruffians may be Sharers With me, to win a Glory so perfectlie Illustrious? And could I bestow So Matchlesse and Divine a Benefit, As Your Preservation, on the World, People would stile me God! And though from the Earth I took my Being, with the Noblest of The Ancient Heroes they'd fix my Name in Heaven, Invest me with Diadem of Starres, And Robe of Immortallitie! And what is it, That Obstructs this Blessing to the World and Me? If I look upon your Innocence, I read a Book, in which, not onely a Few Finite Yeares are writ, but see an Age Drawn out to all Eternitie. If on your Losse of State; no Injurie of the World, No Shock of Fortune can diminish A True Greatnesse, That which was your Own, Is still On you; and sets you forth th' Example And Adoration, both of the Present And the Future World. Is it then last, Your Losse of Friends, or all these joyn'd together, That withholds this Blessing we would so Dearly Purchase? What is there in your Condition, That is not to be paralleld in Others? Look upon my Misfortunes, and you shall find A perfect Sceme of all your Saddest Evils. I lost, as you have done, a Father, a King, The Second Hopes unto a Crown, the Joyes And Glory which doe wait on these: Nay more, By you I lost them. Remember what your Righ Hand, your Father, and your Brother, did Take from me, what your Left, their Ministers, And Servants. Learn then a Strength of me (that Is the Worst Name for it) to bear a Change Of Fortune: And pardon a Fathers Death; Let the Innocence of Mine excuse my Violence to yours. We are the Wretched'st Two Alive, made so by Our Selves, and can be Onely Happy in Our Selves—No Beam of Joy yet? No breaking of a Raie of Comfort, From these Clouds of Sadnesse? No Dancing After this Long Night of Sorrow? Madam, Yet look up! Though hitherto my Comforts Have been Air, and unable to remove The weight of Grief oppresses you, yet here's One remaining, I dare pronounce, will prove Successfull. Vouchsafe to cast an Eye upon this Paper, That beares the Characters of your Living Brother, and other Friends. He gives Her a Paper. Eud. It is not so! It cannot, it must not be! Your Safeties Will not Suffer this; if the Sword of Warre Have spar'd him, That of Policie hath Cut him off. Forbear to Mock me thus, such Delusions Drive my Sorrowes to Distraction. Pall. Madam,
He lives, and with him all the Rest, whose Names Are there Subscrib'd; nor is there more than One (Could you but pardon that) of any Note Has lost a Life by these Late Troubles. Think not I have mock'd you with a Deceitfull Shew. I know, to have given you Happinesse, As you imagine, had been Twice onely To have Snatch'd it from you. I shall say no more To you, But Live as you find the Hopes true I have promist you. And believe when I Spoken this: my Life, my Honour, all that I possesse, and all that can be added To me, are a Gage Short to that I have given you. And till I present your Brother in Safetie To you, I'le never presse to enjoy again The Heaven of Looking on you. Rod. Madam, clear Exit Pallantus. Your Spirits yet at last from these Clouds Of Discontent. Many Noble Comforts Court you on ev'ry Side; make a Truce With Your Sorrowes, but till you see the Issue Of'em. Eud. I shall at least so far, as till I have prov'd this One that's promist me. Exeunt Omnes. Enter Cleander, Hianthe, Clearchus, Aratus, Haimantus, Phronimus, and Eurilochus; Shouts of the People as they Enter. People. Jove, Neptune, Apollo, all the Powers That favour Crete, preserve and blesse the King. Clean. Through the Happinesse of my People. May I know no other Joy or Blisse, but what First passes you, the Middle-Way of Blessings Between the Gods and Me. People. The Gods preserve Your Majestie. Enter Pallantus, and Kneeles and kisses the Kings Hand, Pall. Sir, I humbly crave your Pardon, That thus tardily, after the People, And your Enemies, I present my Dutie To you, and wish you Happinesse. King. I cannot Be deceiv'd, thou must be, th'Inimitable, Matchlesse, not to be Counterfeited, or Resembl'd, Great Pallantus! Whom as none; Can Reach to in a Noble Action, so none Can Equall in a Gallant Presence! Nor Doe I wonder to see the Change wrought in thee, Thy Deed hath thus Transform'd thee, It sits upon Thy Brow, and casts a Glorie round about Thy Face! Ara. Me thinks till this Day, the Times had Likewise a Vizor on, a Look'd not with A True Face before. Sir, you shall hourly see New Graces, and New Glories break forth from him! Pall. My Lord, you promise too Highlie for me. Ara. Thou look'st sadlie after all thy Honours. King. So my-thoughts! What can be the Cause? Can He That has given a Nation Happinesse, want it Himself? Speak thy Discontent. If it lie not In my own Power to Remedie, I'le Sacrifice In thy behalf. Pall. Sir, low as the Earth I bow To you. But that which is my Grief, will be No longer mine alone, than while I doe Conceal it; 'tis a Disease, that all Good Men
Will catch with the first Fancie, and Conceit. Justice could never yet, with all her Care, So carve out her Punishment, but that the Innocent Were Wounded with the Stroke, and felt the Judgement Of anothers Sin. While with her Sword, She Cuts off the Offending Parent, the Child Is made an Orphan in the Cradle, and mourns In after daies, the Crime he nere Committed. Clean. Whither does this Sad beginning tend? Pal. To this Sir. As we have slain (with all Religion) A bloudy Tyrant and Usurper; one That was Greater in his Sins, than in the Kingdome he purchas't by them: So too we have Unjustly slain the Father of a Lady, That knew not so much Guilt, as to satisfie her, Why she lost him. And for want of his Life, She now Contemns her Own, a Jewell Of Jnestimable Valew to all the World, But to her self. Sir you cannot call Her An Enemy, though her Goodnesse stood against You So Many Years, and preserv'd her Father, In despite of all his Sinns. It became her To withstand the greatest Piety what ere, If it were an Enemy to her Owne. Hian. Her Cause of Grief is Mighty, and if Care Be not taken, as their Faults have done the Rest, Her Goodnesse will destroy her. We that beheld The past Deformities, can bear Witnesse Of her Vertues. She was the onely Mine Of Honour, and when we had been wearied In seeking one Grain else where, in Her We could find a Treasure. Nor was this a Beauty In her, set off onely with the Blemishes Of Others, And Foyl'd by Generall Vices; But twas a Reall, and a Native Excellence, Which as it could not be obscur'd by Thickest Darknesse, so neither could it be out-shined By the most Radiant Brightnesse. King. Her Grief Concerns us all, and ought to be provided for Before our Feasts and Triumphs. Returne. In our Name to Her, and tell Her, be the Advantages Nere so Eminent we have receiv'd by 'em, We truly Mourn, for whatever Losses, may be Called Hers, Say too, in Person we had come to Comfort her, But that we thought a Visit, in the Freshnesse Of her Sufferings, too much Violence. VVhat ever there remaines, that can bring a Joy To Her, shall carefully be sought out, And offered to her. Her Brother with many Of her Friends are fled into the Fort, And are there shut up—VVould I could give'em Life— VVhat say you my Lord? May I do this? VVill not Mercy in this place, be Madnesse? Ara. Sir t'will be so in no place. You may do this, Or any thing you have a mind too. Even in your Suddain'st, Uncousidered Thoughts, There is a Secret Counsell, and Depth of VVisdome; And seeing all your Actions, Nay, all your Pleasures Are in some Exercise of Vertue; we VVill not crosse you in'em, but make't Our greater Care, to see you no time Suffer By your Goodnesse, or that your Mercy prove
A Cruelty to Your self. Clean. You have given me Resolution. Haste then in the first place Unto the Fort ('Twas their desire this Morning, To have Conference with one of Note) And if you finde'em fit for Mercy, Or to be made fit, offer't to'em Exeunt Omnes. Enter at one doore Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, and the Captain of the Guard; Timeus to them at the other. Time. No Answer yet return'd? Poly. Not yet Sir. Time. One look out again. Polyander, I remember, Exit Captain. I heard thee once say, when I condemnd thee For thy smiles, That if there were a Cause, thou Couldst Frown, VVhy look'st thou Sadly at this Time then? Our Fortunes ought rather to stir our Indignation Than our Grief. Poly. Sir were they my Own Misfortunes I were under, and not yours, the Heaviest Pressures should not move a Passion in me, Unlesse it were some Glory, but when I look On you a Fellow-Sufferer with me, Remember the State from which y'are fallen, Though in my Own Miseries I had a Heart Of Flint and Rock, In yours I could desolv't Into a Stream of Teares. Cap. Sir ther's now one arriv'd. Enter Captain. Has certainly brought an Answer. Time. Letus Seat our selves before he Enters, that he They all sit down about a Table that has a Cup of poyson on it. May see on what strength our Demands are made. Every Man put on a Face of Mirth and Resolution; and fancie to himself He's at a Banquet, that will refresh him, After all his Toyle—VVho's this? Do any Enter Paliantus Of you Know him? Poly. Not I my Lord! Men. Nor I! Time. Sir, Y'are VVelcome But we Invite you onely To look on. The Liquor this Goblet holds, Though it be Brisk, and of a Luty Operation, VVe cannot Commend so much for Purity, Or help to Good Digestion. The Gods Give not Life more Certain, than this gives Death, Do you think you can behold the Drinking Of it? VVould Aratus himself were here, That once he might be Glutted with A Spectacle of Death! You look Pale on tis Already. Fly Sir, while you may; for certainly Your Enemys have a Plot upon you, And sent you hither to take your Death in By your Eyes. Had they none to send us, To behold our Resolutions, but such a Trifle? Pal. What Shape can I put on, and thou not Injure Me in't? I never yet appeard to thee In any Form, but Either I found thy Scorn Or Hatred in it! At first I was thy Fear, As all that were Innocent did Fright thee. And because Thou wert Guilty, I was Banisht. Not to remove me neither, but my Death. VVhich standing firme 'gainst any Stroke of Law, By Treachery thou would'st have reach't it. Am when by Miracle I scapt thy Plotted Mischiefs, by Chance thou would'st have slain me A Stranger, and Unknown to thee: My Disguise VVrongd thee not, nor couldest thou pretend a Quarrel To it, more than to him that in the remotest
India drawes his breath— Timeus starts from the Table, and draws his Sword, the rest doe the like. Time. I know thee now! Thou need'st not further declare thy self! And thou art Come past all my Wishes To Satisfie my Regenge. Pallantus Knocks, and a Guard rushes in. Pall. Hold, I came To bring Peace, and not Destruction. Doe you Perceive yet how vain is all your Malice? Time. If thou art that man thou would'st seem to be, And Equallie with Me do'st honour a Dead Father; yet setting by these Seconds, Let us Singlie trie our Hatred. The Grant Of This will please me more, then a Consession Of all the Articles proposed by me. I had rather see thee Dead, or by this Meanes, Not see thee Live, then again be Master Of the Fortunes I have Lost. I am unfit For Life, And shall but curse the Givers of it. Pall. If I thought so, I'd grant to your Request, And Kill you; I could doe it, I have Strength And Justice enough to make me Able. But you are not so Bad as you suppose. These are Despairing, not Malitious Thoughts. Yet ere I gooe (rest assured) one way or other I'le give you Satisfaction, I came For that Intent. Shew me your Articles— Here one gives him the Articles, which he seems to run over with his Eye, and reads the last aloud. And last, That thus attended we may depart The Isle, How poor are these Conditions! Without more Commission I dare grant you Better. Why these are demands within the Compasse Of a Subjects Asking. Be not Deceiv'd, You were not so Safe in your Own Raign, As in your Enemies. The State is not Translated from one Tyrannie to another; But a Prince governes now, which is a Name Of Mercy as well as Power; which He truly Knowes, And in his first Deeds desires to shew on you. He does not think he's then like Jove, when he can Thunder, but when he can shoure down Blessings On a Nation: Not when he is the Voyce Of Death, but when he sits Harmlesse with the Power Of Death about him. Revenge, Torments, Executions, are not the Attributes Of a King, but a Destruction. He Rivals not The Immortall Powers in Temples, Statues, Adoration; but in Transcendent Vertues, Divine Performances; the Saving, Helping Qualities, not the Stern, and Awefull, Are the Steps, by which he Climbes above the Heads O'th' people, and appeares a God on Earth. Time. Why should I be a Stranger to these Vertues More then this man? I was not born for Lesse Things Then He! Certainlie, when Nature made this Frame She intended it for the Noblest purposes! Pall. What doe you yet Resolve, or Demand further? He mindes not what Pal∣lantus sayes, but continues his medita∣tion. Time. How my Soul's Acquainted with these Excellent Precepts, though it have been ever Kept A Stranger to 'em! how it approves, consents, Takes part with 'em at first hearing; even winding And twisting with 'em, as if its Highest Good
Were in their Fellowship! Pall. If you have no more To Ask, or Hope for, hear what is Freely Offer'd to you. Your Lives in the first place Are granted you; In the next your Fortunes, Honours (in a word) whatever with Justice You can call yours. Why look you Wildlie at this Gift Of Grace? It is no Wonder to the Giver Of it, nor them which live about him, though The Consequence may seem Dangerous. 'I were not worthie the High Name of his Vertue, If either the Perill or Offence were Lesse. And 'tis but a Mean Expression of his Goodnesse, to say, His Enemies were Courted To Live by him. But presentlie you'l think, This Offer'd Mercie is not to Save you, But to Deferre your Death. A Vain Thought. When can it be done more Justlie? Or more Safely? Y'are as farre from those to Pittie you, As to Help you: None but Himself has any Care Of you. 'Tis true, there is a Lady that had A share in you, but Injuriously You threw her off; nor can you claim an Interest, When you have Neglected Her in all her Miseries: Not in your Flight, your Articles, no not In your Thoughts provided for Her. And had She not fallen into the Hands of Enemies, That were Servants too to Honour, You had Thrown away a Jewel that had a First Esteem Even among the Gods. Time. O Sir, you have undermin'd My pride, and remov'd me from that Advantage-Ground I stood on, to my Own Low Pitch. These your Last Words come Near unto me, and make me, With Reverence, believe all that you have spoken. Your Vertues before did onely stir my Hate And Envie; but this Deed has taught me Admire you. Nor can I doubt, there is a want of any Honour, When you have shewn such Noble Care, in preserving A Distressed Virgin, whom I durst not think of, Least I should think too of Dishonour. Pall. Sir, keep your Transportation to your self. We doe not think Our Selves such High Deservers, In doing that which Barbarous People Would have done. They which would have burnt the Temples, Would have Knelt to Her; and what Duties their Want of Faith deni'd unto the Altars, So Visible an Image of the Deitie Would have call'd from 'em! Think you, we could desire To save such Enemies as you, and not Adore an Enemie of Her Vertues? Time. Give me not Scorn, and Honour in the same breath. You cannot so Nicelie, so Abstractedlie, Conferre a Benefit on the Unfortunate Eudora, but it will Reflect on me. Your Words besides, with a kind of God-like Power, have remov'd, not onely my Despaires And troubles; but like Heavens Lightning, shot into My Soul, has torn me from my self; burnt and Consum'd all that was Vitious and Corrupt Within me. Be not then Unlike the Powers You have yet resembl'd, to scorn the Person That your Grace Converted. Pall. All Vertues, crown'd With Happinesse, flourish in Timeus.
I meet you to the fullest of your Wishes. And believe, as my Bodie is now One They imbrace. With yours, my Soul is no lesse joyn'd. I perfectlie Forgive, whatever you Have done to me: Forget, what I have done To You. Next, believe with This, I throw away All Danger that does threaten you. In the last place, He casts away the poyson. Exeunt all but Comastes. Follow me whether I shall Lead you. Com. I breath, am warm, alive all over; feel, smell, hear (but when I look on He points to the Cup that had the poyson. Thee, I thank God) I taste not. I see too, and more particularlie, that 'tis not Death, but a Dream of Death one∣ly that hangs on me; Some ill Vapours of the Spleen, bred from Noise of Warre, hearing of Murders, Varietie of Danger, and no Feasting. The King, my bountifull and loving Master, was kill'd suddainlie; his Son deserted by the Armie and the whole Kingdome, on the Newes, scap't hardiie with his Life, a few friends and followers to this Fort: where, with as much adoe, we shut our Selves in, and our Enemies out; But Honour, a subtiler and more pernicious Adversarie than all the rest, shuffled it self into the Hold with us, and has never ceas'd one minute since, in its Own Name, and the Name of Honestie, of the Condition we have Lost, and the Disgraces we were to expect, to present us with Halters, Daggers, Poyson, any thing that might give us (as she term'd it) a Noble End. I must confesse, I am not for these Melanchollie Things, my Ends have still lain otherwise. 'Tis true, I bear on me the Dignitie of a Lord. But how? As a Pedler does his pack, upon my Shoulders, not in my Heart. And what is Honour at the best? But a bare Name onely; and not alwayes so much to me: the Title was never given me Seriouslie, but by Rascals; with my Fellow Peeres (if I pleas'd 'em in the Feast) I was my Lord Comastes, If not, Comastes-with-my-face-full-of-Sauce, and my Locks of Liquour, my hair and beard dropping like a Wine-presse, as if my being there were not to Drink the Wine, but Make it. But again, I have a Lordship in Land to loose, as well as Title. What then? shall I sell my Life for Dirt? My Soul for a few Acres? I'le batter the World too for a Grave, and main∣tain't I make as Wise a Bargain. But say this Land be taken from me, pray how came I by it? Was it the Inheritance of my Noble Father, or the Purchase of my own Wit? Good Yeoman-of-the-Bottles Sleep in peace; your Sonnes Being was from you, but his Well-Being, and his Dignities, from his proper Vertues. Which as the Philosopher wisely observes, in no fortune leave the Owner. And while the Sciences of Eating, Drink∣ing, Fooling, and the like, are held in Estimation, I cannot want a Lordship. Fare∣well therefore all Dreames and Meditations of the Other World, my Making was for this; your Elizium with Sweet Shades, and purling Streames, does not one whit entice me, for when they have said all they can, 'tis still to be Dead, to be there. And having happilie broken from the Companie of my Noble Associates, I'le yoak no more with 'em, till I see what becomes of their Magnanimities: but thus as I am, alone, with warie steps I'le march unto the New Court; and doe not Despair, though the King and State be Chang'd, to continue still the same Man. Exit Comastes. Enter Pallantus, Timeus, Polyander, and Menetius. Pall. My Lord, I beseech you attend here Till I give notice of your Coming. Pallantus goes out, and returnes presently again, and holds up the Hanging for Eudora, who with transportation meets her Brother, after whose first Encounter Pallantus withdrawes. Eud. Oh! Is it Reall, that my Armes imbrace? Or do they Idlie thus infould a Shaddow? Liv'st thou Timeus? Or are we Dead together? And on the Elizeum Banks enjoy this Meeting. Say, and confirm me. For so lost In Miserie, so weaken'd and perturbed With Grief are my best Faculties, that what I doe, and what I see, I Know not.
Time. Dearest Eudora, I excuse thy Weaknesse; Nor is't a Wonder, if thy Softer Nature Feel these Impressions of a Potent Sorrow; When the like Passion disorders even The Strongest of my Powers, and leaves me broken With as great Distemper. O my Eudora, Well may we rave of Shades below, and An Hereafter-Being, when we have latelie Suffer'd such a Change, as to a Death May well be Equall'd. Turn, and cast thy Eye Upon these Miserable Reliques of our Former Fortunes. Eud. Yet we doe Live, my Lords, She turnes to these that came with Timeus. If they doe Live, that have a Doubtfull Death Still hanging o're 'em. But my Timeus, I am o'rewhelm'd with Griefes, th'are parted to me By an Unequall Hand: my Share of Common Losses Is the same with Yours; and then my Private Troubles Are no lesse than they. No sooner were the Transports o're I ow'd your Safetie, but Like The Pangs of Death these seized on my Soul. Time. What can thy Goodnesse suffer, that's set beyond The reach of all I can Imagine? End. Which way shall I begin? I dare not speak My Troubles; the beholding of thy present Evils, Forbids the Office of my Tongue. O my Timeus, thy Misfortunes are so great, That they render thee something Sacred To my Thoughts. And as with Religion We Impale that Oak, which by Joves Thunder Has been struck, to keep't hereafter from a Prophaner Wrong: So Thou, by thy Misfortunes Struck from Heaven, seem'st Consecrated and Exempted From all Violation of a Mortall Tongue. Yet look on This, and read thy Self, those Thoughts I dare not utter. And though it shew but One Small Line of that Vast Sceme of Crueltie, Design'd or Acted by thee, it may serve To bring the Rest into thy Mind. This Paper Was found in the Villaines Bosome, that should Have done the horrid Act, by Him that should Have suffer'd it. Time. Eudora, though on a Mind of Bloud and Guilt, this Paper, and thy Words Attending it, might rush with no lesse Horror, Than that Thunder thou now spok'st of: Yet on me, These Bolts and Flashes are like those Brute And Idle Ones, which dash 'gainst Rocks and Mountains Without harm. Know, that before these Wakenings Came from Thee, all Heavens Artillerie has been Empti'd on my Soul; and those Celestiall Fires Have wholly purg'd, nay calcin'd, and burnt up The Old Timeus. And what is seen remaining Of his Substance, is of a Holier And Diviner Nature; such as admits No Commerce with a Sin, unlesse it be, Like the Religious Magistrate, to Hate, And Punish it. Such as dares look on all His Vices past, nay, bear 'em purtrai'd, and Blazen'd in his Banner, as the Enemies, And Monsters, 'gainst which he is to wage A Trucelesse-Warre for ever. Eud. And when Timeus Shall begin his Race of Vertue, who is there To be found, that can Out-strip him, or bear up
A Pace that's Equall! O let me imbrace You again, my Brother! Twice Saved, twice Restor'd Unto me; and much Dearer in the Last Than First Gift of you. Before my Armes Infolded but my Comfort, but now they Contain, and hold their Wonder! And know Timeus, These Vertues Heaven has sent thee, are in no Idle Uselesse Season given thee, but bestow'd With as much Providence as Bountie; when An Occasion Great and High Calls on 'em. Say then, my Brave and Vertuous Brother, Say, From thy New and Changed Soul within thee, That Radiant, and yet Sparkling Vertue, From Heaven so Late descended, What Course Does Honour point forth unto our present Fortunes. What does its Sacred Lawes exact And Command from us. Take thus from me the State Ofour Condition. On the One Side, Our Lives Are granted by our Enemies, and not Onely so, but we are Highly Courted To accept 'em, have all the Flatteries And Temptations, can make us Love them, Even Obtruded on us. On the Other, We have lost a Father, nay more, a Crown, They say, Usurpt. This Mysterie you better know Than I. Yet still Consider (for 'twill no lesse Concern our Honoure to weigh this thing) Whether a False and Usurpt Power (being still The Soveraign and Highest) doe not Create Something of a True and Reall Greatnesse In the Persons that have borne it, which forbids'em To Act a Second, and a Lower Part, on this Worlds Stage. And if in this Scrutinie, the Verdict Be cast against our Lives, Know 'tis not In Our Enemies powers to give us that, Which Dutie, our Higher Master, Commands us To throw from us; but either thou art Oblig'd To shew me the Way to Death; or 'tis expected, That thou Learn it from me. Time. O Eudora, Thou Wonder of Vertue, thou Miracle Of Honour! How sordid Low, how despicablie Poor is all the World beside thee! What Noble Heights thy Soul does mount to, no lesse above The Following, than President of others! And shall I presume to Judge those Daz'ling-Flights, Which no Eye lesse Heavenlie than thine Own Can reach to? Shall Timeus? A Trewant? A Novice in the School of Vertue? A Proficient but of Yesterday? No. Eudora, pronounce boldlie what thy Soul Shall dictate, as to an Oracle I will submit, But never teach thy Vertue. If the Question Thou hast put be Hard, I dare not speak in't, 'Tis Eudoras Life: if it be Easie, 'Twas yet her finding, and poorlie I will not Rob her of the Glory. Eud. Alas, alas, How farre I am mistaken! Thou giv'st me Glory, And I need thy Pittie. Thus Children have a Sword Put in their Hand, when both their Hand and Sword Need holding by another. If I had Vanitie to take unto my Self the Powers Thou speak'st of; yet at this time,
Like a Phisitian that's himself Distemper'd, My Learning and Experience serve me Nothing. No Timeus, my Reason's darken'd, The Clouds of Discontent obscure my soul, And in the Mazes of a troubled Mind I wander without a Cleu to guide me. Death with his Horrors, and Dismay laid-by, Drest in a Form bewitching, and Uncommon, And waited on by Crowds of Sweets, and Pleasures, (As if with Love again he had chang'd his Arrows) Most powerfully Charmes and calls me to Him! One while presents before me, the Famed Examples Of the Romane Fortitude, th' exalted Glories of those Ancient Worthies, that preferr'd A Noble Death, before a Life of Pleasure, And of Shame. And then pursues this Theam Of Shame, though all those steps of low Contempt; And Scorn, I open'd to you at the first, Or the Worlds Censure can be thought to blast The Gallant by. Life on the Other side, With a Deportment Sad, and Face Austere, Without all dress, or shew of Blandishment, But with a kind of Aweful, and Divine Authority, forbids me hear th' Allurements Sung by Death; tells me, though the Notes be Sweet, Th'are most Pernicious, and that a Syrene Sings 'em; that the VVorlds Opinions, as her Pleasures, are False and Impious, and by The Vertuous both should be contemn'd, Opinions In Truth, and not in Number, take their VVeight. Now well I understand, when Both have Pleaded thus, 'Tis neither Life, nor Death, the Noble should Desire, but Duty. The One, and Other, Ought to be held Indifferent: and this Third Alone with Passion be pursu'd. But now In which of these two Our Present Duty lies, There stands the Scruple I am troubled with, There stands the Doubt I would have Solv'd. For when I dare meet Death in any Form, I would not Have it said Eudora forfeited the Belief, Of having a Diviner soul, while through Fear, Like a Plant or Vegetable, she clove To a Being on this Earth. Nor yet, when I have Greatnesse enough to look on Life, In the most Frowning and Unpleasing Aspect, That unequall to my Miseries, Out-fac'd With Troubles, I poorly fled my Station In this World, and Crept into the Calm of Death To seek my Peace. Like Boasters thus playing The Coward under a Masque of Vallour. Time. Eudora, this part of your Philosophy, That Life and Death ought neither to be Consider'd, But as they may Conduce unto our Vertue, None more firmly does imbrace than I. Nor in the Dayes my Soul was tainted with The Blackest Crimes, was an Unmanly Fear, Ere part of that my Guilt. And yet Eudora, I must say, I see no reason, more than The Scruple, the Ruputation of thy Question Put into me, why the Prolonging of Our Lives should be Dishonourable to Either of Us. And if it be Duty that calls us
To our Death, it will not be hard to shew Where that Duty is set down. If the Worlds Opinion onely, what that Opinion is, Thou hast already spoken. Thy words import Beside, that the Discontented, Passionate, Vain-glorious, obtain not, by their Contempt Of Life, the Honours of a Noble Death: But Those alone, who have no Other Way, To save their Vertue. So that, 'twas not Rome' Cato, or her Portia which deserv'd this Crown; But her Curtius,, her Regulus, her Decius. And if any do Object, that the first Of these, were also Highly Vertuous, I readily confess it: but all that The Vertuous do, is not alwaies Vertuous. This is an Immunity of the Gods, And not of Good-Men. And though One Comm on Glory belong'd unto the Lives of Both Of these, the Glory of their Deaths was farre Unequal. The One sought Themselves, the Other Sought their Duty To bring all this home to Thee Eudora, Remember that thy Vertue's Courted, thy Honour's safe, no way Assaulted. But ador'd. And then for Thee to think of Death, Is Idle, Vain, or Scrupulous; Error, And not Vertue; Superstition, and not Enter Pallantus. Duty, nay worse, 'tis Dire and Impious; Something that might Sute perhaps, with the Foul Deeds Of Timeus former Life, but not with The Fairer Actions of Eudora. Pall. How like a Skie troubled with Clouds and Meteors, That Heavenly face appears! The most Propicious Aspects from on High, shine on their present Councels. I fear some Deadly Maxime governs, And guides their Consultation. Eud. Timeus, This is the Time allow'd us to work out To Our selves, an Everlasting Honour. If we let-slip the Opportunity, W'are lost unto a Noble Name for ever. Time. Eudora, there's little danger of an Error, Or Omission there, where neither Will, Nor want of Care betray'd the Business held In Consultation. Eud. For should we think To Reassume again hereafter, our Councell's now laid-by; Our Neglect at present, Would not be look'd on as an Error, but A most Wretched Poorness; and our best Pretences Be judg'd a pittiful afflicted Folly. Time. There is but one Particular I know Can hinder, in Eudora, the Choyce of Life, From being just, and truly Honourable. Eud. There spoke my Noble Brother! That, that particular Timeus! That Particular is Undoubtedly The thing we have so long been searching for, And never found till now. Time. 'Tis this Eudorn, That thou be well perswaded and assur'd, Of what thou put'st in Act: for the most Just And Lawful Action perform'd with Doubting, Becomes Unlawful. Eud. Timeus, I thank you, For your Reproof; I shall believe it seasonably Given me. It has awak'd me, and no longer Will I hover in a Doubtful Mind; 'Tis true,
This sence you have delivered, coming to me From another Hand, I held suspected; Thought it not safe, too hastily to Credit it, From you: But seeing you do not onely Affirm, But Abide and stand in this your Sentence: I likewise as an Undoubted Truth, will Accept, and rest upon it.—Say now Timeus, Do you know yond Person, that did Conduct you To this place? Time. Know him, Eudora! Yes, When he wander'd in Remotest Nations, My Fears held Intelligence on his Motions; When first he set his Foot within this Land, My Spirit, by a kind of Antipathy, Did feel it. In his Disguise I knew him. There is no Place, or Shape he can be Hid in, But my Soul would find him. He was the Meteor first, That hung with Direful Threats ore my Impiety. But since the Auspicious Star, that lead me, Both to Honour, and to Life. 'Tis the Valiant, Vertuous, and Heroick Prince Pallantus! Eud. My Obligations are no less to him, Than yours. Too long we do neglect him, And having once resolv'd to accept of Life, We ought to acknowledge it to Him that Gave it us. Let us joyn our Thanks together. Here they both go to Pallantus, who sees them not, till Eudora begins to speak, but then as one surprized he turns to them. Eud. My Lord—we come to acknowledge our Lives, To have been your Gift, and in no Common way Bestow'd upon us. Mercy must be allow'd A share i'th' Act; but had not your Honour, And Prudence, wrought more Effectually, The Other Vertue had been Useless to us. As you are thé Greatest, Bravest, most Glorious Person of this your Age; may you be likewise seen, The most Fortunate, and most Happy. Pall. Eudora, like the Gods, when she Sayes happiness, She Gives it. But what thanks shall I, and all The World with me, return for the Unvaluable Benefit, she acknowledges Received, Enter Rodia. But is indeed Conferr'd on us, The Conservation Of her Life? Rod. Madam, the King's hard by, Coming, as 'tis said, with an intent To visit you. Eud. The King! Pall. Tis true Madam. I had it in command from him, to say, He was a Suter to you, to admit A Visit from him; Eud. What will you do, Timeus, With your self! Time. Not willingly meet him At this time. Pall. My Lord, you need not, you may Withdraw. I believe too, a fitter time Exeunt Timeus, Poly. Menetius. May be found to present you to him. Enter Cleander, Clearchus, leading Hianthe, Melissa, Aratus, Haimantus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus. Clean. Madam, fall not so low; too much already Euroda offers to kneel. We have Dejected you, and gladly would Descend our selves, to raise you Higher. Yet look on that Majesty the Gods have Enthron'd in you, your Matchless Vertues,
And Divine Perfections, and you will see Not onely there's none Above you, but none Can be found your Peers. Our Visit, is in wish To Comfort you; and we hope, while our Highest Vowes are such, you will not scorn the Offer, Though from your Enemies; your Enemies, By Fate, and Fortune Madam; by Design, And Will, your vow'd and perfect Servants. Eud. O Sir,. Permit me to throw my self before your Feet! It is not fit I stand an equal Height, With Majesty and Vertue, so much Above me. What hateful Name, and by the World abhorr'd, Is due to me, when you have call'd to Your self An Enemy? If you are One, 'tis to Your own security, in preferring thus Your Mercy, before your Peace. Y'ave given me, And my Brother Life, to bring your own in danger, And Remov'd our Grief, which may hereafter Cause it to your self. Sir, think me Unworthy, But not a Scorner, of these Favours. I know To weigh both my Losses, and Obligations To you. Clean. If you will make us happy, To partake hereafter our Joyes with us, With you we will observe your Dayes of Mourning. Count all your losses Ours; with most Obsequious Rites Adorn the Dead; remember, and lament him, As a common Parent. Hian. None, Madam, With so high a Confidence, can wish you Comfort, as my self; who in so long, and sad A Night of sorrow, knew none, but what you gave me. Be Favourable still to me, and grant me A time to pay 'em back; be favourable To the Age in the same Grant; your Name will bless Its Annals, while it has leave to boast, Not onely its own Vertues, but all the former Years Could justly Glory in. Clear. Fame, thou spok'st loudly Of these Ladies, and yet thy Voyce was narrow In their praise. Enter Comastes creeping behind the backs of the Company, who severally make their Addresses to Eudora. Com. I have Past hitherto, And perceive no great Alteration. I thought the subversion of a State, Would have chang'd the form o'th' Houses, and the Streets. It has not shifted a sute of Hangings here. Yonder's our princess too; I am among Friends. Now Fortune direct me, which is the King— The Least-Change that e,er I saw. Nay, then I perceive, I may e'en do what I list. Ara. My Lord Comastes! Faith this was kindly done, To make the King a Visit. Com. Your servant My Lord. I hope you have forgot the little Unkindness, which past betwixt Your Lordship, And my self, and will speak a Noble Word In my behalf unto the King. Ara. Ha, ha, ha, Would'st thou be Fool again? Com. No my Lord, You know I was never call'd so in the Last Raign. Ara. Ha, ha, ha, Why I tell thee, the King's too serious. He never Laughs, nor Smiles, but very seldom, And then 'tis still in Approbation,
Of something Excellent. He hates a Jest. Look, Twice h'as cast his Eye upon thee, and yet Keeps his Countenance: Despair of ever Pleasing him, There's no Buffoonrie can come from thee, So Ridiculous, as thy present Misery. Clean. My Lord—Who's that? Ara. One Sir that was Master Of the Dead King's Mirth, he never laught without His Allowance. Twas in's Power to have jested The best Head off in the Kingdome: Yet I think He was guilty of no worse Crime, than Lunary. Clean. What does he expect? Ara. To hold the same place Under you. Clear. Sir, we understand you, And your Desires. Go, leave the Court; be not Seen in't after this day, upon your Life. And look warily to your Actions, If you shall deserve the Lightest Punishment, The Heaviest shall fall on you. Ara. Stay my Lord— Sir, you have Doom'd him, as if you had been Witness Of his Follies, and were there not hopes he might Redeem the Life he has so ill spent, A weightier judgement were deserv'd by him. Sir, I beseech you let me intreat for him, He's yet Young, and if he have Leave, may be Vertuous Continue Sir, as you have begun, To Change the Men, and not Destroy 'em. He thrust himself with confidence on your Mercy,' Let it not be said, that that was a Snare to any. Besides, Sir, you have made this Place a Sanctuary, To All that can claim an Interest In that Excellent Lady. Clean. My Lord, I would Be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recal What I have said, and wish to see those Vertues, We hope in you, Com. I'll not despair Sir, To be Master of 'em, 'Twas the desire Of Favour with my King, that made me what I was before, and shame now to Remember. But seeing I am to please another way, And make Vertue my Endeavour, Unwearied In those Rougher Waies I'll toyl to gain your Smiles. He kisses the Kings hand: Clean. My Lord, having weighed the Necessity Of your Voyage, I shall not with unseasonable Complements importune your stay, but rather Give my best Assistance both to make it Prosperous, and your Return more speedy. We have ordered a Fleet, my Lord, to attend On your Designs, not so much inferior In Number of Men and Vessels to your own. Clear Sir, too profusely you bestow these large Benefits upon me, without naming all Conditions, or share of Venture with me. Clean. Conditions, my Lord? Hereafter Ages, That have forgot our Obligations, May make Articles between our Nations, But ours must ne'er know any; we cannot Be Losers by you, from whom we have received All that we possess. Pall. My Lord, I am An humble Sutor (if I may obtain His Majesties leave) to be allow'd a place In this your Voyage. The Kingdom sends forth none More useless to it, than my self; none that With more reason seeks the Tumults of a War, To cure the Troubles of an unquiet Mind.
Clean. My Lord, you hold the palm out to me, In this offer of your Company. Victory, I know, will follow, which way so e'er you Turn you. I shall be proud to serve my self Under so Brave a Conduct. Clean. This Accession Likewise, my Lord, I shall be willing to grant Unto your Voyage; but still that your Return May be more Speedie. Yet I hope we have A Gage in this Lady more powerfull than All Others, One that will put an Edge unto Your Sword, and Sailes unto you Vessels. Clear. Sir, in Her Name alone I doe pursue This Voyage, and in Her Name alone, Shall hope a prosperous and speedie Issue. Pall. Madam, though a Hard Fate, or Fortune no lesse Cruell, has set me for ever at a Hated Distance to you. Yet another power, No whit Inferior to the Former, Commands me, To direct all my Actions to your Service. And however Unaccepted, nay Unknown, To you, I pay these Devotions, yet Constantlie to pay them still. In Obedience To this Power I have engag'd my self unto This present Voyage; an Undertaking To me, without Design, without all Fruit: But either, as I hope, by some Fam'd Action To adde a Glory more unto your Name, Or by my Seasonable Destruction, For ever to remove a Hated Object From your Sight. Eud. My Lord, while you strive to conferre More Glory on me than I dare Assume, You take some from me, which I may justly Claim; And Blast my Honour, while you seek to Raise it. Wrongfullie you Charge both my Innocence And Clearnesse, when you say, I Hate you, Or can be pleas'd with your Destruction. I have alreadie Acknowledg'd the Highest Benefits receiv'd from you, offer'd my Vowes to Heaven In your behalf: and though, when these are once paid, They doe not there take End: Yet to repeat them Oft unto Your Self, would ill become Eudoras tongue, and lesse the greatnesse of Pallantus Eares. But if what's alredie past Be too little to assure you, your Ruine's No Part of my desires, by this Double Sute I shall seek to confirm you further. First, That you will be pleas'd to take my Brother This Voyage with you. And let this perswade you, I seek not your Destruction. Next, that you will Obtain me leave to retire from Court, to pay That Debt ofteares in quiet, I have so long Ow'd unto the Dead. And this no lesse ought To assure you, I cannot Hate that person, By whom I seek so farre to be Dispos'd of. Pall. Madam, you have given me a Happinesse, Which neither Envie, Malice, nor the worst Of Fortune can take from me. You have set me the Onely man above The Stroak of Fate. Whatever you desire, After your Own manner, and in your own Time, Will be permitted to you; and you may command Not onely for your self, but in the behalf
Of Others. And may, I hope, after these Dayes Of Mourning are expir'd, to see again That Joy return into your Face, which I Was never yet so bless'd as to behold? And shall in that Day a Servants Humblest Sute Take place; which now his High Respects forbid him, Even to Name to you? Eud. Now first, My Lord, I have seen a Weaknesse in you; but yet I shall thus farre Remember you. That the Gallant Ask not their Fortunes, but they Make 'em. A more Direct Answer I must not give you. And if it appear hard to you, that I refuse To Prophesie in that, I may seem so well To Know my Resolutions; ask the same Question Of those that have been held the most Allowable, And wise Diviners in your present Case, Your Vertue, Honour, Obligations to me; And hear what they will say. Perhaps they'l Doubt, Or Hide their Skill; if they doe, Excuse a Virgins Silence, when such bolder Oracles make no Reply. Pall. Madam, let me kisse your hand—I beg your pardon. No further shall I provoke you with my Disorder'd Passion, though I know, nothing But my Wonder can be encreas'd by your Replies. Your Wisdome, Honour, Beauty, All Incomparable, shall be the Incitements Of my Actions unto Glory, in hope They may hereafter prove their Crown and Ornament. In the mean time I shall seek to know no other thing But this, How most Worthilie I may approve My Self your Servant. Clean. And Madam Cleander when he speaks, takes Eudora in one hand, and Pal∣lantus in the other. If favourablie you shall admit him In that qualitie, we All will glory To wear the same Title. And think not, that A Single Person Courts you, but in a Single Person, th' Interest of the Kingdome. Even thus Divided I acknowledge Yee Both To be the Chiefest Glory of your Country, But when Yee shall be joyn'd Yee'l adde yet more Unto her Happinesse, and be no lesse Her Peace, and her Securitie. But I Anticipate the Blessings of another Day, When my Dutie commands me to give thankes For those I have receiv'd on this. And hitherto Our Kingdome, hath been like the Kingdome of The Gods, Felicitie has succeeded To Felicitie, and Joyes have Crowned Joyes. And should this Day Conclude what it hath Begun, I have yet reign'd a Perfect Reign; having Beheld in Few Houres, the Strange and Various Changes of an Age. Exeunt Omnes. This Play being Design'd for an etertainment of the King and Queen at York-House, at the Nuptials of the Ladie Mary Villers, and the Lord Charles Herbert, had Scenes fitted to evety Passage of it throughout, and the last in this place was a Funerall Pile, bearing on the top the body of the Dead Tyrant, and set out with all the Pomp the Ancients us'd in those Ceremonies. This Seene consisted onely of Musick and shew; on the one side of the Pile stands a Consort of Musitians, representing the Priests of the Land, and on the other side of it another, representing the People.
People. Sacred Peans to Mars sing, Notes of Triumph, not of Woe, Hence your Ewe and Cipresse fling, Who adornes a Trophy so? These are the Spoyles of our Great Enemy, Hang Garlands on them of the Lawrell Tree. 1. Priest. Hence impure and bloudy Voyce, Far be from our Mysteries, Bidentals are Joves proper Choyce, Holier than the Sacrifice, Each Unskilfull Hand and Rude, At his Alter dares obtrude. Here all the Principall Persons of the Play enter in Mourning. 2. Priest. Touch not then with Lips prophane, What Heav'ns Fire hath purified, Teares have washt away his Stain, His Black Deeds his Bloud hath died. He for his Sinnes hath paid, with Death and Sorrow, His Credit's more that Payes, than doth not Borrow. Chor. He for his Sinnes hath paid, with Death and Sorrow. His Credit's more, &c. People. Yet still you must allow a Fault. And that by Death his Body ought To Expiate Offences Higher, Then purge if Sulphur, Salt, and Fire. Least your too partiall Favour this way bent, Excuse the Ill, and Blame the Innocent. Chor. Least your too partiall Favour this way bent, Excuse the Ill, &c. About the middle of the last Stanzo, Timeus puts a lighted Torch to the bottome of the Pile which gives fire to some Perfumes laid there on purpose; the which wraps the Pile in smoak, and smells ore all the Roome. At the End of the Song the Curtain falls, and shuts both the Scene and Actors from the Beholders Sight. FINIS. Mid-night and Daily THOUGHTS
To a careless Sinner. THou dost not, sure, believe that thou shalt die, Or never think'st upon it seriously; Because thou liv'st as if thou didst disdain, After this life, ever to rise again: Else thou wouldst set a higher price upon The Glories of thy Resurrection: For 'tis not possible a Man of sense Can always hold so ill intelligence With Heaven, as not to wish, or not to fear, He never may, or never would come there. Some Caveats. WHen petty Pleasures are procur'd with Gold, When youth is gone, and we decrpeid old, There's no more Gusto than a Tale twice told. The greatest Monarchs, while they flourished, Were honour'd and ador'd; but being dead, Were soon forgot, and only pitied. So that whatever Marble Tombs pretend, All their gay glories never can defend Their pamper'd bodies from the Beggar's end. Caesar and Alexander both became The highest splendor of a glorious Name; And yet in some things both deserved blame. So that when Men have all the World subdu'd, They may themselves, and all their Fame delude, Unless they do in Piety conclude.
Those mighty Hero's car'd not to be good, (But brave) because they never understood The sacred Sanction of our Saviour's Blood. But those who saw the Miracles he did, And heard how boldly he their Crimes forbid, Are justly scourg'd, instead of being chid. What's our due then, who do believe, yet run The course which that accursed Crew begun, To slight God, and re-crucifie his Son? Which shews Men want some Caveats to restrain The idle Fancies of a busie Brain, That frequent losses bring, instead of gain. These serious Thoughts are Caveats to despise Such Crimes, as from our idle hours may rise, And captivate our Senses in disguise. Till by a power divine we can obtain Such bright, serener joys, as will sustain Our Souls, and to eternity remain. For we are born to learn, and to express, By daily actions, what we do profess To purchase everlasting happiness.
On Poverty. PUre honest Poverty in former times, Was no disgrace; but now our latter Crimes Have introduc'd new kinds of punishments, To expiate our sins, for old Contempts In luxury, and such profuse expence, That we are now chastiz'd for that offence, With Penury, to make us own our shame, And free all present accidents from blame: Which from God's mercy now to us is sent, To make our most obdurate hearts repent. And yet there may such poverty proceed From wicked Men, whose malice have decreed Our ruine, to get wealth for their support, In spight of right, or their damnation for't. And such absurd, base scandals do invent, That no man's innocence can e'er prevent. From such Devils, good Lord, deliver me, As hate all those, who truly worship thee; And with profound repentance do submit To all the judgments that our God thinks fit; And make the poverty I now endure, For all excesses past a perfect cure.
On Pride. OF all the Vanities I know, 'tis Pride, Which all the World most justly may deride, That like an Ass, with golden Trappings dress'd, Thinks himself 'bove all other Beasts the best; And when he brays, does all that hear him fright, Mistaking their amazement for delight; Like gilded Fools, that only learn of late To strut, and make loud noise when they do prate; For Pride did ne'er the greatest man adorn, Nor free him from God's hate, and wise Men's scorn. Satan for Pride, and for Ambition fell, With his accursed Crew, from Heav'n to Hell. On Pride's Kindred. PRide's next of kin, are such as do despise Their Neighbours, for the Motes in their dark Eyes; Who first their own Beams should remove, then learn: That Rule, by which they may such Motes discern, And by this caution constantly prevent Such rash Censures, that do raise discontent Between good Friends, who seldom will endure A blind Man's Precepts, till himself he cure.
Septemb. 3. 1693. On this Day's Sacrament received. LORD, I Did believe, but not such joy conceive As since I did thy Sacrament receive, To ratifie thy mercy, and my zeal, By adding of thy Holy Spirit's Seal Upon my heart, to manifest thy love, And all my doubts and fears by faith remove, Which made me shrink from death; but now my voice Shall Hallelujah's sing, and Soul rejoice, To celebrate this Victory obtain'd O'er all my sins, by thy bless'd Conduct gain'd. How great then is my Obligation grown, If thou wilt this day my Election own, By adding joys on joys, and grace on grace, Till I in glory come to see thy face! And now adore and worship thy great Name, With warm addresses from this sacred flame.
On Adoption. I Have read, that he who lives in a constant, uni∣form Obedience to the Gospel, and performs the Conditions required in it, departs sincerely from iniquity, and shuts up the ways that lead him into temptation, may give himself as strong and comfortable an assurance, that he is an adopted Child of God, as if a voice from the Clouds should tell him so; and is a good argument for frequent Medita∣tions. How to know when our Sins are forgiven. IT has been asked, How a Soul may know when her Sins are forgiven? and answered thus: When she finds the same affection to God, with his that said, I hate iniquity, and all false ways I utterly abhorr. Yet David, who said so, did die, and so must we. Tho' our Souls may, by the same grace, become of the same temper with his, and our sins be forgiven too; yet we may consider how few Men do slip out of this World into eternity, with a joyful hear∣ty delight to be with God (through divine Love) which is the highest perfection of an holy life; and is our greatest assurance to manifest our sins for∣given, when our Souls are by faith so fixed on God, as to know no joy so great as such spiritual Com∣forts do raise, when we desire to be in Heaven; which taught David to hate iniquity, and to abhorr all false ways; and so reduced him from all his sins, to become a man after God's own Heart.
On Reconciliation before we die. IF we fully consider our manifold sins, and the horrid Punishment due unto us for them, if not forgiven before we die, 'twill make us tremble at the approach of Death. But if we do believe in Christ's plenteous Redemption, with GOD's immense Mercy to deliver us from Hell's eternal Torments, and exalt us unto Heaven's eternal Joy and Glory; it may be justly said, Happy is that Man who can obtain such a Reconciliation with GOD before he die (as daily to delight in the Meditation of a sudden Death, with inward assu∣rance of his eternal Bliss the moment he expires) which is the highest Exaltation of Joy on Earth, and will be the greatest Comfort at the hour of Death; and ought to be the chief Business of all Men to live and die so, who do march every mo∣ment, from our Cradles, dying, towards our Graves.
On Heavenly Joy. WHate'er we do on Earth, we all pretend Heaven is our Home, Heaven is our Journey's end. That's true Seraphick Joy, when we do find Such elevated Bliss, as fills the Mind With high transports of God's celestial Throne, And all our meaner Objects we disown: Yet sometimes spoil our bless'd angelick rest, To rowl on Roses, when on Thorns is best, Vainly thinking some diviner Grace May smooth afflictions with a smiling face; When sighs and tears (if they come not too late) More surely can our heavenly Joys create. When God observes our Zeal to do our best To please, we shall assuredly be bless'd; And may expect to find more Penitents Encircling of God's Throne, than Innocents: Which shews sincere Repentance surely can, With a fix'd Faith, restore relapsed Man. Thus may our high-rais'd, warm addresses prove Bright Ecstasies of the divinest Love. Then will our Souls from dross be clean refin'd, And by our sacred Chymist be calcin'd, Fit for a Choir of Angels to attend Such Saints, and sing them to their Journey's end.
On taking heed of all our Ways. WHen God reduces Sinners, to take heed Of all their ways, in thought, in word and deed, Repentance then will be of little use, When all our actions will need no excuse: We shall the World subdue, and stoutly stand In full obedience unto God's Command. And then will Death in glorious Robes descend To guide, not fright us, at our Journey's end. So that if we take heed in all our ways, We shall the Devil defeat, and wear the Bays.
To a Friend. My dear Friend, I Have read in a divine Author, That if God be with us, he will make us see that he is with us; and will not depart from our sight, until he has brought us never to depart out of his. Which is a Lesson of high concern to Men in this World; for Thus to enjoy God here, is to be in Heaven before we die. When our Souls are thus transported with a continual divine Conversation with Almigh∣ty God, we may taste and relish his celestial Joys to some degree, so as to envite us to value his spi∣ritual Comforts above all carnal Fruitions. So that our great Business is to improve this Blessing to the highest reach of humane Fancy, by a daily practice of holy Meditations, to contemplate and observe how God doth infuse this joyful enjoying of Him into our Souls, by the secret working of the Holy Ghost; when we set our selves with zea∣lous integrity to find him there, to converse with us on this great lesson of his immense Mercy, with our humble prayers to be enlightned from above, to participate of such angelical Delights, as far as our frail Nature will admit of; which by frequent use, will bring us to such an habit of holy living, that God will manifest his presence ever with us, by an inward Felicity of divine Comforts, to such an assurance of our Election unto eternal Bliss, as is ineffable to be described: So that when we raise our Thoughts with a divine Desire, to know as much of God as we can know, and of his being with us, he will add of his Grace to enlarge our Capacities to
such heavenly Trances in Devotion, that we shall be with him, and he with us, as we do wish, with such a joy as will dread all diverting Occasions that shall obstruct those Emanations of his holy Spirit working in us. And thus if we do entertain our selves by such frequent addresses to find God, he will daily meet, and ever dwell with us, if we unfelgnedly desire to dwell with him; and will give us such a glimpse of his eternal Bliss, as may fix our hearts on Heaven, and make us live every moment in a joyful Expectati∣on of Death's quickest Summons thither; and by this frequent entertainment of thy Soul with God, Thou, my Friend, wilt find such a communication with God on Earth, to be the highest Perfection of Piety, and a felicity much more delightful than all other Diversions, which can never reach such Se∣raphick Joys, as I wish to thee my Friend.
On the Fear of Death. IF we fully consider our manifold Sins, and the horrid Judgment due unto us for them, it may well be said, Happy is that Man who can obtain such a Reconciliation with God before he die, as daily to delight in the meditation of a sudden death, with inward assurance of his eternal Bliss the mo∣ment that he expires. Because all our Ideas of the divine Felicities above, do seldom invite Men to welcome Death with cheerful Hearts: Our fears are so much stronger than our Faith, that too ma∣ny Men do rather think, than find they do believe that Christ's plenteous Redemption will cancel all their Crimes, and bring them into Heaven; and therefore dare not really rejoyce to look on death; but start back from such angelick Happiness, as he brings good Men to participate of, in God's eter∣nal Glory; which natural infirmity of doubting, can only, by an illustrious Faith, be removed; and that Faith, by frequent Prayers, be obtained. Then, thus to live, and so to die, will make us live and die in great tranquility, though not to reach St. Stephen's Faith, who saw Heaven open to him; yet to so great a degree of divine Raptures in Devotion, as to be filled with elevations of an inward assurance of our Election, which must come from God, when the Soul is in such a blessed Trance of celestial De∣light, that is ineffable to be described. How near such joy is to the joy we read of in Paradise; when fervent Zeal is by a lively Faith so raised, and sixed in God by frequent Meditations, it is a wonder that such Men can fear to die, or doubt togo to God with cheerful Hearts, when thus invited, and thus led by his holy Spirit, with such bright illuminations of surprizing joys, while those divine Flames last,
as cannot be related. When Men's hearts are war∣med with such Seraphick high Transports of Love and Mercy from Almighty God, to give true Peni∣tents some taste of their eternal Glory; that be∣ing thus enlightned, they may not fear to die; but rather welcome death, who comes to carry them to Heaven, which is the highest Exaltation of the Soul's joy, so to delight in God, that the expectation of Heaven may be more pleasant, than all the momentary Fruitions of this World are, compared unto a blessed incomprehensible Eter∣nity, Which neither Wit nor Fancy can express, When multiplying numbers make it less; When neither first nor last can e'er be known Points so far distant, yet so join'd in one, That the eternal Circle shews us none, But is a secret known to God alone. 'Tis such a sacred Riddle, so profound, That humane Wisdom never can expound; But leaves us still to wonder and adore, What will be after, and what was before. On the Power of Faith. THough Men by Nature born to fear, and to avoid what may seem hurtful, yet that fear by Grace and Faith may be converted into divine Valour of the highest kind, as is evident by the Three Children in the fiery Furnace, and by Daniel in the Lion's Den; which with other the like Ex∣amples, should invite such Men as trust in God, not to fear what he only can prevent, if he thinks fit; and though a fearful Man cannot remove a Mole-hill for want of Faith, much less Mountains; how little Faith then have we, when the noise on∣ly of Ill News does affright our unsetled Souls
with dismal apprehensions of what may never hap∣pen more than the ill event brings with it, if it do, unto such pious men as live prepar'd to bear af∣flictions for few moments here, with faithful, joy∣ful Thoughts of their eternal Happiness in Hea∣ven. So that we see the Power of Faith will re∣move the greatest terrour, and work Miracles, when Men dare trust in God. Lord, give me grace to live, as I do write, And as thy holy Spirit shall indite, To manifest thy mighty Mercy shown To such a Reprobate as must own. Christ's Doctrine to suffer. CHrist's Doctrine is with patience to inure Our selves to suffer, what he did endure On Earth; from that malicious, cursed Crew, Who scorn'd his Miracles, and boldly slew Their bless'd Messiah, who did then submit To die, because his Father did think fit, That we, redeemed by his precious Blood, Might trust in him, who dy'd to do us good; And now may sighing sing, and weeping pray Our death may prove our highest Holy-day, When we with Christ in Paradise appear, And shine amongst those blessed Angels there. On the Power of Love to God. TO love and fear God, is what every good Chri∣stian doth own, and what most Men think they do; but very few, I fear, do understand what it is to love and fear Him as we ought, with all our Heart, Soul, and Mind, above all other Objects whatever; which is a Lesson of great use to bring Men to Heaven; who know that we are dying eve∣ry
moment that we live, and cannot wish more pleasure here, than we shall find by serving God thus: For those who can love him with all their Heart, and Mind, will worship, and adore him with the same Zeal, and will obey, praise, thank, pray, and trust in him with the like fervent affection, in all their divine addresses, with their utmost endea∣vours to be with him in Heaven; which God never will reject; nor can eternal Bliss be purchased at a lower rate of Love. Thus God exposes Heaven, to entice Good Men, to purchase at the Market-price; When Love, with all its Perquisites, comply, To six a blessed Immortality On such exalted Souls, as take delight To mediate on his beatick sight. When their enlightned Faith does bring them there, (Enrich'd with love) they'll bid adieu to fear, And leave no arguments to justifie Such timorous Men, as dare not think to die; Though their eternal joy will then be such, That none will have too little, or too much. And those who truly love, will surely find Their happiness by God is predesign'd, Who sees the heart and thoughts of every Man, That loves and serves him to the best they can. On Faith. WHen Faith grows strong, our Fancies will soar high, To search the secrets of Eternity; Which to our Souls are of so near concern, That no man can a greater Lesson Learn, Nor have a more serene, celestial Bliss, Than he'll enjoy, by practising of this
Great step, which by degrees will lead him on To the sacred Seat of his Adoption, Where Faith 'bove all the Gifts of Grace will shine, With Love in Bliss, and Glory most divine. On God's Mercy. OUr God from us his Glory keeps conceal'd, Because it would destroy us, if reveal'd: His Essence we can never understand; 'Tis well if we obey his just Command; For God to mortal Man will never teach Such great Secrets; because what we can reach, By Nature cloys, as soon as had or known: He therefore lets us live by Faith alone; Still subject to so many hopes and fears, That our prime Joys are damp'd by frequent tears, Which daily do our sorrows multiply, Until death comes, to tell us we must die; The only remedy ordain'd to cure All sorts of evils that we here endure. Yet God in mercy makes amends at last, To free us from all miseries are past, By raising them to bliss, who do their best To gain a share in his eternal rest; Which belt in God's esteem is to do all Was done by bless'd St. Stephen and St. Paul. On true Valour. HAppy are they, who in these latter days, Are fill'd with love, with gratitude and praise To God, whose joyful Souls do ever fly With highest thoughts of their Eternity; And by the actions of their lives declare, That Faith in Christ, has conquer'd their despair, For all past Crimes; and now with Death has made Strict Friendship, never more to be afraid
Of his most sick alarms, in disguise, Nor of his quickest Summons by surprize. And thus the greatest Cowards in the Land, For Valour may in competition stand, With any Hero's of the former age, Or those who now in a just cause engage, When Courage is a Vertue to be brave, And sets a Crown on such a Soldier's grave. On Relapsed Man in Paradise. WHen Youth with strength, wealth, and beauty flourish, Some short joys our wanton hearts may nourish; But when old age is much decrepid grown, We ought with sighs and tears great Sorrows own, For idle hours that we have vainly spent, Without the sense of shame or punishment; And if we die in that unhappy state, All hopes of mercy then will come too late; So that if age revive, and propagate Past sins, till they do greater Crimes create, 'Twill turn old Age's Blessings into hate. Then let no mortal man presume to think He cannot see, when he is pleas'd to wink; For no Man yet was ever such a Sot, That Age his former Crimes had so forgot, That on his Crutches thinks 'tis boldly brave, Loaden with Crimes to creep into the Grave. Much worse than Youth, when cross'd in his desire, In a mad fit, dares leap into the fire: Which shows, that all our Ages here, ne'er can Retrieve the Curses of relapsed Man; Till faith in Christ create a brighter flame, Impow'ring men to have a surer claim
To Heaven, at our blessed Saviour's cost, Than that, which Adam's disobedience lost. By which, we the intrinsick Treasure find Of future joys, in a Seraphick mind. On the Power of Faith. IF all Men did our Christian Graces understand, That like good Heraulds we might rank them according to their antiquity and merit, Faith may claim the highest dignity and place, as of just right, to be the most fixed foundation on the blessed Rock of our Salvation, which will, unmov'd, withstand the greatest Storms, when lofty Structures built on Sand, are, with Wind and Rain, soon tumbled down. And if we mind those mighty Miracles of the first Ages, they all relate unto Faith. Our blessed Sa∣viour also used to say, Whosoever believeth in me, shall never die: (Do you believe that I can do this? and then, Be it done according to your Faith) Thy Faith has made thee whole. The Woman with the bloody Issue, had no other application for her Cure but Faith. Without Faith, what signifies our Creed? And to what purpose did our Saviour bleed! If we all Doubting could from Faith divide, Pure Faith would then in greatest triumph ride. God grant all those the Power of Faith, that die In joyful Hopes of bless'd eternity; When their departing Souls will gladly own, By faith they rise from Dunghills to a Throne.
How to delight in GOD. THe Text says, Delight in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire: And no doubt but if we delight in him, with the highest faculty of our Souls (above all carnal appetites) with contemplati∣on of his glorious Essence and Attributes, in frequent fervent Prayers, with continual Gratitude for his daily Mercies. To adore him as we might, we should find such a rejoycing in God, to be the most voluptuous felicity that the heart of Man is capable of. But we mock our selves too often with a belief of this Felicity, by a careless searching short in our own Hearts, for a clear proof of the divine Perfe∣ction of this delighting in God; which every Man must find in himself; for no Man can correct the unseen Errours of his Neighbour's heart. So that it must be every Man's concern to examine his own Conscience, how much he rejoyces in God, more than in all worldly Fruitions; and according to his proportion in excelling therein, his peace of Con∣science will prove the more exalted joyful Feast, and will create in him the greatest hope of his heart's promised desire, and is the surest way to remove our natural Fear of Death, who only can lead us to glory; which all Men ought to think on, more than all other affairs in this World: For if we de∣light in God as we ought, We should the clear intrinsick value find, When Grace enriches a delighted Mind, That trusts in God; and by such bless'd converse, Excells all pleasures of the Universe, Which no Man's Faith nor Fancy can conceive, Till that delightful practice gives him leave:
Then Souls enlightned by that holy fire, Will pass to Paradise when they expire; An higher Bliss can no Man's heart desire Though worldly joys may all our Senses please, The Soul's joy makes them all but a disease. But when God's glory in our Souls doth shine, It shews those holy Raptures are divine. Yet we ought not to think, that every petty pleasing Object that assaults our Senses, doth de∣serve the Name of a Delight, more than little Chil∣dren have for every new Baby they do see. But when the Soul's supreme delight is so fixed on God, that every address brings men as near to him as Souls can come while they are involved in Clay; yet by a flaming Zeal, and such high mounting Faith, as doth believe that God is every-where, and Heaven with him, and them, are altogether at that time there. Where such joys may grow up to such a divine Delight in God, as will come nearest unto his beatick sight (tho' few Men seek it by such practice as we might) and therefore cannot fansie such tran∣scending Bliss on Earth, as those her metick Livers have, who daily do converse in Heaven, with great delight, in expectation of a quick Summons thither; and such Piety may be truly called, Delighting in God. 'Tis said my Book does need apology, To beg a Pardon for tautology; Which is a Crime I never understood, If the repeated matter be all good; David's Example, as my Pattern, may Excuse that Errour, and for pardon pray.
On the Power of Divine Meditation. DAvid says God requires no Sacrifice, But Penitence and Faith; he does despise The Blood of Beasts; We are to thank and praise His holy Name, and honour him always. And if we trust him as we ought, Mankind Will be, by frequent Comforts, so refin'd, That we on Earth shall have a daily taste Of his eternal Peace, and joys at last. If David's Rules authentick be, That God Had rather use his Mercy than his Rod, And proffers Heaven at so cheap a rate, T'invite us to become regenerate. What labour less can mortal Men invent, To gain God's favour, and 'scape his punishment! If thus our Duty may his Favour claim, All Men will trust and honour his great Name. Such Ecstasies in Meditation will Men's heads with glorious heavenly Visions fill; And by degrees our Souls with joys advance, To think that we are there in such a trance; And find that such enlightning Zeal as this, Is emanation for our future Bliss. A Dream of Heaven. THough Sleep Death's Image be, I have been now, I know not where, convey'd I know not how! Where something did appear so dazling bright, I could not see its Glory, for the Light. My Soul supriz'd with Wonder; and amaze, Methought I pray'd, and did forbear to gaze: Frighted and pleased at what I lik'd, and fear'd, I found it was a Dream of Heaven appear'd;
Which waking fled; but did my Fancy fill With blessed Ideas, which abide there still With such transporting joy, that I can weep To think of what I had, and could not keep. On a Dream of Hell. STart not, my Soul, 'tis but a Dream, to show The dismal Terrors of eternal Woe, Which unrepenting Sinners feel below: Where Satan with his cursed Crue do dwell, For their Ambition tumbled down to Hell; While we rejoice on the Divine Presence Of our exalted Bliss, by Penitence. Those fiery Streams, we seem to see, May give us joy to find that we are free From that sad Doom, where Torments never cease, But rather to Eternity increase: While our Conversion doth aloud proclaim, What mighty Honour due to God's great Name; Who will, in Mercy, save a Reprobate, If his Repentance do not come too late? On Death. 'TIs very strange the World should still comply, To think that Death is sent to make us dye, By leading us to Immortality: And the same moment does our sonls convoy From worldly slavery to eternal joy. So that we ought to find some other Name For God's great Messenger, that bears our blame Alone, tho' Life and Death are both the same Moment our eternal Lot, to end this strife, We may treat Death as our first step to Life: No terror find by our remove from hence, When all our Happiness proceeds from thence.
The POSTSCRIPT. IF Heaven be what we read, or hear and see, or do believe to be the glorious Habitation of the more glorious Trinity, that we pretend to love, to obey, to trust, worship and adore, as one united God, who has created Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all there∣in; and from whom we do expect eternal happiness, when our Souls expire. How can we justifie this Creed, if in our actions we daily do transgress what we so daily do profess, as if our present mo∣ments did afford us more concern, to pamper fa∣ding Flesh for being Worms meat in the Grave, above the nourishing of our Souls with heavenly Manna, to endure unto eternity. If this be Gospel-Truth (as I think it is) I can∣not chuse but wish and pray, that my Retire∣ment may produce the like Effects in others, by reading what I write, to obtain the high Felicity I privately enjoy, transcending all the glistring Vani∣ties that I have seen, and too largely sharedin; but now know no Felicity in this World, to be compar'd unto the Joy of living ever ready to go out of it, which is not so easily done, as said, though we en∣deavour all we can. Now, Reader, I have nothing else to say; But wish thee Grace to meditate and pray, Which will high joys create, and teach thee why True Piety will never fear to dye, When arm'd with such Divine Philosophy. FINIS.
ADDENDA. On our cold desire to go to Heaven. WE seem to prize the other World 'bove this; But fear to go to that undoubted Bliss. We find few Men, who would with Enoch fly, From hence to Heaven, (that dare soar so high!) Or with Elijah, would take like delight, To mount his Fiery Chariot, in his flight. Our Faith, for such Celestial Joy, comes short Of our Fruitions here; where our Support Is what we see, and what we understand; Which we preferr, before God's best command. Tho' Reason, and Religion, both agree To bring us to a Bless'd Eternity; In the same moment, we are rais'd from hence, Through Faith, by God's Divinest Influence: Which only can Immortal Life Create By Death, destroying this our Mortal Fate. So that, till we with God's Decree comply, We do not truly Live, until we Dye.
To a Friend in a fit of the Gout. WElcome thy pain, my Friend; this Gout is sent In Mercy to fore-warn, and to prevent Thy Gluttonies, and Epicurean Crimes, Which were unpractis'd in our Fathers times. This is the effect of strong Falernian Wine, And pride, to wash thy Feet in Muscadine; By eating Mushrooms stew'd with Ambergreece, And the fat Livers of the Jews fed Geese, With Peacocks Eggs in gravy, to support Thy Luxuries, and now thou'rt punish'd for't. On the Fear of Death. 'TIS strange, that all Mankind should be afraid To Die! nor any arguments perswade Wise Men, from the terror of a Name; Death is God's Messenger, and we to blame, To antedate his Arrant, with such fear, As doubts to go with Him, we know not where Tho' Death's power, only can our Souls convey To Heaven; if we God's Holy Laws Obey. But we still struggle with undaunted strife To keep our dying Bodies, from true Life. For want of Faith, lest Death should by mistake Lead our sad Souls to the Infernal Lake; When such gross misdoubting Grace, only can Force Death to fright a misbelieving Man: Which shews the Glory of our future State, Is left to our own Option; not to Fate.
On true Devotion. WHen true Devotion is our chief delight, We may presume, 'tis pleasing in God's sight, And to our Souls; will sacred Bliss reveal, To fix and to eternalize our Zeal; And while we live, our blessed thoughts direct, To the Seraphick Joys of God's Elect. And will by our Adoption when we dye, Declare the glory of that dignity. On God's wondrous Works. WHen we consider God's Word and Deed, And see the products of the smallest Seed, It doth our wonder greatly antedate With joy, and in our hearts fixt Faith create, It doth all doubtful thoughts, with truth confute, When fancy guides our Fingers on the Lute. But yet these petty arguments of sence, Must all submit to God's Omnipotence, In wonders of a higher nature shown! Which all the Christian World admires, and own. But know not how the boystrous Sea or Land Do steady stand; (by God's Supreme Command.) Who has the Sun and Moon so firmly set, With Stars, in their fixt Spheres, that no Man yet, Can by his Industry or Art declare, How high or what circumference they are, And yet the Seat of God's Celestial Bliss, Is still to be admir'd! above all this Where God himself, Inthron'd is pleas'd to dwell, Which must in Glory, all the rest excell.
Tho' these be wonders of a large extent, There be some of much more wonderment! That God should all Offences here forgive, And grant us daily comforts while we live. By our Souls washing in the Crimson Flood, Of our Bless'd Saviours Sacramental Blood, By which he does our Claim to Heaven advance, When we approach in a Seraphick Trance; And own his Mercies with intire delight, To glory in his bright Beatick sight. The more we think, the more we wonder! and The less of Miracles we understand; Why the same Earth, should ev'ry year produce Such various Fruits and Herbs, for humane use; If Faith and Gratitude did not combine, To think such Meditations are Divine. When God with secret Bliss, such joys imparts As does create true Zeal in pious hearts; And doth their Souls, with flaming Love invite To Paradise; ineffable to write; Unless his Holy Spirit should indite. To my Old Sick Friend. MY good Old Friend, why so sad? does thy Age decline so fast? that the Idea of thy Grave frights thee with fear to die. Are we not all dying? and none knows who shall go next, nor how soon be gone; if this occasion thy dismay, I will teach thee an Antidote that will dispell the Poyson of that Serpent's bite, and turn that univer∣sal curse of Death, into a State of Bliss; if thou can'st raise thy dejected Spirit to a quick sense of snaring the Eternal Joys of Heaven, with those de∣parted
Saints, who by Faith, Prayer, and Peni∣tence, are now exalted thither. Let thy melancholy Meditations and Prepara∣tions for the Grave, be changed from a Gaol deli∣very; into a constant, chearful, zealous Conversa∣tion, in thy Divine Retirements, with God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; by a total Resignation of thy Soul, and all thy concerns unto them; and think with pleasure how near thou art arrived to thy Journeys end, to be with them in Paradise. Then such Celestial Thoughts will be thy most pleasant entertainment, and surely meet with surprising joy from Faith in Christ's plenteous Redemption; which will beget a hearty, speedy welcome unto Death's arrival, who comes to con∣duct thee to Eternal Bliss; and thou wilt also find, that every devout step towards this felicity of thy approaching Salvation; will make thy heart dance with a Saint-like delight, to baffle the terrors of the Grave; with a serene prospect of thy Eternal Happiness at hand; and so make thy last hours full of Angelical transporting joy to be with God, the moment thy Soul expires; fix thy heart thus, and all sad Thoughts will vanish, when a sincere Faith becomes predominant. Thy Heart by practice, will delight in this Divine Elixir of Eternal Bliss.
On vain Projectors. NO mortal Man can limit or restrain, The boundless fansies of another's brain; But may such Fetters on his own Thoughts lay, As will keep them from wandring much astray; But naturally, Men add wings to try, How high their vain ambitious Hearts can fly, Until like Icarus, their waxen wings Do melt, and all their hopes to ruin brings. But when our Souls do with Angellick Love Soar high; they will Celest'al joys improve To flaming Zeal, and raise our hearts so high; As will discern our Immortality. To my Rich Friend become Poor. TEll me, Old Friend, and speak the truth, If twenty Dishes in thy Youth, Did then more please, and gratifie Thy Stomach with that Gluttony, Which did Diseases daily breed; Till now thou dost on one Dish feed. Tell me if now thy constant health Gives not more joys than thy lost Wealth Afforded; by thy vast excess, In frequent Treats and Wantonness; Which made a noise, more than content, For all thy charge and time mispent. When to the Poor, half that expence, Would have procur'd God's Providence; And sav'd the loss of thy Estate, Which thou hast thought upon too late;
Tho' now thou dost aloud profess, Thy Poverty proves Blessedness. On Injustice. IF Charity to Men, be God's Command? Justice, must in much higher favor stand; If neither can in wicked Men find place; They slight God's Anger, and despise his Grace. But these are petty Crimes, when Avarice Doth harden hearts for gold; and Souls intice, To sell Salvation at so cheap a Rate; Such villanous intentions aggravate. When a design'd premeditated cheat, With a bold-fac'd fraud, shall just Right defeat, And a false Cause by power shall justifie; Hell only can reward such Infamy; For God with indignation does declare, He will Poor Men's Oppressors never spare. Against Momentary Joys. NOW let my Friend, from sighs and sorrow cease, For Crimes repented; let thy joy increase, For thy serene assurance, lately gain'd, Of pardon, by thy Saviour's Blood obtain'd; Let thoughts of thy Eternal Glory rise, And scorn all Earthly Bawbles that surprise Unsteady Souls, with present fading Toyes That cloud the brighter Beams of Heav'nly joys. And boldly do those glist'ring bubbles try, In hope they'll last unto Eternity. Who raise their idle fancies, by their wit, To practise Atheism, rather than submit
To part with present Moments of delight, To purchase Heav'n, with God's Beatick sight; Who with his known Decrees, will not comply, But think to live, till they are pleas'd to dye. Tho of such Men, it may be truly said, They are that moment, both alive and dead. The Terror of Death, by Death is cured. IF Death were not for Sin from Heaven sent; It could not be esteem'd a punishment; To be deliver'd from our daily woe, While'twixt our Roses, Thorns, and Thistles grow, So that our care should be, to weed our hearts From foul excrescents, by such holy Arts, As will that fatal sting of Sin destroy, And so convert our sorrows into joy; When we the Pangs of such a Death endure, As doth produce both Punishment, and Cure. To my Old Friend on his Birth-day. MY Friend, thou dost well to celebrate thy Birth-day, as a vow'd Sacrifice to God; because he did reserve the first born to himself of Living Creatures, and thou art one; But let not thy Altar be adorn'd with a superfluous Treat, with too many flagons of rich Wine, and Tables throng'd with Wealthy Guests, as if it were a Bacchanalian Feast: But such a moderate Meal for thy own Ser∣vants, with some Poor Neighbours, that may so∣berly rejoyce to see a New Year begin, with a pro∣pitious prospect of thy insuing happiness; and
pray thy Piety and charity may Shine round about thy Habitation here on Earth, until thou art ad∣vanc'd to Heaven. Death is the Beggars highest Holiday. TIS but a faint Felicity, that any Man can have in all the Honours, Treasures, and Pleasures of this World, without a joyful inward assurance of his Salvation; when the next moment, an an∣gry Neighbour, or a Tyrant Prince, can end his days: Or Sickness by tormenting pains turn all his joy into sorrow while he lives; with despairing terrors worse than all, at the approach of Death; when a poor pious Beggar, will die transported full of Celestial Joys for his highest Holiday, and be as welcome into Heaven, as the greatest Mo∣narch. And therefore may be well and truly said, Both Souls are of the same fine Substance made. To my merry Friend. WHY now so joyful my good Friend? has thy Princes smiles this Morning added new fea∣thers to thy Heart? that makes it fly so high. His frowns to morrow may turn those gay feathers in∣to Lead; tho' thou deserve not such a change: Consider now such frequent sad Fates, as do befal the craftiest Men, that only trust in mortal acci∣dents for their support in Princes favours; and raise thy Souls delight in Service of the King of Kings, whose favours will endure unto Eternity,
above the reach of Earthly Storms; and then thy Prince's favours will have a sure foundation to sub∣sist on, with higher joys than any Sycophants black Arts, by Malice or by Envy can disturb thy Peace, or Pleasures; when a good Conscience is so cen∣ter'd, and so fix'd on God. For no Man can ima∣gine, the constant felicity, of a strict pious Life, in all conditions; but he that is so reconciled with a lively Faith to God, as chearfully to part with all the glist'ring Bubbles of this World, to enjoy everlasting Bliss in Heaven, which ought to be the supreme hope of our best endeavours. On the fear of Death. THO Men by nature Born to fear, to Die May still account it a great misery, When Piety and Prayer can't prevail, To change the pow'r of that severe Intail; Tho' all our Hearts, and Souls do still agree, To frame our Minds to God's most bless'd Decree; Because no other means, (like that the best) To bring Mankind to his Eternal Rest. Yet our weak Faith cannot the credit gain, By Heavenly joys, and glory to obtain, Such Courage and a Valour so Divine, Rather to Die with joy, than to repine To part with fading pleasures; that no Age Can for one moments certain time engage, They shall abide; nor can find any cure, That Men on Earth, for ever shall endure. How great a shame and folly then, that we Should fear to go, where we desire to be And so preferr our miseries on Earth, Before a bless'd and glorious chearful Death;
That will in gratitude the surest way, Our Souls to God in Paradise convey; When Faith, with such a Zeal shall so comply, 'Twill shew a Godly Gallantry to Die. On the Art of Meditation. WHO will the Art of meditation learn, Must make each Paragraph his chief concern▪ For some few moments to consider on, Lest reading more create confusion; And unavoidably disturb the Brain, With more at once, than what it can retain; When Piety by Art is thus refin'd, It will rejoyce the heart, inrich the mind With sacred Thoughts; beyond all Earthly care; Till flesh be turn'd into Angelick Air. All Men should live as ever in God's sight, And make Devotion their supreme delight. And then observe, how God does Grace return, To make Seraphick Joy the brighter burn. FINIS.
