L1082 14472617 102416
THE SPEECH OF MASTER SPEAKER BE∣FORE HIS Majestie, AND BOTH THE HOVSES OF Parliament, after his returne from Scotland, upon passing the Bill for Tunnage and Poundage, on Thursday the 2. of December. Also, relating the present distempers of England and Ireland. Whereunto is annexed his Majesties Speech in Parliament. LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Henry Twyford, at the three Daggers in Fleet-street. 1641.
MOST DREAD SOVERAIGNE, THe observation taken from the unlike Compositions, and various motions of the world, made the Philosopher conclude, Tota hujus mundi concordia ex discordibus constat. The happy conjuncture of both these Nati∣ons in the Triumph and Ioy of your Sacred pre∣sence, extracted from the different and divided dispositions and opinions, gives us cause to ob∣serve & to admire these blessed effects from such contrary causes. Wee may without flattery com∣mend your Sacred Majesty, the glorious Instru∣ment of this happy change, whose piety and prudence, directed by the hand of God, hath con∣tracted this union from these various discords. The Story of these times will seeme para∣doxes in following generations, when they shall heare of Peace sprung from the Root of dissention, of union planted upon the Stocke of
divisions, two Armies in the Field both ready to strike the first blow, and both united with∣out a stroke. Nothing can reduce these truths into a be∣liefe, but the knowledge of your piety and Iu∣stice, who hath accomplisht these acts of won∣der, by goodnesse, and gentlenesse, without force and violence. This way of conquest, this bellum incruentum, hath beene the Rule of the most valiant and pu∣issant Monarchs, advancing your glory, in safe∣gard of one subject, more then in the death of a thousand enemies. Thus have you erected a Monument of glory to your Sacred memory for all generations. And as your care and piety for the welfare of your Northerne Kingdome called you to that worke for the great comfort of your people which your wisdome hath so happily consum∣mated: So now the distemper of your other kingdome (Fomented by the same spirits, whose presence admits no peace in Israel) Calls on your providence to heale the diseases of that Nation. The one from whence you returned, hath
with Abell (though the elder brother) offered an acceprable Sacrifice; The other with Cain hath erected altars of bloud and revenge (the old Immolations of Iesuiticall priesthood) which invokes the necessitie of your Iustice. The one to a naturall, hath added a politicke brotherhood. The other of brothers (I am sorry to say it) are become strangers. The fidelity of the one hath written a Story of admiration to the world. The disloyalty of the other hath paralell'd that horrid Designe (matchlesse before amongst all generations) First in their intention, the de∣struction of a Kingdome, even then when Vnity and Peace was tying the knot of Religion and safety. In the Discoverie a moment of time preven∣ted the execution. In the actors (Iesuits and Priests) without whom the malice of the Devill could not have found a party in the world fitted to act over the like bloudy tragedy. But this amongst our many Ioyes we receive by your happy returne is not the least, nay the
greatest, That that providence which protected that gracious King, your most religious Father, from that bloudy Attempt, and increased the blessing of a long and happy Reigne, hath also defended your Sacred throne from all rheir Ma∣chinations. Thus we see Religion is the greatest policy, the never-failing support of King and king∣dome, that which Firmes you and your posteri∣ty to your Throne, and our duty and obedience to it. Give me leave here most gracious Soveraigne to summe up the sense of eleven Moneths ob∣servation without intermission (scarce) of a day, nay an houre in that day, to the hazard of life and fortune, and to reduce all into this Conclusi∣on, he Endevours of your Commons assemb∣led, guided by your pious & religious example, is to preserve Religion in its purity without mix∣ture or composition, against these subtile inva∣dors; and with our lives and fortunes to esta∣blish these Thrones to your Sacred person, and those beames of Majestie, your Royall Progeny, against treason and rebellion. The wayes that conduce to this end are the
defence of the Land and Sea, for the one, wee have already voted to raise moneis; for the other, this Bill in some measure will accomplish for a little time, and to that end I (by the Command of the Commons) humbly beseech your Roy∣all assent. His Majesties SPEECH the 2. of December. I Am to speake a word unto you, since I have been so long absent from you; It is no way in answer to the Learned Speech of Master Speaker: But yet I shall touch one point of it concerning Ireland; But first I must tell you, though I have been absent longer then indeed I did expect, or could have been expected by you, yet I stayed no longer in Scotland then the necessity of those affaires would absolutely permit, and indeed I have therein done so much good, that I will boldly affirme unto you, that I have left the people a most contented and happy Nation: So that if I did misrec∣kon a little in time, I doe not misreckon in the end. Now though I have deceived you a little of your expectation in point of time, I confesse you have de∣ceived my expectation in finding of businesse here; for I had thought to have found things in quietnesse, and settled both for Religion and peace of this Kingdome,
But I found distractions, such as I could not expect, In so much, as the Parliament was thought fit to be guar∣ded, this I speake not any way to seeke out a fault, or to have any distrust of the hearty affections of my Subjects, but on the contrary when I came here (as you all see) I found the affection of my people unto me, to my great comfort. Now I assure you, I come with the same affection that you or any good people of the world could wish, for I am so farre from disliking any thing that I have done hitherto, that if it were to doe againe (in the fa∣vour and good of my people) that I protest I would doe it againe. And whatsoever may be justly expected of me for the securing of Religion and Liberty of my people, I shall not faile to doe it, and therefore I shall mention no particular at this time, but onely that great particu∣lar of Ireland, which Mr. Speaker did mention, of which I do not doubt, but you have had a great care, yet me thinks, things go on slowly; and I mention this more reasonably, because a couple of Noblemen are come out of Scotland according to the Petition and Instructi∣ons, which it pleased both Houses to send unto mee at Barwicke, which I instantly dispatched to the Chancel∣lor, who now have the disposing of all things. I spoke to them this morning, and I decreed both Houses to appoint a select Committee, and make and end of that businesse with them. I have but this word more to say, that I assure you, I have no other end but the happinesse of my People, for their flourishing, is my greatest Glory, and their affection, my greatest strength. FINIS.
