l137 12146709 54947
THE HISTORY OF LEARNING: OR, AN ABSTRACT Of Several BOOKS Lately Published, as well abroad, as at home. By one of the Two Authors of the Ʋniversal and Historical Bibliotheque. LONDON, Printed for Abel Swalle, and Timothy Childe, at the Ʋnicorn at the West-End of St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1691.
To the Right Honourable, the Earl of DORSET and MIDDLESEX, Lord Chamberlain of Their Majesties Houshold. My Lord, THis Work does every way belong to your Lordship; for besides the many Obligations your Honour has been pleas'd to lay upon me, and to advise me to the composing of it, I know not a Person more universally Learned, and more capable of Judging all sorts of Learned Writings. I doubt not, My Lord, but your wonted Goodness and Affability will vouchsafe me a favourable Acceptance of this Present: Though I must acknowledge 'tis with some Reluctancy that I make it. There is so much difficulty in making Abstracts, and one finds so rarely wherewith at the same time to Please and Instruct, that I can hardly hope I have done any thing worthy to be Presented
to so delicate a Judgment as your Lordship's. I have been unfortunate in that I write not in my own Lan∣guage; by which Means some Improprieties may escape, of which I am ignorant, and which I hope your Lordship will pardon. I presume to offer this Essay to your Lordship, partly because I have the Honour to be known to your Lordship by other Works; and that I hope, under your Lordships Patronage, to be assisted for the Future, from Men of Parts and Learning, with something more considerable, and more deserving your Lordships perusal. I am, with all Duty and Respect, My LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, J. D. de La Crose.
THE PREFACE. THE following Essay is not as one lately Published, a Translation of the Journals Printed abroad; but a real Abstract taken from the best Books lately Printed both at home and abroad; which, if it finds Encouragement, shall be continued as oft as Matter occurs, Monthly, or otherwise. 'Twill be unnecessary that I enlarge upon the great Ʋse and Ad∣vantage of these sort of Works; the great Encouragement they have receiv'd in Holland, France, Germany, &c. does suffici∣ently evidence their Worth, and seem to reproach us for having so long neglected it. 'Tis true, it has been twice attempted here; but those having been barely Translations, and the Readers ge∣nerally understanding the Original, seems to be the Reason they were no better received. But not to detain the Reader too long, I shall pass over what might be more said upon this Occasion, and proceed to give an Ac∣count of my Design in as few Words as may be. I design then to Publish an Abridgment of all new Books as they shall appear in the World; to which purpose, I shall keep a Correspondence abroad, in order to the being furnished with eve∣ry thing rare with the first. But in regard this Design is of too large extent; that is, the abridging of every Book that is Pub∣lished; especially in this Age, where so many trifling Imperti∣nencies. pass the Press, I shall chuse only such, to insert in this
Work, as may most deserve the perusal of the Studious Reader. I shall enlarge upon such as shall publish any Novelty to the World, and such as discourse the most rationally upon any Sub∣ject; and shall endeavour to mark out the most considerable Pas∣sages, and the Places best writ of every Author. The Reader must excuse me, if I omit giving a Judgment upon the Style and Language of Authors; which I shall avoid, and chuse rather to give Account of Things than Words. I shall also, as little as pos∣sible, take any Side in the Disputes of Learned Men; or if it should happen that I adhere to one Party in such Disputes, I hope the Ingenious Reader will believe it to be the Force of Reason and Truth that draws me to its side. As for those Authors that fill the World with Books ill digested, and wherein there is no∣thing to be learn'd, they ought to esteem it a Favour in being passed over in silence. Manuals of Devotions, and Sermons we shall but rarely take notice of; they being of such general Ʋse, so well known, and read almost in as little time as an Abstract. Di∣ctionaries, Collections, Abridgments, and such like, the Au∣thors must pardon us if we take no notice of: Also, Law-Books, Treatises of Practical Physick, or any thing too particular in one Faculty, will be improper for us to speak of; for though they may be excellent in their kind, yet their Abridgment will ap∣pear but tedious and dull to any not of that Profession. But I would not be thought, upon this Pretence, to excuse my self from abstracting such ingenious Treatises as shall be Published, in Ana∣tomy, Natural Philosophy, Mathematicks, &c. For though such Ab∣stracts may indeed be unpleasant to such as understand them not, they must bear with the Evil, and remedy it, by turning over the Leaf, to a Place that pleases them better; for in a Work of this Nature, which is writ for all the World, and every Profession, such inconveniences cannot be avoided. And thus having given an Account of our Design, we doubt not, but all Learned and Ingenious Gentlemen will assist & promote it, by communicating to us such things as may be convenient to insert in this our Journal; which, if
at any time they please to direct to the Publisher, they shall be thankfully received, and Published accordingly: By this we mean, in such Cases where a Person may have made any Discovery in Natu∣ral Philosophy, Physick, Mathematicks, Critick, or the like, and would not give themselves the Trouble of Writing a Trea∣tise upon it, if they please to communicate it to us, we shall give it place in our Journal, and preserve and publish it to the World, better by far than if it was Printed by it self. Which Adver∣tisement, considering the present discontinuance of the Philoso∣phical Transactions, will not, we hope, seem impertinent to the Learned World. The Reader must excuse the Imperfection of this first Essay, it being but a rude Dranght of what we intend for the Future, if the Author be so happy to see his Labour encouraged, and his De∣sign favoured by the Approbation of Worthy Persons. This is all we thought necessary to tell the Publick at present; only this we have further to say, That the Abstract of the Phy∣tographia is of another Hand, and that through Inadvertency we sent the Copy to the Printer's, without having digested it into proper Order; but the like Fault shall happen no more. We have added at the End a Catalogue of some Books which we intend for the next; together with some others, most eminent∣ly recommendable to the Learned. The CONTENTS. I. History of Lewis the Great, taken from the Medals, &c. Character of this Book. The French King's Religion toward his Allies. Of his giving Peace to Europe, and taking 200 Cities by Storm. The immortal Man. French Protestants how reconciled to the Church of Rome. Blasphe∣mies of the French Panegyrists. Pag. 1.
II. A New Bibliotheque of Ecclesiastical Authors. An History of the Author and his Book. Canonical Scriptures. Ancient Liturgies; whether St. Denis was ever in France? What Honour is due to the Saints? No Bi∣shop of Bishops. Doctrine of the Three first Centuries. Of the Power of Coun∣cils, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, and Celibacy. Pag. 2. III. Horatius Rodellii. Whether Mecoenas was descended from the Kings of Etrury, Deus esse, Oculo irretorto, Descendere Vinum. Pag. 14. IV. The Comedies of Terentius, by Madam D'Acier. Character of Plau∣tus and Terentius, and their Comedies. Contaminare. New Explication of a perplex'd Passage in the Andria. Pag. 19. V. Cornelius Nepos, Nic. Courtin. Pag. 23. VI. Juvenalis & Persius Lud. Pratei. Passage of Persius explain'd. Pag. 3. VII. A Defence of Diocesan Episcopacy. Opinions of the Independents. Pag. 25. VIII. Description of the United Netherlands, &c. Ʋsefulness of Tra∣vels. London bigger than all the Cities of Holland together. Pag. 27. IX. Vauban's New Method of Fortification. Character and Contents of this Book Original of Fortification. Situation of Places to be fortified. Orillon, Flank retired, Bastion, &c. Pag. 28. X. Haver's Osteologia Nova, An Idea of the Formation of the Foetus, of the Periosteum, the Bones and the Teeth. Of Growth and Nourish∣ment. Of the Marrow. Of the Mucilage and Mucilaginous Kernels. Of the Cartilages. Pag. 33. 2. Ruyschius Observationes Anatomico-Chirurgicae. Wonderful Cure of an Aneurisma. Of the Membrant Hymen. Pag. 46. XI. Leonardi Plukenetii Phytographia. Pag. 42. XII. Praxis Mayerniana.. Whether the Smoak of Tabacco can reach the Brain? Pag. 47. XIII. Richerius, De Potestate Ecclesiae. Votes of the Third Estate in France against the Pope's Power. The Doctrine and Practice of the Gallican Church, prov'd agreeable with them. Rules to examine whether a Doctrine be orthodox or no? Whether it be lawful for the People to depose Princes? Of Ecclesiastical Power, and Excommication. Sentiments of Marsilius of Padua. Blasphemy of Pope Gregory VII. against Royal Dignity. Pag. 48. XIV. An Universal Analysis of Equations Pag. 53. XV. Leybourn's Cursus Mathematicus. How to know the Length of the Way which a Vessel makes. XVI. Some Observations made in the great Congregation of Waters, communicated by the Honourable R. Boyle. That Sta-water is colder on the deep below, than by the Surface. Pag. 58. XVII. Inscriptionum Antiquarum Sylloge. Whether the Daughter of the first Chri∣stian Emperour builded a Church to S. Agnes? Whether the Idolatry of the Heathens be excusable? Pag. 59. XVIII. The Falshood of Humane Vertues. Whether Subjects may rebel against their Kings? Pag. 62.
THE HISTORY OF LEARNING. I. HISTOIRE DU ROY LOUYS LE GRAND, par les Me∣dailles, Emblemes, Devises &c. History of Lewis the Great; Taken from the Medals, Emblems, Devices, Inscriptions, Ar∣mories, and other Publick Monuments, Collected and Explained by Father CLAUDIUS FRANCIS MENESTRI∣ER Jesuit. A new Edition augmented with five Plates. Fol. Paris, 1691. F. 64. IF the Contents of this Work were answerable to its Title, and if the Author had given us an exact and continued History of the Exploits of his Hero, and had proved the most remar∣kable Actions that were performed under his Reign, by the Medals that were coined, and other publick Monuments that were erected on that occasion, it would without doubt have been a very useful Book; but nothing of all this is to be found there∣in, for the Medals are confusedly placed, the order of time, which is the most principal matter in a History, is not well observ'd, and in∣stead of a Commentary, there is only a licentious Interpretation of the Latin Inscriptions, or some other trivial Circumstances, and that too but very rarely; insomuch that it can neither be esteemed as an History nor a Panegyrick, but a gross and imperfect Collection of whatsoever could be invented by Flattery, to aggrandize the I∣dea of a Prince that delights in Vain-Glory, and is perhaps too much addicted to the love of popular applause, And indeed, what can be devised more vain than the Medal25.5. wherein he is represented in the midst of the Cities of Genoua and Luxemburg, turning the Globe of the World, on the point of his Sword, with this Motto, Quod libet licet▪ I do whatsoever I think fit. Altho' the Character of a Jesuit and a Panegyrist doth not well a∣gree with that of a sincere Writer; never heless we are induc'd to believe that Father Menêtrier hath found it to be a very difficult task, to produce these Medals as undoubted proofs of the Historical matters and facts related by him; as being conscious to himself that the greatest part of them were founded only on Hyperbolical ex∣aggerations,
or on the false reports of hired News mongers. As for example, it is well known to all the World, that in the War that happen'd between England and Holland, in the Year 1666, France a∣mused this Commonwealth with feigned Succours; that those few French Vessels that joyned with de Ruyter, served only to molest and perplex him, by breaking all his measures, or giving an account thereof to the Enemies; and that the Forces that were sent thither by Land, marched only to espie out the Country, and to contrive intrigues and plots against them, as it afterwards appeared by the design which was discovered in the Year 1672. Therefore we may very well turn the reverse of the Medal, and instead off. 13.2. Bata∣vis terrâ marique desensis. Religio foederum, put Batavis terrâ marique proditis. Derisio foederum. There are others likewise that are absolutely repugnant to evident matters of fact; particularly, that which is consecrated to Lewis the Great, for granting peacep. 26.3. to the Hollanders whom he had Conquer'd, to the Germans whom he had every where Vanquished, and almost to all Europe that had combined together against him: For without reckoning Switzerland, Italy, and the most part of the Princes of Germany, Poland, and Moscovy, who were not engag'd in this quarrel; France was assisted by England, Sweeden, and the Bishop of Colen and Munster, through whose Territories they attacked the Hollanders at unawares. Moreover in the beginning of the War, all Europe seemed unanimously to concur in promoting the ruine of the United Provinces; since Spain opened a passage to their Ene∣mies, and the Emperour for a long time stood still as it were a Spectator; to which if we add the Intelligence that the French ob∣tain'd within the Country, and the Cowardise of some of those that had the Command of the Principal Posts, it may well be concluded from thence, that these Conquests are not so Glorious as they would have them to be believed. But on the contrary, there ac∣crues to King William Everlasting Glory, which cannot be eclipsed by the most inveterate Envy, for rescuing by his Valour and Pru∣dence, at the Age of about 22 Years, four Great Provinces out of the Hands of so Haughty and Potent an Enemy; and restoring his Country, that was almost ruin'd, to its Primitive state and lustre. These are matters of fact that cannot be call'd in question, but we shall leave it to the Readers judgment to determine, whether these are of the like nature that afford the Subject of this Me∣dalf. 28. Victori perpetuo. Ob expugnatas Ʋrbes ducentas. To the Eternal
Conqueror for having taken by Storm 200 Cities. I know not how it can be affirmed that Cities which have surrendred themselves, as soon as the Enemy appear'd before their Gates; or those that went forth to meet him, and to deliver their Keys into his possession, were taken by force of Arms: [expugnatae.] But I am of opinion that it would be very difficult to reckon up twenty, whereof the French King hath made himself Master after another manner, at least before the breaking of the Truce. The word Perpetuus, which Father Menêtrier translates Eternal, calls to my remembrance thef. 2.6. Viro Immortali, and the10.6.27.6. Aeternitas Imperii Gallici. The former Epithete hath been generally exploded, and it hath been very ill resented that they durst presume to call Lewis the XIV. The Immortal Man: The Eternity of the French Empire does not appear to me to be more tolerable, and to say the truth, both the Expressions savour too much of Paganism and Blasphemy; as well as this Counter, wherein Joshua is represented giving a Signal to the Sun to stop, and the French King doing the like to the New Moon, with these wordsf. 37.42. Solem ille, hic Lunam sistit, and under the Medal Germaniae Pax. However, the Germans are not willing to allow that his most Christian Majesty should assume to himself the Glory of setting Bounds to the Progress of the Turks, and of restoring Peace to the Empire; but if this power be disputed, none will deny him the honour of exciting those Insidels to break the Truce with the Emperor, and of furnishing them with Officers, Arms, and Ammunition. Amongst so many prevarications, it was not expected to find a publick Affirmation of a matter of fact, which the French Writers have for a long time disowned, that is to say, that the Protestants of that Kingdom had not been reconciled to the Communion of the Church of Rome, but by making use of the utmost extremity. For what else can be meant byf. 50. the labours of Hercules placed in the Constellations: The Thunder with these words, Deorum jura tu∣etur; the Giants crush'd to pieces under the Mountains; the Hydra slain; the heads of this Monster sever'd and burnt; Trees cut down; and their Branches lopt off. Nay they confess, that those pretended Conversions could not be otherwise performed; in a Device, the Bo∣dy whereof is the Gordian Knot cut asunder with a Sword, and the Motto Frustra tentassent alii: Others would have attempted it in vain. And Father Menétrier ingeniously explains the meaning of it, without any evasion, having caus'd thef. . Titles of 36 Declarations pub∣lish'd
at several times against the Reformed, to be grav'd on a Plate. The Printers of Holland have added to their Edition of this Work, five new Plates, comprehending divers very Satyrical Em∣blems and Devices, which I shall not here mention: but only ob∣serve, that one Mdal grosly reflects on the Honour of the English. Notwithstanding this Book taken all together, deserves a place in the Library of the ingenious, not only on the account of several publick Monuments therein contained, as the prospect of the Square call'd la Place des Victoires, the Obelisk of Arles, &c. but also in re∣gard that there are inserted the Arms of the Principal Houses or Families of France, of the Prinees, Dukes, Prelates, and other No∣blemen of the Order of the Holy Ghost, together with those of the Marshals of France, of the Colonels and other Military Officers, as also those of the Regiments that have been lately raised, and lastly those of the Presidents of the Soveraign Courts. I shall add one Inscription, worthy to be Printed in the next Edition of the Je∣suits Book, and made upon the Building Versailles. Hic fuit ante Chaos, dixisti & Regia Verbo, Fit Ludovice tuo, sic fata est machina Mundi. Which may be properly Paraphrased in English thus. That the Eternal Word the World should frame, A Wonder 'twas, till Lewis did the same. II. NOUVELLE BIBLIOTHEQUE DES AUTHEURS ECCLESIA∣STIQUES, &c. Or, a new Library of Eccle scastical Authors, containing the History of their Lives, a Catalogue and Chronology of their Writings, and an Epitome of whatsoever is comprehended therein, together with divers Critical Reflections on their Style and Doctrine, as also an Account of the se∣veral Editions of their Works. In five Volumes in Quarto, which com∣pleat the History of the six first Ages of the Church Printed at Mons, and to be Sold in London by Abel Swall, and Timothy Child at the Ʋ∣nicorn in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1692. the 1. Vol. pag. 342. THis Work hath been every where so much talk'd of, and hath been generally so well esteemed among the Learned, that although
this is only a second Edition, and a large account hath been al∣ready given of the two first Volumes in the Bibliotheque Ʋniverselle; nevertheless we are perswaded that it will not be altogether un∣acceptable to the ingenious of our own Nation, who perhaps have not seen it, or at least have receiv'd but little information con∣cerning the Subject and design thereof, to represent to them a more particular Character both of the Author and the Book. Mr. Du Pin is a Professor of Divinity in the College of Sorbonne, who according to the Testimony of divers learnedVide Cae. Pres. Hsl. Ltter. Men, and even that of his own Works, hath been for a long time addicted to the Study of Ecclesiastical Antiquity. And as he is a man of great Parts, and endued wih a clear and sound Judgment; it may be easily imagn'd, that by frequent reading, he hath dis∣cover'd many things that are Contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of that Church wherein he hath been Educated. But in a Society which cannot endure to be Contradicted in the least matter, and that hates even the very Name of Reformation, it was dangerous to Communicate his Discoveries to the World, at least until some fa∣vourable opportunity did enable him to use a greater Liberty. It is probable that as soon as the Controversies between France, and the Court of Rome, concerning the Regalia, and the nomination to great Benefices began to arise, Mr. Du Pin was incited to pub∣lish his Remarks, but observing judiciously that this contst would not be soon appeas'd, under a Prince so jealous of his Honour and Right, as Lewis XIV. and a Pope so obstinate as Innocent. XI. he judg'd it to be expedient to afford them longer time to be ex∣asperated one against another; to the end that he might be more secure, and might discourse more freely and with greater weight concerning the matters. The event happen'd as the Author had foreseen; for the Pope vindicated the persecuted Jansenists, either as being of their opi∣nion, or designing by the Publick expressing of a Compassion that cost him nothing, to strengthen his party with the accession of so considerable a number of Learned Divines, and of he best Writers in France. Whereupon the King being incensed that his Holiness should attempt as it were to prescribe Laws to him, and should endeavour to withdraw his Subjects from their Allegiance to him, took other measures, and having Summon'd an Assembly of
his Clergy,In the Year 1682. caus'd it to be declar'd therein, 1. That the Pope hath no Authority directly or indirectly over the Temporalities of Kings. 2. That much less hath he any power to depose them. 3. That he is not infallible. 4. That he is inferiour to a Council. At that time the breach seem'd to be irreparable, and it was gene∣rally believ'd that a Patriarch would e're long preside in France. It is true indeed, that the persecution of the Protestants, whose entire De∣struction was then hasten'd, afforded but little hope of a Reformation to the moderate part of Roman Catholicks. However, many of them that were willing to flatter themselves with vain Expectations, gave it out, that none ought to be discourag'd by these rigorous Persecutions; that the Court, not being ignorant of the commotions that a too much precipitated Reformation hath produced in other places, in∣tended to proceed therein by degrees; And that even on this ac∣count they had very good grounds to abolish, the Exercise of the Reformed Religion; either to avoid a Schism like unto that which vexes yet England at this present; or insensibly to gain the consent of the old Catholicks by the Conversation of the new. Upon the whole matter, this is sufficient to induce us to believe, that the Court of France is not unwilling that their Divines should take the Advantage of this Conjuncture obliquely to assault the Superstitions of the Church of Rome. However, Father Simon, to vindicate himself, in regard that our Author had refuted 4. Disse. Prol. P. 30.38.9. his too presumptuous Conjectures on the Pentateuch, hath written against him with much animosity, accusing him as one that had employed his Pen to revive Calvinism that was so lately extirpated: Never∣theless, all these loud Clamours produced no effect, serving only to promote the Sale of the Book; neither have they oblig'd Mr. Du Pin to blot out these passages that were offensive to his Adversary; but only to add certain Notes in this Second Edition to prove that Moses really composed the Pentateuch. And the Author is so far from having been reprehended for bringing allegations in favour of the Protestants; that the Censors of Books have loaded him with extraordinary Commendations in the beginning of the second Volume, which they conclude in these words; That not being able to determine whether the vast extent of his Learning, the Sagacity of his Judgment, or the continual solidity of his Reflections, ought most to be admin'd; they find themselves oblig'd to declare, that that which would serve for the Commendation of many, is not sufficient to discharge all the Obligations that they judge to be due to his singular merit.
A large Preface is prefixed to the first Volume, wherein the Au∣thor explains and justifies the Title that he hath given to his Book, gives an account of his Design and Method, and propounds cer∣tain Critical Rules to determine whether a Work be forg'd, or whether it really appertains to the Person to whom it is Attributed. This Preface is follow'd with a Preliminary Dissertation concerning the Books of the Bible; in which he treats, 1. Of the Authors of the Books of the Old Testament in general. 2. Of the Canonical and Apocryphal Writings. And indeed the judgment of Mr. Du Pin on this Article is very Remarkable, seeing he is a Roman Ca∣tholick, for according to his opinion the Six last Chapters of the Book of Esther are not extant in the Hebrew Text, but were ta∣ken from divers places, and contain several pieces apparently Col∣lected by the Hellenist Jews. St. Jerom, expresly rejects the Book of Buruch, as not being included in the Canon of Sacred Writings, in his Preface to the Prophecy of Jeremiah. The History of Tobit is likewise excluded, in all the Ancient Catalogues, from the num∣ber of Canonical Writings, as well as that of Judith; In a word, Christian Antiquity hath follow'd the Canon of the Jews as to the Books of the Old Testament; there are no others Cited in the New, and a great part of these are often alledged therein; More∣over the Primitive Catalogues of Canonical Books, composed by the Greek and Latin Ecclesiastical Authors, do not con∣tain any others. In the Chronicon of Eusebius, the Books of the Maccabees are separated from those of the Holy Scriptures, and placed in the Rank of Josephus and Africanus. The Books of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus are inserted in the Ancient Catalogues among those Writings that are esteem'd to be very useful, but such as are not Canonical. Nothing can be inferr'd to prove their being Divinely inspir'd, from those passages that are produc'd by the Fathers, in regard that Origen, St. Jerom and St. Hilary, by whom they are cited, reckon them among the Apocryphal Writings. Moreover, these Books were not admitted into the Canon of holy Scripture even in the time of Gregory the Great: Forasmuch as this Pope speaks to this effect:Greg. Lib. 12. Moral. We do nothing that is unreasonable in exhibiting the Testimony of Books that are not Canonical, since they were Published for the Edification of the Church. Many Ecclesiastical Writers, both Greek and Latin, reckon only 22 Canonical Books, annexing the History of Ruth to that of Judges, and the Lamentations of Jeremiah to
his Prophecies, although they lived after the third Council of Car∣thage, and after Innocent I. who is reported to have inserted the Maccabees and other Apocryphal Books into the sacred Canon; which shews (adds our Author) that these definitions were not follow'd by all Authors and by all the Churches, until this was at last entirely determin'd by the Decision of the Council of Trent. Insomuch that these Ecclesiastical Assemblies partake of this general property with the others, that the Decrees of the later should abolish all those of the preceeding; or otherwise, it is but just that the Church of Rome, which hath a power to make new Articles of Faith, should like∣wise be invested with that of causing the Books from whence they are taken to be esteem'd as Canonical. In the third Article of this dissertation, the Author gives us the History of the Hebrew Original, of the Translation of the Septua∣gint, and of other Greek Versions of the Old Testament. 4. He dis∣courseth anfterwards concerning certain Authors, whose works have some Relation to the Sacred Writings of the Hebrews, as Philo, Josephus, Aristaeus, &c. 5. He treats of the Authors of the Books of the New Testament. And 6. of the Canon of these Books. Let us now proceed to the Body of the Work. Mr. Du Pin hath thought sit to reject the Liturgiesp. 8. that are attributed to the Apostles, in regard (says he) that we need only to reflect a little on what we Read in the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, concerning the Celebration of the Eucharist, and on that which hath been alledg'd on this Subject by St. Justin, and the Primitive Fathers of the Church, to be convinc'd that the Apostles and their Successors celebrated the Sacrifice of the Mass with great Simplicity. A very small number of Litanies were, recited therein, but by little and little, some other Collects were added, together with certain exterior Ceremonies to render the Service more venera∣ble to the People, lastly the Churches proceeded to regulate and to commit these particular Methods to Writing; and this is that which we call Liturgies. Our Author is not only content to disallow the Works of the Counterfeit St Denis,p. 24. (b) but he likewise proves in one of his Notes,p. 38. that the true Dionysius the Aropagite never was in France; that Pho∣tinus first propagated the Christian Religion in that Kingdom; and that in the time of St. Irenaeus his Successor, Christianity was esta∣blishd only in that part of the Country call'd Gallia Viennensis & Lugdurensis, since there were no Martyrs any where but within the Limits of these two Provinces; concerning whom he producethp. 50.
an Epistle of the Church of Smyrna to those of Pontus, which de∣serves to be remembred in more than one place. The Pagans having hindred the Christians from carrying off the Body of Polycarp that remain'd entire in the midst of the Flames, lest (as was pretended by these deluded Heathens) they should adore it instead of Jesus Christ; the Church of Smyrna made this reflection thereupon, cer∣tainly these People were possess'd with an extravagant frenzy, as being ignorant that the Christians adore Jesus Christ, only because he is the Son of God, and that they honour the Martyrs, who are his Disciples and followers, only on the account of the Love that they testifie for their King and Master. Afterward, The Centurion having caus'd the Body of this Martyr to be burnt, the Christians took away his Bones, being more valuable than the most precious Stones, and more pure than Gold, which they BURIED in a place where they Assembled together, to Celebrate with joy and Chearfulness, the Day of his Martyrdom; thus HONOU∣RING the MEMORY of those that had fought Gloriously for their Religion, to the end that they might confirm and instruct others by such Examples. These are the Sentiments (adds our Author) of the An∣cient Church, concerning the Respect due to Martyrs and their Re∣licks, explain'd after a very clear and distinct manner, equidistant from the contempt that is cast on them by our Modern Hereticks, and from the Superstition of some Catholicks. But Mr. Du Pn would have extreamly oblig'd the World in shewing who those Hereticks are, who despise the Holy Martyrs, and their true Relicks, and refuse to afford them this sort of honour that was done to their memory, by the Church of Smyrna. In this Edition is an extract of Origen's Book concerning Prayer,p. 142.145. which the Author had not seen when he publish'd the first; and on the occasion of the dispute that rose between St. Cyprian and the Bishop, of Rome concerning the Repeating of Baptism, he produceth a remarkable passage164 2. taken from the Acts of the last Council of Carthage, holden in the Year 256. Wherein this Father exhorting the 87 Bishops that were there present, freely to disclose their mind, without any design of excommunicating those that were of a different opinion, gives them this reason. For none ought to Style himself Bishop of Bishops, to endeavour to constrain his Colleagues by a Tyrannical Authority, by reason that every Bishop hath liberty, and power to make use thereof, as he shall think fit, and that he can no more be judg'd by another, than he can judge him: But we ought all to attend
to the judgment of CHRIST, who alone hath power to set us over his Church, and to judge of our Actions. In this Controversy both par∣ties pretended to have Tradition on their side, and St. Cyprian op∣pos'd to that which was alledg'd against him by Pope Stephen, the truth of the Gospel and the Primitive Tradition of the Apostles. The Edition of the Works of this Father, which is declar'd by Mr. Du Pin to be generally most esteem'd, is that which hath been Pub∣lished some years ago by two English Bishops, and Printed at Oxford, but the Annotations of Pamelius are not much reguarded, by reason that he applies himself rather to confirm the Doctrine and discipline that is received and maintain'd by those of his own Society, than to explain the difficulties that occur in the Text of the Author. Mr. Du Pin doubts 199.1. whether the passage recited by Joannes Da∣mascenus, in his third Homily concerning Images, appertains to Me∣thodius: it is declared therein that the Christians made certain Fi∣gures of Gold representing the Angels, for the Glory of God; if it were written by this Bishop, it must be taken (said he) in another Sence, different from that which is attributed to it by Damascenus; and by these words, Angels, Principalities and Powers, the Kings of the Earth are to be understood, as may be inferr'd from the pre∣ceeding expressions. Moreover he rejects all the Decretals that are imputed to the Primitive Popes, and believe that they were forg'd by Riculphus and his Successor Benedict in the ninth Century. Lastly, he concludes this Volume, with an Epitome of the Doctrine, Disci∣pline, and Moral Instructions of the Church in the three first Ages thereof. There are no notes subjoined to this Abridgment, because it is taken for granted, that sufficient prooss of all that is asserted there∣in, have been already exhibited in the body of the Work: Neverthe∣less, it cannot be discerned by what Arguments alledg'd in the pre∣ceeding Treatise, Mr. Du Pin supports the following Propositions that are afterward maintain'd by him in the said Epitome; viz. (1) That altho' all the Fathers are not agreed, that Infants are born in Sin, and liable to Damnation, yet the contrary opinion was more agreeable to the Church. (2) That the Sacrifice of the Mass was Ce∣lebrated in Memory of the Dead. (3) That the ancient Christians invocated the Saints and Martyrs deceas'd; and that they were per∣swaded that they prayed to God for the living. However, there are other Principles that are grounded on better Authority, and such as are of great importance with respect to the present differences
among Christians. (1) That the ancient Writers always mention'd the Virgin Mary with a great deal of respect, tho' they have not exceeded their due bounds, as it hath been afterwards practised; that it was not generally believed that she remain'd a Virgin after her de∣livery; that no mention hath been made of her assumption, and that there is a passage in the works of S. Irenaeus, which is not favourable to the immaculate conception. (2) That the Holy Scripture contains the principal Articles of our Faith, and that it was lawful for all Christians to read it. (3) That the Elements of the Eucharist were ordinary Bread, and Wine, mingled with water; That the consecrated Bread was divided into little pieces; that the Deacons distributed it to those that were present who receiv'd it in their hands, and that they likewise gave them some of the consecrated wine; That in some Churches this distribution was reserved to the Priests, but that in others every one approached to the Table and took his Portion of the Eucharist. (4) That during the three first Centuries, there is no account concerning the unction or annointing of the sick mentioned by St. James. (5) That the Clergy were forbidden to be engag'd in Civil and Temporal Affairs. (6) That Priests were permitted to keep their Wives whom they had espoused, before they were Ordained, and not to marry any after their Ordina∣tion: but that both was allow'd to Deacons. (7) That there have scarcely been any disputes, or different sentiments in the Church con∣cerning Moral Duties. We find divers Tables at the end of this Work, some of which are Chronological, and shew the time of the Nativity, Death, and Prin∣cipal Transactions of the Sacred Writers, and Ecclesiastical Authors; others serve to distinguish the genuine Works from those that are forg'd. There are also Alphabetical Indexes of the Authors and Principal matters. Mr. Du Pin hath observed in the Second Volume the same Method as in the preceeding, all the difference is, that the Works of the Fathers of the fourth Century, being generally more known and in greater number than those of the three first; there are likewise in∣serted more frequent reflections on the Protestants, perhaps to sa∣tisfie the importunate clamours of some Zealots, who otherwise would have suppressed the Book. However the same sincerity and liberty of speech which was so acceptable to all judicious Readers in the first Volume, is every where conspicuous throughout the second.
It is apparent from the Life of St. Athanasius, which is exhibited at large by our Author, that the People began even in his time to adhere too much to the exteriour part of Religion, since two of the greatest Crimes with which the Arrians charg'd this Father were, that he had broken a Chalice, and had administer'd the Holy Sacra∣ments in a Church that was not Consecrated. It may be also observ'd, after Mr. Du Pin, that Lay-men were then admitted to the Commu∣nion in both kinds; that there were Women that kept their Virgini∣ty, and were not shut up in Monasteries; that there were married Priests and Bishops; that the Monks might alter their condition, and take Wives; that it was not lawful to make new Articles of Faith; and that Councils, even the Oecumenical, were only the Witnesses of the Creed of their Ages, whereas they had Soveraign Authori∣ty to determine all matters that related to Discipline. Thus it is expresly declar'd by the Nicene Bishops, in appointing the day for the Celebration of the Feast of Easter. It seems good to us, we think fit that it should be so. But their Expressions are altogether diffe∣rent with respect to the Consubstantiality of the Word, since after having declar'd their Opinion as to this matter, they are content only to subjoyn; such is the Faith of the Catholick Church. After the Extracts of the Writings of the Fathers, we find those of the Councils that were conven'd in the fourth Century. The Canons of that which is called the Council of Elvira, are an Anci∣ent Code or Collection of the Councils of Spain, and it cannot be doubted but that they are very Authentick and of great Antiquity. The 34 and 36 Canons have caused much perplexity among the Roman Catholick Divines. One of them prohibits the lighting of Tapers in the Church-yards, by reason that the Spirits of the Saints ought not to be disturbed: and the other to set up Pictures in the Churches, lest the Object of our Adoration should be Painted on the Walls. Many have endeavoured to render divers Explications of these Passages, but it seems to me, says Mr. Du Pin, to be more expe∣dient to understand them simply, and to acknowledge that the Fathers of this Council did not approve the use of Images, no more than that of Wax-Candles lighted at Noon-day: but, continues he, these things are matters of Discipline, and may be observ'd or neglected without any prejudice to the Faith of the Church. The 35 Canon forbids Women to remain all night in the Church-yards, in regard that often under pretence of Prayer, they secretly committed abominable crimes. The 60 de∣prives
them of the quality of a Martyr, that are put to death for publickly demolishing of Idols, because it is not enjoyned in the Gospel, neither do we read that this was practised by the Christians in the time of the Apostles. The same perverse spirit that hath caused the Canons of the Coun∣cil of Elvira to be wrested to a contrary sense, hath in like manner given occasion to some to doubt as to the truth of the History of Paphnutius related by Socrates, Lib. I. Chap. XI. This Egyptian Bishop oppos'd the new Law, that was intended to be enacted in the Council of Nice, to oblige the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to live single, and to abstain from their Wives, whom they had married before their Ordination. For although he himself was never married, neverthe∣less he maintain'd that this Yoak ought not to be laid on the Clergy, and that it was to expose the Chastity of Women to apparent dan∣ger. I believe, (said Mr. Du Pin, in speaking to the Roman Catho∣lick Doctors) that this doubt proceeds rather from a fear with which some are possess'd, that this matter of Fact should in any wise impugn the present Discipline, than from any solid Proof. But these Persons ought to consider, that this Ordinance is purely concerning Discipline, that the Discipline of the Church may be alter'd as opportunity serves, and that it is not necessary for the vindication thereof, to prove that it hath been always uniform in all Places. Moreover our Author shews that Hosins Bishop of Corduba presided in the Nicene Council, and not the Popes Legats. He acknowledgeth as the authentick Records of this Synod, only the Form of Faith, the Epistle to the Egyptians, the Decree concerning the Feast of Easter, and the first 20 Canons: And consequently he rejects as suppositions Pieces, the Latin Letter of this Council to S. Sylvester, together with the Answer of this Bishop, and the Canons of a pretended Sy∣nod holden at Rome for the Confirmation of that of Nice. In the 59. as also the 60 and last Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which Mr. Du Pin believes to have been convened between the years 360 and 370. It is prohibited to read in the Church any other Books than the Canonical, and those only are acknowledged as such, which are allow'd by the Protestants, excepting the Revelation. The 8. Canon of the Council of Saragossa forbids the vailing of Nuns before the age of 40 years. The Bishops of Macedonia being about to confirm a Censure that they had made against a certain Bishop named Bonosius, and desiring
the advice of Pope Siricius, he replied, That the Council of CAPUA, having referr'd this cause to them, it did not appertain to him to give a∣ny Judgment therein, and that they had power to determine it. The most ancient Record (according to the opinion of Mr. Du Pin) in which the name of Mass is applied to signifie the publick Prayers, recited by the Church of Rome in celebrating the Eucha∣rist, is the third Canon of the II. Council of Carthage, holden An∣no Domini 390. In the end of this Volume, the Author exhibits an Epitome of the Doctrine of the fourth Century, as he hath done in the preceeding, with respect to the first three, and he avoucheth that, altho' no∣thing was taught in the fourth Age of the Church, but what was likewise believed in the three former; nevertheless the principal Mysteries of the Christian Religion have been much illustrated and explained therein. III. Commentaries on Latin Authors. Q. HORATII FLACCI Poemata Interpretatione & notis illustravit Pe∣trus Rodellius é Soc. Jesu, jussu Christianissimi Regis ad usum Sereniss. Delphini, huic Editioni accesserunt Odae aliquot & Satyrae: unà cum inter∣pretatione continuâ, quae in priori desiderabantur, nec non Index re∣rum, Phrasium & Verborum memorabilium. 8. Lond. Impensis Abel Swalle. 1690. pag. 366. THis Edition which is no less correct than that of Paris, hath moreover this advantage, that it contains the entire Works of Horace. Father Rodellius thought fit indeed not only to avoid the in∣terpretation of divers Odes and Satyrs, that seemed to him to be somewhat too luxuriant and offensive to chast minds, but even wholly to retrench them, nevertheless this defect is now supplied, by reprinting these Pieces that were omitted, and by Paraphrasing all the rest, excepting about half of the second Satyr. I. THE Author having perus'd Mr. Dacier's Translation and Critical Remarks, undertakes to censure some of those that are not. agreeable to his opinion. The latter in his French Interpretati∣on declares, that whereas Horace makes mention of Maecenas thus;
Atavis edite Regibus. These words are not to be understood, as if Maecenas were really descended from the Kings of Etreria, since there is not so much as one Historian, that takes any notice of the Royal Stock of this Favourite of Augustus, but they all affirm that he derived his extraction, from an illustrious Family of Knights. The ancient Commentators produce three Names of these pretend∣ed Kings, but he avoucheth it to be a counterfeit List, and that they were deceived in taking Atavus for a Great Grand-Father. As for his part, by the word Reges he understands, Noblemen, or Persons of considerable Quality, insomuch that according to his Judgment, the meaning of Horace was only this, that Maecenas was descended of an ancient Family of Etreria. It must be granted that the words Rex & Regina are often used in that sense which is al∣ledged by Mr. Dacier; but on the other hand, Rodellius insists, that in this place the word Rex ought to be taken in its proper and ge∣nuine signification, as well as in the following Verse of Propertius. Maecenas eques Etrusco de Sanguine Regum. The Historians might easily omit this circumstance relating to the Noble Extraction of Maecenas, by reason that none of them un∣dertook to give a particular account of his life, and it is mention'd by the Poets, in regard that they had receiv'd the greatest share of his favours. Neither indeed could Maecenas derive his Pedigree from the Kings of Etreria, but at a very great distance; so that according to the judgment of Rodellius, as well as that of Mr. Dacier, the name of Cecina that is attributed to the Great Grand-Father of this Illu∣strious Person, and who is reputed to have been King of Etreria, is meerly feigned. Besides the Kings of Etreria were not very conside∣rable, if we may give credit to the Testimony of Dionysius Hallicar∣nassaeus, Lucius Florus, and other Ancient Writers. There were twelve in number at the same time, and altho' they had an Equipage like unto that of the Roman Consuls, together with a Scepter and a Crown; nevertheless they reigned only within the narrow bounds of one City, as Porsenna at Clusium. Therefore altho' it ought not to be accounted as a matter of no moment to be descended from those Kings. Yet it is not of so great consequence, as that it should be admir'd that the Historians have not made mention thereof, with respect to Maecenas. These are the reasons alledged by Rodellius, which being confirmed by
the Authority of Propertius, will without doubt cause many to incline to his Opinion. It is not sufficient, that because a word, as that of Rex, is used in a certain sense in some places, therefore it ought to be explain'd after the same manner wheresoever it is possible that this signification may be admitted; it must also be attended with certain circumstances which favour this sense, and determin that equivocal word thereto. It is requisite then to enquire whether it be probable that in the expres∣sions of Horace and Propertius the word Rex should be taken for a Rich or Noble Man; but we shall leave this to the decision of those that are expert Criticks in the Latin Tongue. II. Father Rodellius hath annexed a Chronological Epitome of the Roman History from the 21. year of Horace to the 57. which account indeed is useful for the more clear understanding of the Works of this Poet; but the Chronology of Horace's Odes inserted in Tanaquil Fa∣ber's Letters would not have been less advantageous; and Rodellius would not have acted more unjustly in borrowing from him all this lit∣tle Work, and in doing him that justice which is due to his merits, than in taking only part of his design: for altho' Faber died among those of the Reformed Religion, nevertheless there is no Jesuit that can de∣ny him the reputation of a good Grammarian, which quality hath been always esteemed to be consistent with that of an ill Roman-Catho∣lick. III. Moreover Rodellius contradicts M. Dacier with respect to an ex∣plication published by the later on the 6 Verse of the 1 Ode. Terrarum Dominos evehit ad Deos; which M. Dacier understands, not with reference to those that are properly called Gods, but concern∣ing those that had obtain'd the prize in the Olympick Games, whom Horace else-where stiles Coelestes. The Latin Interpretation is consonant to the ordinary acceptation of the words, that is to say, that they which overcame believ'd that they had acquired a great deal of Honour, which might be Hyperbolically termed a Glory equal to that of the Gods. Horace makes use of the same Figure twice in this Ode. Me doctarum hederae praemia frontium, Dis miscent superis. And Sublimi feriam sidera vertice. It is likewise known that this expression Deus esse, is commonly ta∣ken
to signifie to be esteemed happy; moreover the Epithet of Terra∣rum Domini entirely determines the sense, and it may justly be admir'd that M. Dacier hath not observ'd it, since he hath so clearly explained divers passages that are far more difficult. It is true indeed that he is not the first Interpreter, who through a commendable emulation and earnest endeavour to offer somewhat that is new, and to excel o∣thers, hath been induc'd to deviate from his Authors meaning, and to seek for too many Mysteries therein. We are sometimes apt to lose our Subject by too intense an application of the mind, and by how much the greater our efforts are, so much the farther we depart from the true sense, to which it is afterwards very difficult to return. On the other side, if we do not apply our selves with a great deal of at∣tention to the reading of an Author, either we understand not what he says, or we let slip very considerable difficulties, without illustrating them. To be successful, we must take care to keep the middle path between these two extremities, but this precept is more easily given to others than followed by themselves. However it may be observ'd much better than it is generally done, if we could be perswaded to remain in suspense for a while, as touching the meaning of those passages, wherein we suspect that others have been deceived, and in the mean time if it be possible often to read over that Paragraph concerning which we are doubtful. But as soon as a new explication comes into our mind, if it have never so little shew of probability, we are im∣mediately restless and impatient, till we have committed it to Writing; and when it is once written, we find it to be extreamly difficult to de∣face or revoke it. IV. TANAQUIL Faber had endeavour'd to shew in his Epistles, that the 14. Ode of the 1st. Book ought to be understood literally; where it was generally believ'd that Horace designed to represent the State of the Roman Common-wealth that was ready to be engaged in a new Civil War after the defeat of Brutus and Cassius, under the Idea of a disabled Vessel that was again to be expos'd to the tempestuous waves. He affirmed that there was nothing Allegorical in this Ode, but that the Poet address'd himself to the Ship that had convey'd him from Philippi into Italy, and that was about to return by the same way, with those that had accompanied him in this Voyage. Father Rodellius who seems to fear lest there should be something of danger in opposing the Torrent of Interpreters, as his Divines aver, that it is not lawful to depart from the general consent of the Doctors, main∣tains
the contrary opinion, viz. That there is an Allegory in this place. They that are desirous to be further informed in this matter, may at their leisure compare his assertions with the reasons that are alledged by Tan. Faber. V. THERE is a passage in the 2d. Ode of the 2d. Book, which hath very much perplex'd Interpreters, and it is this, Quisquis ingentes occulo irretortor. Spectat acervos. M. Dacier explains this Phrase Occulo irretorto, with a streight or direct Eye; that is to say, without envy; for the property of envy is to look askew; and Rodellius insists that this is the Character of a man of whom it may be said, That the brightness of Gold does not at all dazle his Eyes, and he is never blinded thereby. This indeed comprehends the sense in general, and several Commentators have observ'd it before them, as may be seen in an An∣cient Edition of Horace's Works, together with the Annotations of 40 Grammarians, Printed at Basil in the year 1580 in Fol. But with∣out injuring the reputation of those Gentlemen, it may be justly af∣firmed, or that they have not sufficiently express'd the sence of the word irretorto. Torquere oculos signifies to turn our eyes to a certain place. —Oculosque ad maenia torsit. Retorquere oculos, is to turn the head backwards to look on something that we have left behind us; thus Cicero, in his second Oration against Catilina, which he made after he had compel'd that Traytor to aban∣don the City of Rome, from whence he departed with great indignati∣on. Retorquet oculos profecto saepe ad hanc Ʋrbem, quam ex suis faucibus ereptam esse luget. He often turns his head to view this City, and grows desperate, by reason that his attempts against it have failed. It may be said of a man that leaves his Native Country without expressing any sorrow: Spectavit maenia patriae exiens oculo irretorto, or, egressus maenibus non retorsit oculos. Horace represents a man that despiseth Riches after the same manner, as it were, passing through vast Mountains of Gold, but beholding them only whilst they are before him, without vouch∣safing to look back on them when he is past, which shews that he doth not regard them; for we are accustomed to turn our heads, that we may retain those things longer in our sight; which we are constrain'd to leave with much regret.
VI. IN regard that it hath been observ'd by those that have seen this Edition of Rodellius, that he therein often opposeth the judgment of M. Dacier, it might be expected that he should have made some Critical Remarks on a passage in his Notes on the 21 Ode of the 3d. Book but he hath taken no notice thereof. Horace addressing himself to a certain Bottle or Pitcher, hath this expression, Descende Corvino jubente Promere languidiora Vina. Go down, since Corvinus hath commanded me to entertain him with the most delicate Wine. M. Dacier observes on the word descende, that the Romans kept their Wines in Ware-Houses built on the top of their Houses, that they might be ripened with the Smoak. He would have done well, if he had quoted his Authors; for none can imagine that Wine above twenty years old at least, such as that which is here mentioned being as old as Horace, should be kept in a Garret to ripen it with the Smoak. This perhaps might have been a good method to make Vinegar thereof, but by no means to render it more delicate. He might then have affirmed, on much better grounds, that the Romans usually hung their Bottels on the walls of their Cellars, as may be inferr'd from the 23. and 24. Chapters of Cato's Treatise de re Rustica. This is one of those things which it were to be wished that M. Dacier had always observed, at least to pro∣duce his Authors, when he exhibits any remarkable circumstance or as∣sertion; for we live in an Age that is extreamly distrustful, by reason that divers Criticks have been known to avouch those things whereof they could alledge no proof, with no less assurance than those con∣cerning which there is the greatest Evidence. IV. LES COMEDIES DE TERENCE traduites en François par Ma∣dame D'ACIER, &c. The Comedies of TERENTIUS, Translated into French by Madam D'Acier, with some remarks upon them. The last Edition Corrected and enrich'd with Figures at the head of each
Comedy. 12. Divided into three Parts. The I. hath 576 pag. The II. 490. The III. 432. Printed in Amsterdam 1691 for the Bro∣thers Huguetan, and are to be Sold in London by Abel Swalle and Tim. Child. This Edition is Printed after the same manner, and even Page for Page according to that of Paris. I. WE find in a large Preface prefix'd at the beginning of the 1. Tome a Comparison between Plantus and Terence, the substance whereof is this, that Plautus had more vigour than Terence, that he ex∣ceeded him in the vivacity of Action, and in the contriving of in∣trigues, that he shewed more skill in acting than in speaking; but that his Sentences were often too much affected, his Drolleries gross, and his Style sometimes low: Whereas Terence is not so accurate in his designs, and excels rather in speaking than acting; but his Style is far more correct, his Morals better dispos'd, and his Drolleries much more refin'd; And it is for this reason that the ingenious take more delight in perusing Terence's Comedies, than in reading those of Plautus, and on the contrary the common People prefer the later before the former; and it is on this account likewise, that altho' other Poets are more esteem'd than Terence, nevertheless, he is reckon'd among those of the first Rank, with respect to the descrip∣tion of manners. Upon the whole matter, as when we happen to light upon a thought or conception that we judge to be apposite, and which we are desirous to preserve, we are so much accustomed to act a certain part, that when we would represent another, we cannot forbear intermixing with it somewhat of this Air, wherein we have been confirm'd by a continual habit: thus that ingenious disposition of mind which Terence might participate with Scipio and Le∣lius, is more or less conspicuous in all the Personages that he brings on the Stage; we cannot discover any thing that is outragious or irregu∣lar therein, neither do we find those mean and sordid expressions that are used by the vulgar. To prove this, we need only to compare the discourses of Thraso and Gnatho, with those of the Miles gloriosus and the Parasites that are introduc'd by Plautus; the later indeed was skilful in causing the multitude to shout, but Terence afforded satisfacti∣on to the judicious Auditory, who do not make their divertisement to consist in the obstreporous noise of Laughter, to which the Rabble is addicted, but in hearing somewhat recited that savours of real wit and ingenuity.
II. MOREOVER Madam D'Acier vindicates her design in transla∣ting the entire Works of Terence, foreseeing that some Criticks might be so scrupulous as to dislike what she hath done, by reason that a cer∣tain pious and worthy Person seems to have believed that they ought not to be translated without making great alterations, and very considerable additions. The same Gentleman published three Comedies in French, many years ago, which were received with great applause. They that are desirous to know whether he hath as faithfully rendred the Author's sense, as he hath taken care to represent it in an elegant stile, may compare his Version with that of Madam D'Acier, and I doubt not but that af∣ter a careful review of both, they will acknowledge that the latter hath better express'd the genuine sense and energy of the Original, which she hath follow'd with much more exactness: III. AFTERWARDS Madam D'Acier proceeds to entertain us with an account of the several Translators and Interpreters of Terence's Works, and more especially of certain Figures that are in∣serted at the beginning of every Act, in two Manuscripts of the French Kings Library, and which may contribute much to the more clear un∣derstanding of divers passages of this Author; but it were to be wished that she had caus'd them all to be well grav'd. Moreover she hath found in these Manuscripts the confirmation of certain conjectures con∣cerning the order of some of the Scenes, that are generally attributed to those Acts to which they do not appertain. Instead of annexing separate examinations according to the Rules of Dramatick Poetry, as she hath formerly done with respect to Plaurus, she hath intermixed with her Remarks several particular observations relating to the ma∣nagement of the Theatre, wherein she gives an account of the alteration that she has made in Terence, as to the division of the Scenes and Acts. She admires that those Comedies that have been in the possession of learned Men for so many Ages, should nevertheless remain even at this day in so great confusion, that there are some Acts that commence where they ought not; that is to say, before the Theatre is clear'd: and she declares that she hath remedied this disorder. The cause of this inadvertency is, that the greatest part of Grammarians adhere much more to the words than to the matter, and imagine that they have sufficiently explained the meaning of an Author, by shewing what every word hath been u∣sed to signifie separately. IV. AFTER the Preface we find a Translation of Terence's Life, Written by Suetonius, together with Observations, wherein all
the obscure passages thereof are illustrated, and divers Sentiments of the Ancients confirmed. She likewise gives us this judgment concern∣ing the six pieces of Terence that are now extant: The Andria and Adelphi seem to excel in the beauty of the Characters, and the de∣scription of manners; The Eunuchus and Phormio in the vivacity of the intrigues; And the Heautontimorumenos and Hecyra seem to have the pre-eminence, with respect to the excellency of the conceptions, and variety of passions, as also the purity and simplicity of the stile. V. Lastly, to exhibit a general Idea of this work, we shall here produce two passages in the Prologue of the Andria, one whereof is interpreted by Madam D'Acier after a new manner, and the other seems to require a little correction. Terence's Enemies objected to him that he did ill in not simply translating the Comedies of the Gre∣cians into Latin, but in presuming to compose a single one in Latin, from many Greek; they express'd their resentment in these words: Contaminare non decere fabulas; which Madam D'Acier translates, that it is not lawful to intermingle Comedies: She derives the word contami∣nare from contango, affirming that it only signifies here to intermix, and that it is taken in a good sense, insomuch that when Terence's Adver∣saries maintain'd that contaminare non decet fabulas, this Poet avouch'd that decet contaminare. This Etymology seems indeed to be true, and it is on this Account that contamino signifies to sullie or pollute a∣ny thing with touching it, according to Donatus's remark; but we have no example, from which it may be evinc'd that this word was ever taken in a good sense. Terence, after he hath produc'd the accusation of his Enemies, in the same odious terms as they had exhibited it, doth not reply decet contaminare fabulas, but simply proves that it was law∣ful to do that which they call'd contaminare. They pretended that Te∣rence defil'd (if we may use the expression) Menander's Plays, by ad∣ding to them somewhat of his own, or by annexing certain passages taken from other pieces of the same Poet, which being transpos'd, lost a great part of their Primitive Beauty and Elegancy. Therefore al∣tho' Madam D'Acier, as to the main point, is of the same opinion as the other Interpreters; nevertheless every one will not admit that signification, which she ascribes unto the word contaminare. The other passage of the Prologue to the Andria, which seems to stand in need of a small alteration, is this,
Favete, adeste aequo animo & rem cognoscite, Ʋt pernoscatis ecquid spei sit reliquum, Post haec quas faciet de integro Comedias, Spectandae, an exigendae sint vobis prius. Give attention favourably, and examine this Piece, that you may be a∣ble to judge what may be expected from our Poet, and whether the Comedies which he shall hereafter make, may deserve to be acted before you, or whe∣ther they ought to be rejected without hearing. Now let judicious Criticks determine whether this correction, which consists in reading pernoscat is in two words, be not more consonant to the words and design of the Poet. Give attention favourably, &c. To the end that he may know whether there be any grounds for him to hope for the future, and whether you will vouchsafe to grant that the new Comedies which he may hereafter compose, shall be acted, or whether you will explode them without seeing. At least this sense is more agreeable to these words, Ecquid spei sit reliquum, &c. Which after whatsoever manner they are understood, may be much better attributed to Terence than to the People of Rome. Perhaps this Comedy was acted after the Hecyra, or some other Play of this Poet was rejected, which caus'd him to fear lest the like accident should again happen. As for the People of Rome, they had no reason to despair of the sufficiency of Terence's Pieces, which they had already often approv'd; but the Poet having once re∣ceiv'd a repulse, might suspect lest this should have done some injury to his credit, and should occasion the loss of the publick approbation. The word reliquum joyn'd with spes seems altogether to favour this sense, and is contrary to that of Madam D'Acier, who by spes understands ex∣pectatio. Moreover it is a frequent custom of Terence to make use of the Pronoun is instead of ille, hic, ipse, as appears from the examples pro∣duc'd by Robert Stephen in his Thesaurus linguae Latinae. V. CORNELIUS NEPOS de vita Excellentium Imperatorum; Interpretati∣one & notis illustravit NICOLAUS COURTIN, Humanitatis Pro∣fessor in Ʋniversitate Parisiensi. Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in u∣sum
Serenissimi Delphini, juxta Editionem Parisiensem. 8o. Londini a∣pud Abel Swalle. 1691. p. 264. THo' Cornelius Nepos appears to be a very plain Author, and easie to be understood; he is so succinct, and gives us the knowledge of so many Events and Antiquities, that the publick is without question oblig'd to those who took care of the Education of the Dauphin of France, and appointed a person of so much learning and judgement as Monsieur Courtin, to unfold the knotty difficulties of this Author. He has not given himself the trouble to make an unprofitable Paraphrase upon this Historian. He has only explain'd his most extraordinary I∣dioms of Speech by the more common Phrases; and tho' his Notes ap∣pear not very long, however they leave no difficulty in this Author un∣explained. Now in regard the Ancients are no very exact Chronologers, Mr. Courtin has plac'd before his Commentary a Chronology of 44 Olympi∣ads, or 176 years. Which space of time includes all the lives which Cornelius Nepos has written; and his Interpreter has taken care to mark out to what year the several Historical Actions therein recounted, par∣ticularly refer. This Chronology begins from the 72. Olympiad, that is to say, according to his accompt, from the year of the World 3480. and the 261 year after the building of the City of Rome. To the lives of Cornelius Nepos Mr. Courtin has added all the Frag∣ments of that Author, which are extant, upon which he has also made Notes. At the end there is an Index of all the words of that Historian, conformable to the method of other Commentaries, for the use of the Dauphin. VI. D. JUNII JUVENALIS, & A PERSIS FLACCI Satyrae, Interpreta∣tione & notis illustravit LUDOVICUS PRATEUS, Rhetoricae Preceptor emeritus. Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissimi Delphini, 8o. Lond. apud Abel Swalle, 1691. p. 606. MOnsieur PRATEUS has translated these two Poets into other Latin, with so nice an exactness, as if he had studied for a Ver∣sion of the Bible. For as he is oblig'd to add words to the Text, to
make the construction and contexture of the discourse, he has taken care to mark them in other Letters. You will say perhaps that if he had made a freer Paraphrase, he might have better explain'd his Authors; but he might as well have run himself into a mistake of sense. So that there is no question but there are many people who will commend him for having been a little precise, especially when they shall see that he has supply'd with ample Notes, what might be wanting to compleat the perspicuity of the Paraphrase. And indeed how was it possible to translate clearly and in few words those verses of the 4 Satyr of Persius. —Esto; Dum ndetcrius sapiat Pannucia Baucis, Cum bene discincto cantaverit Ocima vernae. Ocimum is an Aromatick Herb, which they never sow'd but with Curses and Maledictions, believing it would grow the better. Baucis was the name of a poor old Woman, and proverbially taken for any old Herb-woman. Socrates, who in this Satyr represents the person of Persius, tells Alcibiades representing the person of Nero, that tho' he might have reason to boast of the Nobility of his Extraction, and the Comliness of his Person; yet for all that, he might have no less cause to fear his being reproach'd, for having no more wit than a Herring-wife that abuses a Footman. This is the Interpretation and meaning which, next to Casaubon, Mr. Prateus gives of this passage in Persius. You shall find in his Notes all that the most subtle Criticks have said to render Persius intelligible. VII. A DEFENCE OF DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY, in answer to a Book of Mr. David Clarkson lately Published, Entituled Primitive E∣piscopacy; by HEN. MAURICE D.D. 8o. London 1691. p. 470. IF all Books were written like this, I do not believe, there is any Mortal would be so adventurous as to undertake to be a Journalist; for there is neither Table of the Chapters nor of the Matters; nor any Titles upon the Chapters; nor is the design of the Author to be ap∣prehended, either in the Preface or Introduction. So that a man must
have read the Book which the Author refutes, and know what it treats of, if he intends to make any advantage by the reading of this. That want of order might offend the Reader, and hinder the sel∣ling of the Book, and yet neither Dr. Maurice nor his Bookseller have any reason to complain. But this Book is otherwise so well written, and contains so many learned Observations, that 'tis great pity it should not be as well known as it deserves. And therefore we shall in a few words give you an account of what it treats. Mr. Clarkson was a Non-Conformist, of the number of those who are call'd Indepen∣dants, or Congregational Men, because they believe that every Congre∣gation is a Church apart, or a Society of Men by themselves, over which no other has any thing to do; so that the Minister they have made choice of, is very near as Soveraign as the Pope of Rome; or to make use of a Phrase which less offends those Gentlemen, as a Bishop in his Diocess. To prove that this opinion is not so new as it seems at first, Mr. Clarkson wrote a Book, entituled Primitive Episcopacy, which was not Published till after his decease. The principal thing which he drives at, is to prove, that during the three first Ages, no Bishop had above one Flock under his charge, that is to say, so many Christians as the Place could contain wherein they assembled. To make this out, he endeavours to shew, 1. That in the first Age there were none but Jews and Proselytes that embrac'd the Christian Religion, and those but few in number. 2. That the Pagans that were converted in the second and third Age were inconsiderable in respect of the Jews and other Pagans. 3. That there was a Bishop almost in eve∣ry Village. 4. That the greatest part of the Cities were no bigger than the Villages and Borough Towns of England. 5. That such as were bigger were but thinly peopled; at least that it is certain there were but very few Christians in 'em. 6. That it ought to be consider∣ed that the Christians were divided into several Sects, which had every one their particular Bishops or Pastors. Dr. Maurice refutes these ob∣jections with a great deal more pains and Learning than they deserve, in the six Chapters of which the whole Treatise consists. But these answers would engage us in a too long discussion; besides that we are convinc'd that the greatest part of those that will read this Journal, are almost able to discover the weakness of Mr. Clarkson's Arguments.
VIII. An Accurate Description of the Ʋnited Netherlands, and of the most considerable Parts of Germany, Swedeland, and Denmark, contain∣ing a succinct accompt of what is most remarkable in these Countries; and necessary Instructions for Travellers; together with an exact relation of the Entertainment of his most Sacred Majesty, K. WILLIAM at the Hague. Written by an English Gentleman. 8o. London for Tim. Child. 1691. p. 192. TRavels are always full of divertisement, provided they be well written, but they are not always equally beneficial; for that they who do no more than slip into a Country, or make but a short stay therein, can never thoroughly inform themselves of the manners and customs of the people, or of the form of their Government, which is the principal thing to be inquir'd into. Therefore the Remarks of Sir William Temple are admir'd for so much as they give an account of such things. The Author of this description seems to have judgment enough to have been able to do the same, especially having liv'd six∣teen years in the Countries of which he speaks. But it seems that he has avoided tracing the Footsteps of that learned Polititian; and that he has only applied himself to make remarks more profitable for Tra∣vellers only, and more proper for the common sort of People. There∣fore it is, that you shall here find the descriptions of the most famous Cities of Holland, Germany, Sweeden, and Denmark, of their scituati∣on, their Building, the Charges of travelling thither, and living there; besides several Remarks upon their Trade, their Riches, the Inclinations of the Inhabitants, and which way to converse with 'em, and win their Friendship. In the Observations which he makes upon these things he seems still to have had in view the good of his Nation, and to incline those that sit at the Helm to reform certain abuses, which if remov'd, the Nation would be in a more flourishing condi∣tion. You shall there find one example in the extract of a Letter of a Merchant who preferr'd living at Amsterdam before living in London, for reasons very requisite to be readp. 11.113. in the Author himself. To render his admonitions grateful to his fellow Countrymen, he ends with a discourse very curious, and much to their advantage. He gives you a Catalogue of the 18 Cities of Holland that have voices in the
States of that Province; of 53 the most famous Cities of Germany and the Low-Countries; of 22 of France; of 14 in Italy; besides some o∣thers in the Territories of the Duke of Savoy, and the Cantons of Switzerland. He sets down the number of their Houses, which he says he had out of the publick Registers, and comparing them afterwards with the Houses in London, which he demonstrates to be above 100000, he makes it out by that Calculation, that all the Cities of the Province of Holland joyned together do not contain so many Houses as London and the Suburds, not having above 88909. That the 53 Cities of Germa∣ny do not exceed the Capital City of England above a little more than two thirds; and that the 22 Cities of France have not once as many. The Relation of the King of England's first Voyage into Holland is worth reading, especially for persons of Wit, who will there meet with very ingenious Devises and Inscriptions. IX. The new Method of Fortification as practised by Monsieur Vauban Engineer General of France. 8o. London for Abel Swalle. 1691. p. 183. THo' this Book has been published by the Chevalier de Cambray, one of Mr. Vauban's Pupils, it is certainly the work of that great Engineer, who composed it for the benefit of certain young Noble∣men and Cadets residing in divers Cities within the Dominions of the French King. To the end that they might be able to avoid the pains and trouble of reading over so many Voluminous Books that are writ∣ten in the German and other Languages on this Subject; the Author of this Tract hath taken care to epitomize all that he judged to be necessary for the attaining to perfection in this Art. And indeed, be∣sides a large Treatise of practical Geometry prefixed at the beginning; the several Methods of almost all the Eminent Engineers that have hi∣ther to appear'd in the World, are therein plainly exhibited; inso∣much that with a little observation we may be informed of the man∣ner of Fortifying of Places used by the Hollanders, Germans, Italians, and French, as well as most other Nations. Therefore in regard that this Book hath been generally well approv'd, the Publisher of this English Version could no longer refrain from imparting so valuable a treasure
to his own Countrymen, that they might likewise reap the same ad∣vantage thereby, and it is on this account that he hath taken care that it should even exceed the Original, by the means of several consi∣derable alterations and amendments that are made in the translation. Moreover, if curious and well-grav'd figures add any value to a Mathe∣matical Book, it may be justly expected that the great number of Cuts and accurate Schemes inserted therein should render it yet more acceptable. There are two parts in this Volume, one is a Treatise of practical Geometry, and the other a discourse of Fortification; the Treatise of Geometry is likewise divided into two Books, in the first whereof are contained four Chapters, and in the second six; in the former are exhibited thep. 6. explication of the Terms of Geometry, and the6. operation of divers Problemes that may be drawn on Paper by way of recreation, with the help of a pair of Compasses and a Ru∣ler; together with the22. construction of five regular bodies, and of many others that come near them, as also the29. manner of forming Piramids which shall have regular Polygons for their Bases, from the Triangle to the Dodecagon. The second Book comprehends the mensuration of3. Heights, (the Authors Instrument for this purpose is the Astrolabe)43. Lengths,62. Plains,6. Solids,6. and Concaves, that is to say, according to his definition, the Art of measuring hollow bodies, to know how much they contain. Lastly the method74. of making a body of a certain Figure equal to another of another Figure is therein taught which Art is call'd the transmutation of bodies, in opposition to that of surfaces represented in the second Chapter of the first Book. This Treatise is concluded with a perswasion that what hath been therein deliver'd is sufficient for those that are desirous to make a considerable Progress in the Art of Military Architecture. The Treatise of Fortification is divided into five Books, every one of which contains many Chapters: In thep. 1. first whereof is explain∣ed the definition of Fortification, together with its Original and se∣veral parts, as also the terms that are made use of in the attacking and defending of places. As for its Original, the Author affirms3. that at first the Assaults of Robbers and wild Beasts being only feared, the People were content to satisfie themselves with Hedges alone, which custom continued even among some Nation 328 Years before our Sa∣viours Nativity. But in process of time, the ambition of some en∣creasing, who endeavoured to rule and tyrannize over their Neigh∣bours, those that desired to enjoy their liberty, were obliged to dig
Trenches and build Walls, which they afterwards flanked with Towers, to the end that they might more easily repel the Enemy, when he should happen to be lodg'd at the foot of the Wall to batter or un∣dermine it. At last a Monk of the Order of St. Francis named Berthold Schwartz of the City of Fribourg in the Country of Brisgan, having in∣vented Gun-Powder in the Year of our Lord 1380. under the Reign of Wenceslaus. the Son of Charles IV, the Cannon and other pieces of Ar∣tillery were then applied to beat down these weak defences, which was done without much difficulty, whereupon the besieged were con∣strained to reinforce their Walls, to enlarge their Towers, and to give them another Figure, which gave occasion to the invention of Bastions and other Works that are now in use. In the second Book is laid down the21. Maxims and Rules of For∣tification, reserving the illustration of some of them for the fourth Book. Afterwards he enquires into the advantages and disadvanta∣ges of the Situation of Places, built on a Rock, &c. as also that of Cita∣dels and other small Fortresses which serve to command the plain Country: But as for great places he determines that they cannot be better situated than in a Plain, or rather on the Banks of a large River: Then he proceeds to discourse of the nature and30. quality of the earth, and prefers that sort which is fat and pliable as the best for these Works. Lastly, he concludes this Book, with giving some account of necessary32. Provisions and Ammunition; and it is not without good reason that he makes mention of Money in the begin∣ning of his Catalogue. Moreover in the third Book the Author shews, after33. what man∣ner a regular Polygon may be inscribed within a given Circle, and how to make a Scale; he proceeds to represent the35. draught of a Square, as being the first figure propounded to be Fortified; then ha∣ving explained the40. construction of the exteriour parts, he returns, to that of the50. Polygons: Lastly, he exhibits the manner of making,53. Profils or Draughts, of drawing out55. a Fortress in the Field, and of describing57. the Streets in a Draught. To prove in some measure what he hath alledged, and give a great∣er light into the knowledge of this Art, he produces in the fourth Book59.88. the different sentiments of a great number of Engineers, concerning the most principal parts of Fortification, and afterwards de∣clares his own opinion. We shall now give a particular account of the most considerable remarks that have been made on the Method of this
famous Engineer. Let us then begin with the Flanks which are the principal parts of Fortification, therefore nothing ought to be neglected for the most advantageous structure of them. And foras∣much as the largest are undoubtedly the best, Monsieur de Vauban en∣deavours to allow them as much height as is possible. It is for this reason that he will not admit a second Flank, and that he makes the Overture of the Angle of the Curtain to consist of from 98 to 106 degrees. Thus the Flanks in his middle-siz'd Fortification, which we shall only mention here, contain from 18 to 37 Fathoms. I cannot imagine that it will be objected, that he doth not regulate the over∣ture of the Angle of the Curtain with a due proportion to the said Curtain; since its heighth ought only to be determined with respect to the Line of Defence. This seems to be that which this great Man chiefly regarded. Monsieur de Vauban having allowed to the Flanks all the length imaginable, endeavours to cover part of them as much as is possible; to this purpose he erects an Orillon, which he forms out of a Semi-Circle. Perhaps it will be thought to be some∣what unusual that he constantly makes it to consist of the third part of the Flank, because it doth not seem to be necessary to erect a lar∣ger Orillon in a greater Fortification than in a lesser. I am apt to be∣lieve that it is sufficient to allow it so much strength as to be able to resist the force of the Cannon. Afterwards he causeth the two other parts of the Flank to return within the body of the Bastion, assign∣ing them the Figure of the sixth part of a Circle, and this is what hath been lately termed the hollow Tower, or Flank retired. Lastly, for the better covering of the Flanks, he placeth the wings of the Works which he builds before the Curtain within the Faces, at the distance of some Fathoms from the Orillon. It hath been believed for a long time, that double Flanks were of very great use in the defence of a place, but they are wholly omitted by Monsieur de Vau∣ban, tho' his reasons are not as yet well known: neither doth he regard False-Brayes, which is not to be admir'd; and to defend the Trench, he makes use of a small and low Tenail to very good pur∣pose, which he placeth before the Curtain, and is separated from it by a little ditch. The Faces of this Work are in the same deline∣ation with those of the Bastions. The Flanks are distant from the others from 10 to 12 Fathoms, and Monsieur de Cambray declares that this proves what he had before asserted concerning the Line of Defence, for he had avouched in one of his Maxims, that it ought not
to exceed 125 Fathoms, nevertheless it appears from his Tables that it contains from 126 to 138 Fathoms▪ There needs not much pains to be ta∣ken with respect to the Angle of the Bastion, only assigning to it from 60 to 100 degrees, that it may be able to sustain it self, and that the Bastion may be of a sufficient largeness. But as for the Faces they seem to require more care to make them of an equal strength, since they do not exceed at most above 50 fathoms. Lastly, touching the Trench, the Author follows the opinion of Monsieur de Clermont, who allots from 18 to twenty fathoms for its breadth, and from 18 to 20 feet for its depth. The Glacis's are made as large as they can be conveniently, not allowing less to them than 36 fathoms; but as for the Rampart, its breadth is limited to 10 fathoms, and Monsieur de Vauban derides their project that would have it proportioned to the largeness of the Polygons, as if little places were not attacked with the same Arms as those that are greater. In the fifth and last Book, the Author shews89. the structure of divers Fortresses erected in the Field, and afterwards lays down95. Rules for the fortifying of an irregular place. But as to the method used by him, it may be affirmed, that he departs a little from his own Maxims, and more especially from the first; in regard that the Trench, the Base of the Rampart, &c. are diminished proportionably as the side of the Polygon exceeds 180 fathoms, un∣less one would say, that in Triangles, which are unequal, there is the same proportion between their sides. This Book is concluded with mentioning somewhat concerning Artillery, whilst a larger discourse thereof is reserved to a Treatise wherein the Author promises expresly to inform us of the manner of attacking a place according to the judgment of Monsieur de Vauban, the publication of which is impatiently expected.
X. OSTEOLOGIA NOVA: Or, A New Treatise of the Bones, and the Parts belonging to them; with the Manner of their Growth and Nutrition: Communica∣ted to the Royal Society in several Discourses; By Clopton Havers M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society. London, for S. Smith, 1691. Pag. 310. IT would require a Discourse as large as any of the Five Disserta∣tions of Dr. Haver's Book, should we go about to set down every Thing that is new and curious therein: And therefore the extraordinary Abundance of Matter will enforce us to pass over many remarkable Things upon which we should have insisted much lon∣ger; but that they are, as we may say, so heap'd up in Piles one upon another. I. The First Discourse treats of the Nature of Bones, and describes the Membrane which covers them, their interiour Frame and Figure. The Author begins with a kind of Prologue, very significant to the purpose; by giving an Idea of the manner of Generation, according to the Principles of de Graef, and Monsieur Drelincourt. He supposes,p. 7. That all the Parts of the Creature are delineated in the Female's Egg, while it is yet in the Womb, and before the Seed of the Male has given it Life: That the most volatile Parts of the Seed insinuating them∣selves into the Umbilical Vein of the Egg, through the Pores of the Membrane of the Ovary, that Vein carries those Particles to the two Ventricles of the Heart, where they raise a Fermentation in the Hu∣mors which there they meet withal, that rarifies and dilates them, and putting the Fibres of the Heart upon a Contraction, produces that Bea∣ting, which is the Sign and Beginning of Life. Part of these rarify'd Humors falling from the right and left Ventricles, into the Aorta, im∣parts its Motion to the Matter contained in it, and in all the Vessels which depend upon it. The Arteries being thus extended, and the Liquor within them being agitated, opens its self a Passage through the Veins; and this compleats the Circulation. These Humors thus
circulating, meet with Glandules in their way, upon the sides, and at the Extremities of the Arteries, through which there is a necessity for them to pass. These Glandules being a sort of Strainers, the most subtle Parts and those which first get through the Glandules of the Brain, are those which are call'd the Vital and Animal Spirits; of which, when there are sufficient to give motion to the Original of the Nerves, then apparently it is, that the Soul is infus'd into the Fo∣tus. The Membranep. 14. which covers the Bone, is very thin, and exqui∣sitely sensible, and made up of most minute and curious Threds, which deduce their Original from the Dura Mater, and from several Muscles and Tendons. Those that descend from the Dura Mater, lie the nea∣rest to the Bones, and are all parallel; but those which proceed from the Muscles, take a different course, according to the situation of the Muscle from whence they proceed. This Membrane is fastned to the Bone by the nature of their Substance, which is viscous and slimy, and by certain little Fibres of that Membrane, which enter into the Pores of the Bone. It is appointed for Five several Offices: 1. It serves to cover the Bones. 2. It conveys Spirits into their Substance, which preserve their Heat, render them sensible, and assist them in their growth and nourishment. 3. It contributes to limit the growth of the Bones. 4. It serves to keep them joyn'd and knit together, and with the Tendons of the Muscles 5. This Membrane being extreamly sen∣sible, causes us to feel the least Disorder that happens in the structure of the Bones, and directs us in the Application of outward Remedies to the Place affected. The Bones,p. 30. at their first beginning, are no more than a clammy Gelly; which drying by little and little, becomes a GristleCarti∣lage., and af∣terwards a perfect Bone, by the evaporation of the liquid Matter, and the additions of the nutritive Juice. The Particles that compose them, are long in shape, and of a terrestrial and salt Nature; but the terrestri∣al Particles make above two Thirds of the Mass. Their Fibres are long; contigous, and parallel one to the other, in such a manner that they form little Lamels; which meeting at the Extremity of the Bones, lie one over another, and close up the Concavityp. 43.. There are two sorts of Pores in the Bones, besides those which serve for a passage to the Sanguinary Vessels: of which some are oblique, and pierce through the Lamels of the Bones, extending themselves from the superficies of the Bone to the Hollowness; the other are streight and narrow, and appear all along the Lamels from one end of the Bone to the other.
p 49. The Superficies of the Bone is very uneven, unless it be at the Joints, where there is a necessity it should be smoother; to facilitate the mo∣tion of the Parts. This unevenness proceeds from the superficial Ca∣vities and Pores, which there meet together. These superficial Ca∣vities are of two sorts: Some are long, and like a sort of Furrows; others are shorter, and of a different shape. The Use of both is to dilate the Surface of the Bone, and to keep the Membrane more firm∣ly fastned to it. p 6. As for the Pores, their Use is to serve as passages for Blood. Vessels; some belonging to those Vessels which convey that Blood which supplies the nutritious Juice; others, to them which serve to the Marrow. Those of the nutritious Veins are very numerous, but so small, that it is a difficult thing to discern them. Those of the Medullary Arteries are more remarkable, and enter the Bone obliquely; so that the way which they make, is often Ten or Twelve times lon∣ger than the Thickness of the Bone. p. 61. There are two sorts of Hollownesses in the Bone; and of those which are large, there is but one in every Bone; the rest are very nu∣merous, and resemble little Cells, which render that part of the Bone spungy where they are to be found. The Author gives the Reasons of all this Structure of Nature. You will also find there very curious Observations upon the Teeth.p. 78. Dr. Havers observes, That they are made up of two very diffe∣rent Parts: The one is of the Nature of Stones, having the solidity and glittering of the hardest Flints; but with this difference, that they will be dissolv'd by Aqua Fortis, which Flints will not. This Stony Matter is a sort of Rind, which covers all the Part without the Gums. That Part which is within the Gums is cover'd with a particu∣lar Membrane, which nevertheless proceeds not from that of the Jaw∣bone, though this Membrane extends it self to the Fastning or Inclosure of the Teeth in the Gums, and be contiguous to their Membrane. II. The Second Discoursep 89. treats at first of Growth and Nourishment in general; which the Author afterwards particularly applies to the Bones. He reduces all that Matter to Three Questions. The First, How the Nutritive Juice is form'd, and fix'd to the Parts of young Creatures, after such a sort as to enlarge their Dimensions? Certain it is, that that same Juice proceeds from our Nourishment chang'd in∣to Chyle; which passing through the Milky Veins, to mix it self with the Blood, meets with some Particles of the Nutritive Juice of the Kerness, convey'd by the Lymphatick Chanels, that serve for a Fer∣ment
to those of the Chyle. This Milky Liquor entring the Heart, and being mix'd with the Blood, is there subtiliz'd, and passes after∣wards into the Arteries; on the sides of which it meets with Kernels, the Pores of which are so fram'd, as only to admit the Nutritive Juice. Now while the rest of the Blood pursues its Course in the Artery, the Nutritive Particles are press'd out of the Kernels, and advance forward through every up-lifting of the Artery, and by the pressure of other little Bodies of the same nature, which supply their Places, till they are push'd forward into the Intervals of the Fibres, where they meet with the Spirits in Motion. These Spirits have a double Motion; for they turn about their Cen∣tre like a Bowl thrown out of hand, while according to their local Mo∣tion, they describe a Line as streight as is possible. Now in regard the Nu∣tritive Parts are liquid and viscous, and that the Spirits cannot impart their direct Motion to them, they force them to the sides of the Ves∣sels, where they stick; more especially, if they meet with any hollow∣ness, or any void space. Add to this, that while the Creature is yet very young, the Parts are very tender, and the Fibres more supple, and less extended: So that it is no wonder if little viscous Bodies being forced in between the Extremities of the Particles of those Fibres, these soft Parts give way, and so separate one from the other, for the infixation of new Matter. The Second Question,p. 126. proposes, What is the Cause that stops the growth of any Creature? To which, the Answer is, That it is the hardness of the Filaments and Lamels, and the firm unition of the Particles of the Fleshy and Nervous Fibres, which, when a Creature is come to such an Age, resist the Efforts of the Spirits and Nutritive Particles; so that not being able to lodge themselves in the Pores or Intervals of the Fibres, which are already full, they are carried off by the direct motion of the Spirits, to other Kernels, which rarifie them to a greater degree, and employ them to other Uses. The Third Questionp. 133. is about Nourishment, the Nature of it, and how it is perform'd? Dr. Havers believes it to be no more than a continual Supply of the fluid and nutritious Particles that keep the Fi∣bres, the Pores, the Hollownesses, and in a word, all the Pipes and Vessels of the Body full, and in a good condition. Sometimes it hap∣pens that there may be a loss of some part of the Fibres, and that the void space is fill'd up by the Nutritive Juice, which the circular Mo∣tion of the Spirits forces forward, toward the sides of the Arteries:
But this, the Author says, is not the manner of Nature's repairing the ordinary Decays and Wasts of our Bodies. For Proof of which, he supposes, as another Learned AnatomistD. Tyson. does, that the whole Body of Man is porous, and full of Vessels, which several sorts of Humors keep dilated and well sill'd; so that Leanness, and the Marasm it self, do not proceed from that, the fix'd Parts of our Body, as the Flesh and Bones are depriv'd of their Sub∣stance; which can never happen but by the violence of Corrosives, which would cause an incredible pain: nevertheless they feel no pain who are troubled with those languishing Diseases: And therefore such an Atrophy must proceed from hence, that the Humors which fill the Vessels, and preserve them plump, evaporating the Vessels shrunk, and by that means impair the Dimension of the Parts. The Author afterwards,p 143. makes the Application of his Principles, to explain the manner, and the limits of the growth of the Bones, and how they are nourished; which it is no difficult thing to do, if the Reader forget not what has been already observ'd; That both in the Foetus and a new born Child, the Bones are made up of a Matter which is very tender, and easiy gives way; but as it grows, changes into Gi∣stles that the Particles which compose the Gristles, do not form con∣tinued Threads, but leave between them Cavities, or void Spaces, which in time are fill'd up with Nutritive Juice! That it slides along a good while before all the Spaces of those Particles are fill'd up, and that the Gristles are converted into perfect Bones; and then it is that Growth ceases, the Nutritious Particles no longer knowing where to lodge themselves. According to this Hypothesis, Dr. Havers explains the Reason why the Bones grow crooked in the Rickets, and why both that Distemper and the Neapolitan Disease many times produce Knots or Excrescencies upon the Bone. III. The Third Discourse treats of the Marrow.p. 161 All the World knows that the Marrow is an Oyly Substance, which fills the Cavity of the Bones; but you shall hardly any where else meet with so exact a Description of it, as the Author gives here: This Marrow is enclo∣sed in small round Vesicles; of which two, or three, or more, are con∣tain'd in Bags of different shape, and these Bags in a transparent and very slender Membrane, consisting of Fibres prolong'd from the Blood-Vessels, which afford it Nourishment through the Pores of the Bones. These Vesicles and little Bags are also furnished with Pores, through which the Marrow's Oyl passes from one to the other, and communi∣cates it self to the Joints: So that these Vesicles are also a kind of
Kernels, and separate the Marrow from the other Parts of the Blood. p. 171. When these Vesicles are full, they contract themselves, as all puffed up Bladders do, and then discharging their Oil the one into the other, it passes from Vesicle to Vesicle, and from Bag to Bag, till it enters in∣to the thwarting Pores of the Bones; whence it sheds it self into the streight Pores, and at the Articulations, and is employed into the Ca∣vities between their Joints, which it keeps moist and slippery. In the great Cavities of the Bones, the Marrow appears whitish, speckled with Red; but absolutely Red in the lesser Cells, which only proceeds from the different quantity of Veins and Arteries that nourish it: Some parts of this Marrow are apt to congeal, because they are mix'd with Nitre. Though the Marrowp. 178. contributes nothing to the Nourishment of the Bones, that are furnished with Blood-Vessels appointed for that purpose; it is otherwise many ways useful: For, 1. It moistens the Substance of the Bones, and by its oyly Nature it preserves them in good condition, and hinders them from shivering. 2. With the Mu∣cilage it makes the Joints of the Bones slippery, and consequently sit for Motion. 3. Mixt with the clammy Mucilage, it cools them, and prevents their contracting a more than ordinary Heat by their Motion. 4. It prevents them from wearing out, wasting and bruising by rubbing one against another. 5. It is after the same manner serviceable to the Li∣gaments which tie the Bones together, preserving them from being dry and stiff, and keeping them supple and slippery. IV. The Fourth Discourse treats of the Mucilage, and the mucilaginous Kernelsp. 187. These Kernels are one of the principal Discoveries of the Author; who tells us, they were never discerned by any person before himself. They are of two sorts; the one sort, which is very small and numerous, take up the whole Membrane of the Joint, unless in that part where you meet with the second sort of these Kernels, which are conglomerate, bigger, and consequently more remarkable than the first. They are made up of several Kernels, or small Mem∣branes, extended one upon another, long and large at the bottom, and ending usually in a point, though there are some that are flat, and of other different Figures. They are soft and supple, and not brittle; so that they yield to, and suffer the impression of the Bones without receiving any harm. The Blood-Vessels with which they communicate, are not streight, but oblique; so that the Blood circulating round about them, the mucilaginous Particles have time to separate, when they enter the Kernels.
The Mucilagep 201. which distills out of these Kernels, is a clear and clammy Liquor, almost like the White of an Egg. It is composed of Watry, Salt and Terrestrial Parts; but the Salt, and the Earthy Parts make no more than about the 32d part of the Mixture. It partakes of the nature of the Serum, only that it is not to be all turn'd into a Coa∣gulum by the heat of the Fire, as the Serum is. It serves for the same Use as the Marrow, and they assist one another to perform their Functi∣ons. The Mucilage renders the Marrow's Oyl more slippery, and that Oyl hinders the Mucilage from growing too thick. It is formed, as the Author says, in the Spleen, which is of a Viscous and Kernelly Substance, and which has two forts of Pores; the one proper for the distilling of Acids through them, and the other is a Stiptick Juice, which serves as a Ferment for the Blood to produce the Mucilage there. Dr. Havers sets down several Experimentsp. 217. which he has made upon this Liquor; of which, the most considerable, in relation to Physick, are, That violent Acids, as Salt, and Oyl of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, and Spirit of Nitre, and Vinegar, coagulate the Mucilage, chiefly when it is hot; so that it will become thin and fluid, and that you may separate from it a kind of Whey, or Serum. The Author tried, whether by the help of Powder of Coral, Antimony Diaphorerick, or Crabs-Eyes, he could make it resume its first Nature; but he could not bring it to pass: Yet with Spirit of Sal Armon. and Salt of Tartar, all the Coagulation would be dissolved. The Parts where these Kernels are seated, are subject to Catarrh, because these Kernels not only separate the Mucilage from the Blood, but many times also other Morbisick Humors, which Nature desires to be rid of. When those Humors affect the Muscies, they cause the Rheumatism, and when they fall upon the Joints, they breed the Gout. Dr. Havers bestows a whole Articlep. 223, 249. upon both these Distempers, and observes, that the Humors which infect the Mucilage upon these occasions, are of three sorts; the one sharp and thin, the other salt, und the last, which are the most usual, acid and corroding. You will read with delight the Author's manner of explaining the three Sources of these Distempers; which gives a great Light to understand their Cure. V. The Fifth Discourse is concerning the Gristles,p. 288. It has been al∣ready observ'd, that they are only imperfect Bones; which being subtle and flexible, are apt to comply with the several motions of the Mus∣cles. The Author describes at large their Nature, and their outward
and inward Structure, as also their different Uses; and particularly of those in the Breast, p. 284. II. FREDERICI RƲISCHII, Anatomes, Chyrurgiae & Botanices Professoris, Observationum Anatomico-Chirurgi∣carum Centuria. Accedit Catalogus Rariorum quae in Musaeo Ruyschiano asservantur, adjectis ubi{que} I conibus aeneis naturalem magnitudinem representantibus. Amstelod. apud H. Boom 1691. pag. 274. Prostant apud Abel Swall, & Timo. Childe. THere are few Books that look more curious to the sight than this. The Paper, the Print, the Figures, draw the Eyes of the Rea∣der; and there is no body but will give a favourable Judgment of the Work, when he reads in the Preface, that the Author has been Twenty Years Professor of Anatomy at Amsterdam: That he has had all the Conveniencies in the World to make Experiments in the Hospitals of that great City; and that he has spent all his Life in making Collecti∣ons of whatever he has observed most remarkable. Upon these Foun∣dations it is, that he has rais'd the Hundred Observations which compose the first Part of this Work. The Second, is a Description of the Author's Study; where are to be seen several Rarities of Ana∣tomy. Mr. Ruyschius is not of the number of those that build in the Air a Systeme of Physick, which has no other Foundation than Chimerical Conjectures. He maintains, that Experience only is the Mistress of that Art; and he advises, that Men, instead of guessing at the Causes of Diseases, should chiefly busie themselves in collecting together the most surprizing Phanomena's that offer themselves in Practice. But withal, it would be necessary, that all who undertake this Employ∣ment, should have seen every thing with their own Eyes, and that they should be endued with a Conception and Judgment so sufficiently clear, as not to look upon as extraordinary Accidents, Things that happen every day. The cutting of an ArteryOb. 11. p. 5., especially in the larger Vessels, is an Ac∣cident difficult to cure; and the Author would have obliged the Pub∣lick, had he explained a little more at large how he stopt that Aneu∣risma in the Arm, to the Cure of which he says he was an Assistant. When he prepared to make the Incision, to discover the wounded Ar∣tery
that he might close it up again, he says, he made use of an Iron-Ring, lin'd with a thick and soft Skin, which he intended to apply to the upper part of the Arm, above the Aneurisma, to stop the motion of the Blood that way; That that same Instrument not answering their expectation, they had recourse to another, which took effect; but the Author is so far from describing it, that he does not so much as name it. In a Journal of Eight Days, relating to that Malady, which Mr. Ruy∣schius gives us, we find the Wound grew continually worse and worse, till it broke out into two new Aneurisma's; the one of which being as large as a great Pea, open'd it self, but bled not much; because the Chirurgeon stopt it presently; and a few days after, it was through∣ly healed, by opening the Vein, a slender Diet, and a due compres∣sion. As for the other, they had much ado to squeeze it down; it con∣tinued several days, but at length it vanish'd, and the Patient reco∣vered. Paucis diebus secta Vena, tenuiori diaeta praescripta, & debita com∣pressione facta, sanatum fuit. Alterum vero Aneurisma quantumvis com∣primeretur perplures dies, curationi remoram fecit; tandem vero quo{que} dispa∣ruit, convaluit{que} aeger. It would be a strange ThingObs. 22. p. 27. that a Woman should conceive, and yet that the Membrane call'd the Hymen, should not be broken. But the Relation which Mr. Ruyschius gives us, is not sufficient to make us believe it. He adds another Circumstance more incredible; asser∣ting, That the Vagina or Sheath of the Womb was covered and stop∣ped up with an extraordinary Membrane at the Time of the Woman's Lying in. He says, That these two Membranes were cut, and that the Infant came forth sound and vigorous, and that the Mother recei∣ved no harm. However, in my Opinion, there is nothing in this Relation of his, but what might have been unfolded, without suppo∣sing any thing but what is very common. The Bed wherein the Foetus is contained, and which is made up of several double Mem∣branes, sinks down by little and little, through the weight of the Wa∣ters that fill it. Then the Infant separates from the Body of the Mo∣ther, and falls with his Head downward toward the Orifice of the Womb. Many times it happens that the Foetus falls on the Side, and incumbers it self, Head and Neck together, in the Membranes of its Bed. Those, it seems, were the Membranes which Ruyschius caused to be cut, and which hindred the Birth of the Infant: At least there is nothing in all his Observation, which forces us to have recourse to two such wonderful Events.
XI. Leonardi Plukenetri PHYTOGRAPHIA, s Stir∣pium Illustriorum, & minùs cognitarum I CONES, Tabu∣lis aeneis, 120 Fig. fere, 800. summâ diligentra elaboratoe. Fol. Londini 1691. WHerein the Author has given impregnant Instance at his own expence, of his earnest desire of improving Boty. The Subject of this Book hs been the stdied Collection of seve∣ral Vears, and unites in it self the scattered and most distant Parts of Vegetable Nature; which if we consider as to their Number or Novelty, it will appear such an Acomulation of Network Science, as few Books of this Nature can boast of: Not can we sufficiently admire the vast Variety of curiously engra do  ient or unheard of Plants commu∣nicated to the World in so ior and compendious a Volue. The Me∣thod he takes in explaining these Eticks, is both conspicuous and fuccirct; his Names adapted from their essential Notes, and proper Characteristicks, such, as without help of In, might convey to the Mind a true Idea of the Things they denominate, as being entire De∣scriptions of them. The Work divides it self into Two Parts; and by a fresh addition of Parts, may be ngtlinect out ad infin. For our Author pur∣sues the Alphabetical Order in his Design; yet not so as to break in upon Affinities or Cognations, but had rather commute a Name, than not preserve a Clan or Tribe, as may be observed throughout the whole Work: As, for instance, what others call a Pees Africana Ca Palstris fo, with bee reason he terms a Bio, and ranks i among its Cognominals in the Letter B. By this way of exploding improper Appellations, and assigning new ones to some late discove∣red Plants, he comes to assert the stragling Vegetable into its proper Family; and such Alliances that lay before promiscuous, or disjoyned, and stood at distance with each other, into a closer kind of Consorti∣um: Thus, the Ae Orienta ppc fruo of others, (which in∣deed is no Alcea,) is made by him, a Lapp tetrasperms, and subjoy∣ned to the atina Trag, Hist. Lgd, which is a Tetraspermo too; (by many, most untruly stiled a Cynogloss,) as of more congruity with it, and near akin thereto; and in this way of Distribution, he still pre∣serves both Alphab and Aff. How clear his Artol igurations has made that cloudy Stella Legu∣minosa of the Great John Bauhine, when here, as through a Beam of Light, it manifests it self a true Astragalus, and discrepant from all
others of the Kind. The Jacca's, however perplex'd in other Authors, are set to rights in this; and Thapsla's, no less confus'd, are here di∣stinct in the Iconisms of our Author. There are some of those many curious Figures, the needful Emen∣dations of vitiate or mistaken Icons in elder Authors, which are by him made genuine from the Truth of Things, on purpose to clear the Doubts, and decide the Controversies of our most celebrious Moderus: This he esteems a Service done the Publick, as well de∣serves his Pains, and equal to that of introducing Plants de novo. A rare Example of this kind, is the Jacea fruticans Pini folio of the renow∣ned Caspar Bauhine, which from the miserable Cut in Pona, in his De∣scription of Mount Baldus, under the Title of Staebe capitata Rosmarini folio; from whence all later Writers derive their Pictures of it, hath been so puzling to the most sagacious Botanists of this present Age, that it hath been wellnigh lost in their suspicion of its being the same with the Stachas purpurea of Peliterius, in the Illustrations of Lobel. That Figure of it in Prosper Alpinus his Exoticks, pag. 77. under the Name of Chamaepeuce, is indeed more tolerable; but much inferiour to this Noble and Illustrious Knapweed, which owes its Restauration to the more acurate and lively graven Image of our Author. Whose studious care in stating References to obscurer, and less in∣telligible Writers, as Marcgrave, Laet, and Hernandez, he takes to be a proper means to ease Nature of the Tympany some others would affect her with, by multiplying Species without sense or reason; in their proposing Plants for new, which under other Names are to be found in the dark Obscurities of former Writers. But let us now descend to some Particulars of the many hundred rare Exotick Plants this Author represents to view in curious Sculp∣ture; for to recount them all, were to transcribe the Book it self. He there presents you with a stranger Maple from Bengal, that hath the Leaves of Bay; with an Herbaceous Plant from China, from which they rase their Moxa, so celebrated all over India for curing of the Gout. He gives you Three sorts of Serpentaria, the Roots whereof are Remedy against the Bitings of the Rattle-Snake; two from Virginia, and one from Maryland, all boasted Antidotes of America: There is another from those Parts, they call a Serpintary, figur'd in his first Appendix with a fattisll Birthwort or Briony sort of Leaf, and a long Scries of stamineous Flowers dispos'd into a Spike; with a jointed creeping Root, much differing from the former, a Plant of its own kind, and truly Heteroclital. Moreover, he gives a true and
genuine Figure of the Ninzeng, or Ginzeng, together with its Root, of great value in its Native Country, it being esteem'd a Panacea throughout the Oriental Indies. He obliges the World with several rare Adianthums from China and elsewhere, with various Amaranths, and Amaranthioides from both the Indies; an odd sort of Antirrhinum with very slender Leaves turn'd up like Mustachoes; and that Peruvian, Shrub so ostentatiously shewn by some, for the Tree, from whence the Jesuit's Bark is taken, so fa∣med a Remedy for all sorts of Fevers: He proposes to the World a numerous Train of Indian Grasses unknown before to Europe; among the rest, a most illustrious sort, one of the Glories of Carolina: Seve∣ral new and elegant Evonymi from America, and one from Maderospa∣tan, with Leaves not much unlike that sort of Cassia lignea, that's co∣ver'd with the Bark of Winterane. The Indian Tea, with its Fruit and Flower, by him stil'd Evonymo adsinis nucifera Orientalis; as also that other Evonymo adfinis Occidentalis alatis Rusci foliis nucifera, which at its first arrival, came under the Name of Jasminum Americanum, and is the Guaiacum folio Lentisci of the Fagel Garden, in the second Prodromus of Jacobus Breynius. He also pronoses to your view in this most excellent Work, two sorts of the true Guaiacum, or Indian Pockwood, with their Flower and Fruit. Several kinds of Hemionitis from Antego, Wales, and the East Indies; and one especially of the Composite Order, akin to this Moon-Fern Family, with petalous and perfect Flowers growing to the Crenatures, upon the Rim, and on the back-part of the Leaves, a goodly Native of the flourishing Island of Jamaica. The Liquid Amber, or Storax Tree of the West Indies, together with its Fruit; which shews it to be neither Platanus nor Acer, are here ex∣hibited in Icon. The Cock spurs, together with the Plum-leav'd Med∣lar of Virginia, without Thorns, are here distinctly plac'd. That kind of Bastard-Myrile from Bermudos, so like the Elaeagnus Cordi, which our Author, with good reason, takes to be the same with Laurus ser∣rata odora of the Cape, in the Learned Commentaries of Bodaeus a Sta∣pel; another most elegant bacciserous kind from Carolina, that bears its Berries on its Branches in clusters, like so many rugged Coriander-Com∣fits; and a Third Sort, both Juliferous, and Fruit-bearing, with an echi∣nated Fruit, like the prickly Involucrum of a small Chesnut, and Leaves of the Tree like our Asplenium. An Onobrychis, with the Face of a Mimosa, from the Kingdom of Bisnagar. Another with a single Leaf, from one of the Mouths of the River Ganges; and a Third, bifoliate, from Made∣raspatan, are the surprizing Wonders of Botanick Nature.
A mimerous Tribe of strange Phaseoli come to pay homage to the ce∣rious Phytognostick: a small one from Bisnagar, witha short and knobbed solitary Pod, like that of Orobus; but covered with a brownish silken Down, whose Leaves are of a soft and silver hue; another from Ma∣deraspatan, I whose Leaves are somewhat like the former; but its Podds are smooth, and blackish, bloated like a Bladder, with several Flowers spike fashion. There is another larger sort, with many corner'd Leaves, and toberous Root, that's good to eat; which those of Nevis call the Turnep Tree. Another of this Batata kind of Phaseole, from the Southern Cape; a pretty kind of Phaseole with Laburnum-Leaves, and solitary Flowers, a crooked pod in Figure of a Turkish Cymiter; ano∣ther, with such like Leaves, but a small Melilot, and a spiked Flower. A Tree-kind hereof, with Pods no bigger than the smallest Lentil, and almost hid within its Calyx. All these from the English Factory of Fort St. Georgs. Here is a Phaseole, whose Twiggy Stalks are arm'd with Thorns. Indigenous of Japhnapatan; Two unifoliate Kinds, one from the East, the other from the Western Indies, and very different each from other. Several curious sorts of Lycia and Rhamni do here sa∣lute the Reader; one Myrtle-leav'd from Ganges; and another with a Leaf like Privet, from the Oriental Indies, that has this Peculiar, of having its Leaf at bottom united to the upper part of the Pedicle, by an Articulation, that makes a pretty Figure of a Navel. The Saa∣mouna of Piso is only here, and no where else in Flower. A whole Set of Indian Ricini, the Sumach of Virginia, which our Au∣thor takes for an Arbor Copallifera, among the Mexicans; whose near, resemblance to our Lentiscus, gave birth to the Mistake of those Wri∣ters, who will needs have our European Mastich-Tree a Native of Vir∣ginia. Four sorts of Scabious are all display'd in artificial Sculpture. One from Bisnagar; one from Maderaspatan; another from Jamaica; and a Conyzoide sort from Curassau. A Scorzonera bulbosa from Virginia. The Stella Orientalis fulgens, a Securidaca kind, from Maderaspatan; and a Scorpioides with a single Leaf, from Bisnagar, are here laid open to your view. You have the Absus of Alpinus de Pl. Aegypt. here more Authentick; and the Mundubi of the Brasilians in Piso, so near akin unto it, going hand in hand, with all its Parts, most accurately express'd. The Sina∣pistrum-Family is here enlarged, by the addition of two Bisoliate kinds, from the Coast of Cormandel. The Basella Malabarensium in our Phy∣tographia, in little, is more at large, than in the most pompous Picture of it, in the Hortus Malabaricus, Part 7. Where neither Berry, nor its
Kernel, with its running in a Spiral Line, are in the least taken no∣tice of. A Tribalus terrestris, with a large Poppy-Plower, from the Ameri∣can Strand, next offers to divert you; and that other Ebenus, the same with Cytisus Croticus , of Honerius Belli, in Leaf so like the Pentaphylloides fruticosum of our famous Mr. Ray, is no small Or∣nament; seeing its diversity from the Trifoliate Kind, is here made obvious. You have here the lively Images of no less than two of the Tulipifera's; one from Carolina, the other from Virginia, with Flower and Fruit, both differing from the common Kind. A sort of Angelica from the Charibbees, with Seed that tastes and smells of Cummin, and may perhaps be a sort of Podagraria. Very many fine Apocynums from the West-Indies. A trifoliate Arum from Virginia, Afters in abundance from all the Quarters of the World; and an Ophioglossum that smells of Musk, with a Limonium-Leaf, but not so stiff, and sinuate a-top, from the same most happy Continent of Virginia. A Leonuros with a white Flower from America; and another small purple one, with a single Whortle, or Bout of Flowers crowning its Tops, from Maderaspa∣tan. The Goat-Balsome-Tree, from Antego; and that other Babsamiferous One with a Mulberry-Leaf, call'd the Bastard-Cedar, by our Planters in Jamaica, do court your Eye to Recreation; a pair of the new found Boxekind; one African, and the other American; a genuine Branch of the Canella alba Clus, or Cassia Lignea, from whence the celebrated Cortex Winteranus, together with its Fruit, from the Island of Ja∣maica, are well express'd, and happ present themselves in Icom. The Ceratia diphyllos, or Locust-Tree, from Antego and Barbados, wee∣ping forth its Soul into a pellucid Resinous Gum, in Odour of Olibu∣num, or our finest Frankincense, known by the Name of Anime; the same with Piso's Jetaiba, with its Branch, its Lobe, and Fruit, is most exactly figur'd from the Life; the Ʋngula Gati, of the Portugals, never before in Icon; and Avaremo Temo of the Brasilians, and some∣times Native of Bengal, from whence our Author had it; both in Affi∣nity with the former, and this, so vilely cut in Piso and Marcgravius, are here express'd in lively Sculpture. The Chrysanthemums are excee∣ding new and numerous from several distant Parts of our Terrestrial Globe. The Cpressus Virgintuna Acaae foliis, with its Nots and Fruit; The Majoran leav'd Clinopodium; which our English Planters in Ame∣rica, from its most excellent Virtues, distinguish by the Name of Di∣tany; and several sorts of Anils or Indigoes from both the Indies, ge∣nerically
differing among themselves, are here to be found in lively adumbration. Ten of the Eupatrn Band, Eight Conyzoide, and Two of the Vari Order, are here curiously exhibited. The true E of Jamaica, a Soliquiferous and Thorny Shrub, the various Kinds of new discovered Fiics, as well Native of England, as Exotick; Two Eiories the one of Africk, the other a Virginiant▪ The , from the same Place: The great Va∣riety of Mosi, Pursanes of several Sorts from the Charibbee Islands; and the most elegant Phyllyri, from Virginia, a true Herba de Raiz; which by the bended Top-parts of its Leaves, roots in the Ground, and so propagates its Spies, are all surprizing Objects among the Phytographick Tables of our Laborious Author. The Phnio-Scorpiuros, or Heliotropium Palmites from the Oriental Indies. The Rhoi similis Tragodes, smelling so like Androsaemon foetidum, by those of Jamaica call'd Fingego, and by the Barbados-Planters, from its stinking smell, (as 'tis supposed,) the Savin Tree, is a most elegant Shrub, and really deserves the great Exactness that was be∣stowed upon its on▪ The Swilaxaspern divides into many real and specifick Differences, which with the Bastard China, and True-Born Sarsaparilla, are here exhibited with exact Resemblance to the Life: A Ro Sol, from the Kingdom of Portugal, with Leaves about a Foot long; a Virga Aurea with Leaves, Smell, and Taste of Tarracon; and an Epidendron, or Viscum arboreum from the West Indies, with a large white Flower, of admirable Form and Structure, are the Vegetable Wonders that close up this part of the Phytoptical Account: The To∣tal whereof, must needs bespeak the Author a Person of prodigious Pains, and demonstrate to the World what vast Improvements of this Kind might yet further be expected from an Industry so indefatiga∣ble as his. XII. Praxeos Mayernianae in Morbis internis, praecipue gravio∣ribus, & Chronicis Syntagma, & ex Adversariis, Conciliis, ac Epistolis ejus summa Cura ac Diligentia concinnatum. 80. Lond. For Sam. Smith. 1690. pag. 472. THE Reputation of the Deceased Sir Theodore Mayern, is so great, and his Cures have prov'd so fortunate, That Dr. De Vix, his God Son, could not make a greater Present to the Publick, than by
imparting to it the Remedies which hmaderuse of with scntin ness. It were to be wish'd, that the Deceased Sir Theodore had himself pursued his own Work, and put in Order; it would have doubtless been much more useful for our Instruction: But in short, since all the Remains of Great and Learned Men, are esteem'd as precious Relicks, there was Reason sufficient for not suffering these Observations, which were found among the Collections of that Famous Physician, to be lost. You must not expect to meet with many Chymical Remedies, be∣cause the Use of such Medicines was but newly begun to be introduc'd in his Time. But there are other Receipts which will appear to be Novel∣ties to the Physicians beyond Seal, as, several Preparations of Tabacco, and other Herbs to be smoak'd in Pipes, which he prescrib'd in sundry Distempers: There are some Persons who will hardly believe, that the Smoak of Tabacco will reach the Brain; and the Reason which they bring for so saying, is this; because Tabacco is an Herb so sharp and vehement, that if the Smoak of it attended and reach'd the Substanne of the Brain, it would beget Convulsions in those that took it. But this is no convincing Argument; For besides the Trouble which they who first begin to smoak Tabacco, have to accustome themselves to take it, and the Noysomness of it to those that love it not, the great Effects which Smoak produces, will doubtless prevail with all Persons not prejudic'd against it, to believe that Dr. Mayern's Practice was not without very good Grounds. XIII. Edmundi Richeri Doctoris Parisiensis, De Potestate Ec∣clesioe in Rebus Temporalibus, Libri IV. Nunquam antehac editi. 4o Coloniae; & Londini, for Abel Swall, 1691. pag. 526. THere are few People but have heard of Richer, Doctor of Sorbonne, who has made himself so famous, for maintaining in Times of Danger and Trouble, the Sovereign Authority of Kings against the Usurpations of the Popes of Rome. These Pontiffs always upon the Watch to take the Advantage of all Opportunities, to enlarge their Power, laid hold of the Occasion which the Minority of Lewis XIII. put into their hands, and the Intrigues of Cardinal Perron, who was all in all at that Time in France, to spread abroad that monstrous Opi∣nion of their having Power to excommunicate and depose Kings▪ The
Clergy was devoted to the Interest of the Roman See; The Nobility was drawn to their Party by Promises and Threats; so that the Third Estate only stood firm; because it was composed of Learned Civilians, and Do∣ctors well skill'd in the Canon-Law. But the Pope's Nucio so well knew how to scare the Queen Regent, the Chancellor being besides, a Pensioner to the Clergy, that he silenced the Third Estate, and pre∣vented the Publishing of the Declaration which was made, and inclu∣ded these Eight Articles. 1.p. 3. That it should be declared by the Three Estates, that the King held his Authority only from God; and that he has no Dependence upon any Authority whatever, either Spiritual or Temporal upon Earth. 2ly, That all the Subjects in the Kingdom of France shall be obliged without Distinction or Equivo∣cation, to declare, That this Doctrine is confirm'd by Scripture. 3ly That the Commissioners of the Three Estates shall swear to it, and subscribe it; as likewise, all that hold any Office or Benefice. 4ly. That all the Instructers of Youth, Doctors and Preachers shall promise upon Oath to teach this Doctrine, and refute any Opinion to the contrary, as detestable. 5ly. That all Books which maintain, that it is lawful to excommunicate and depose Kings, shall be suppressed as seditious. 6ly. That all Foreigners that shall Publish the like O∣pinions, shall be look'd upon as Enemies to the Crown. 7. That all the King's Subjects who declare themselves to be of their Opinions, shall be proceeded against as guilty of High Treason. 8. That if any Religious Foreigner shall maintain any Proposition contrary to the Law of the States of the Kingdom, those of the same Order in France, shall be obliged to condemn it solemnly, and without Equivo∣cation; as also to refute the Author, if it be thought necessary. C.l. You will find more at large the History of all these Disputes in the First Chapter of the First Book of this Work. In the Second Chapter the Author shews, That the Practice of the Catholick Church is conformable to the Declaration of the Third Estate. In the Third, he proves, That it is no less conformable to the Practice & Doctrine of the Gallican Church, which has all along defended the Authority of Kings against the Usurpations of the Popes, with an extraordinary Zeal; for which the Author brings many Examples,p. 0. 1. Hinkmar the Arch∣bishop of Rhemes's Letter to Pope Adrian the Second. 2. The Refusal of the French Clergy to obey Gregory VII. who would forbid the cele∣brating of Divine Offices in France. 3. The Answer which the Ministers of Philip Aug. gave to the Legat of Innocent III. who would have excom∣municated
Lewis VIII. Philip's Eldest Son, because he had taken Arms to maintain the Right, which the Election of the Barons of England, (revol∣ted from K. John, for submitting himself a Vassal to the Pope,) gave him to the Crown of that Kingdom. 4. The Constancy of St. Lewis, who would never yield to his Clergy, That their Excommunications were of any force, till they were examin'd and confirm'd by the Secular Magistrate. 5. The Acts of the Three Estates against Boniface VIII. which constrained his Successor Clement. V. to revoke his extravagant Ʋnam Sanctam. To this, the Author adds the Decrees of Parliament against the Books of John Tanquarelli, Bernardin Castori, Cardinal Bellarmin, of the Jesuits, Decanus, Suarez and others who advanc'd the Power of the Popes above that of Kings. II. In the Second Book, the Author marks out the Method which he intends to observe; and sets down Three General Heads,p. 66. by which we are to examin whether a Doctrine be Orthodox or no. 1. He would have it so clearly contain'd in Scripture, that it may be clearly drawn from thence without any tedious Ratiocinations. 2. If the Sense of the Passage be contested, to have recourse to the Tradition of the Church, that is to say, to the unanimous Opinion of the Ancient Fathers. 3. To assure your selves that this Tradition is true, and that it proves something, it is requisite that it should be uni∣versal; that is to say, receiv'd & believ'd in all Times, and in all Places. Afterwards the Author examines a little Scholastically, neverthe∣less with good Judgment, the Essential and Formal Causes of Politick Power. There he makes an Analysisp 73. of that famous Passage of Rom. 13.1, 2. and shews that the most Learned of the Fathers, Tertul∣lan, Origen, St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, &c. and the most Famous Mo∣dern Doctors, Tho. Aquinas, Tolletus, Estius, Cornelius à Lapide, &c. believed that that same Passage prov'd the Independency of Princes from all other humane Authority. He proves the same Thing,p. 109. by the Commentaries of the Ancients upon the Words of David, Psal-50. Against Thee only have I sinned. He examines the Difference be∣tween the Mosaick Priesthood and the Gospel, and shews, that though Princes were to submit to the Priests in Spiritual Things, it did not follow, that they had any Superiour in Temporals. After he has confirm'd his Opinion by the Canons of several Councils, and given Examples of the Fidelity of the French to their Princes,p. 123. before they were corrupted by the Jesuits, he examines the Que∣stion, Whether it be lawful for the People to depose Princes? and re∣futes
those that hold the Affirmative. The Reasons which he alledges,p. 133. amount to this, That the Publick Good, Peace, and Repose of Society, are of Divine Right; whence it follows, 1. That it is un∣lawful to prejudice or disturb them. 2. That Religion cannot be a just Pretence to take Arms, since War can only pretend to regulate the Temporalty. 3. That in Moral Things, that which cannot be obtain'd but with extream difficulty, and a very great and inevitable danger, is look'd upon as an Impossibility; and therefore it is better to bear with a Tyrant, than to expose Society to be turn'd Topsie Turvy, by en∣deavouring to take him out of the World. 4. That the Maxim, That no Faith is to be observ'd with him that has violated his own, takes no place in Publick Contracts, where the Interest of the whole Society is concern'd. 5. That it only appertains to Sovereigns to make War; because they have no other way to preserve their Rights, and prevent the Subversion of their Dominions. After this, the Author answers the Objection drawn from the Ex∣ample of the Maccabees, and examines the Hypothesis of M. Antonius de Dominis, who maintains, That Kings are immediately established by God; whereas our Author pretends, that it is the Society that has Di∣vine Authority, and communicates it to those into whose Hands the So∣ciety commits the Sovereign Power. III. In the Two following Books, the Author treats of the Nature of Ecclesiastical Power; and shews,p. 162. That it has no other Aim, but to remove the Clergy from the World, and oblige them only to mind the Salvation of Souls. 2. That the Ecclesiasticks did not succeed Jesus Christ in the quality of Governor of the Universe; but only as Ministers, and Preachers of the Gospel. 3. That Excommunication is a cutting off from the Communion of the Church; and that it does not deprive those that are smitten with it, of their Natural and Civil Rights; and that it is of no force, unless it be pronounced with the Consent of the whole Church. 4. That when the Publick Tranquillity is concern'd, the Magistrate has a Right to take Cognizance of Ecclesi∣astical Censures. In the Fifth Chapter, the Author examines the Errors of Marsilius of Padua, and John Duns, which Pope John XXII. condemn'd in the Year 1320, (p. 323.) The Bull reduces these pretended Errors to Five Heads. 1. That when Jesus Christ paid Tribute to Caesar, he did not pay him out of a bare Submission; but through the Necessity of the Obligation he was in, as he was a Man, to obey Superiour Powers.
2. That St. Peter had no more Authority, nor was any more the Head of the Church than the rest of the Apostles. That Jesus Christ did not establish any visible Head, or leave any such Vicar as the Pope. 3. That the Emperor has a Right to establish, correct and punish, nay, to de∣pose the Pope. 4. That all Ministers of the Gospel are equal by the Institution of Jesus Christ; and that the Difference which is between them, is only founded upon the Concessions of Princes, and may be revok'd. 5. That neither the Pope, nor the whole Body of the Church have any Right to punish Criminals, farther than Sovereigns give them Authority. In the Eighth Chapter, Monsieur Richer treats of the Immunities of the Clergy, and refutes the Arguments of Suarez and Bellarmin, who affirm, That the Pope has a Right to exempt Ecclesiastical Persons from the Civil Jurisdiction without the Consent of the Emperor, or any other Sovereign Princes. IV. In the First Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Author sets down a History of Investitures, or the Collation of Benefices. He shews how the Election of Pastors pass'd from the People to Kings, and the great struglings of the Bishops of Rome to make themselves Masters of it. In the Second Chapter, he answers the Arguments of Bellarmine and Baronius, against Secular Investitures. The Third and last Chapter contains the History of Gregory VII. the first who usurp'd to himself the Power of deposing Kings, and first presum'd to put this pretended. Power in execution. The Author gives himself the trouble to answer the Arguments which that unworthy Pontiff alledges, for advancing himself above God's Vicegerents on Earth; according to the Prediction of St. Paul, 2 Thes. 2. We shall mention only one; because it shews the Genius of that Pope, and the Esteem which Popes, like him, have of Crowned Heads. To prove that the Church is above Kings, observe how he argues. Royal Digni∣ty was invented by Seculars who knew not God, but by the instigation of their Prince the Devil, Principe Diabolo agitante,p. 482. whereas the Ecclesiastick Power was instituted by the Providence of God, and and aims at his Glory. Therefore as much as God is above the De∣vil, &c.
XIV. Analysis Aequationum Universalis, &c. An Ʋniversal Ana∣lysis of Equations; Or, A Short and General Method of re∣solving Algebraical Equations; deduc'd and demonstrated out of the New Doctrine of Infinite Series: By JOSEPH RAPHSON, Fellow of the Royal Society, 4o. London, Printed for Abel Swall, 1690. pag. 50. WE are in a manner indebted to Chance for the composing of this little Treatise, since Mr. Raphson, the ingenious Author thereof, accidentally invented this Method, on the Occasion of a Pro∣blem that had been propounded to him by one of his Friends. For he declares, that he never saw any thing of the like Nature: And indeed, the Novelty of the Subject might be alone sufficient to recommend it to the World; and to induce the Author to appropriate to himself the sole Reputation of so considerable an Invention, were he not preven∣ted by his innate Modesty, and the little regard that he hath for po∣pular Applause. However, we shall leave it to those that are skilful in those Matters, to determine, whether any thing hath been hitherto Publish'd, tending to the same effect; and in case there hath, neverthe∣less it cannot be imagin'd but that they will readily allow the just Com∣mendation that is due to this worthy Member of the Royal Society; for it is not to be admir'd, that Learned Men have often like Notions and Sentiments with respect to the same Subject. Moreover, Mr. Raphson explains his1. Method after the very same manner as he invented it, and to shew the large Extent and Certainty thereof, he propounds a general3. Theorem, which he afterwards resolves more particularly in Two Propositions: Then he proceeds to illustrate his Method by Examples,5. in 32 Problems; wherein is ex∣hibited the Resolution of Equations, of all manner of Dimensions, ta∣ken from the Resolution of a Simple Equation: Whereunto he adds Examples of Quadratick Equations, All his Operations are described at large; and to render the Practice more plain and obvious, the Au∣thor hath taken the Pains to compose certain Tables, which are inserted at the End; insomuch that if he continue to prosecute these Studies, as he hath begun, it is not to be doubted but that he will become one of the most skilful Mathematicians that are now living; since at the Age of 22 Years, he hath already attained to so great a Knowledge in those abstruse and difficult Sciences: Wherefore what improvement may we not expect from the extraordinary Judgment of his riper Years?
XV. Cursus Mathematicus: Mathematical Sciences; in Nine Books: Comprehending Arithmetick Vulgar, Decimal, Instrumental, Algebraical; Geometry, Plain and Solid; Cosmography, Celestial and Terrestrial; Astronomy, Theorical and Practical; Navigation, Plain and Spherical; Trigonometry, Rectilinear and Circular: With the De∣scription, Construction and Ʋse of Geometrical and Nautical Instruments, and the Doctrine of Triangles, applyed to Practise in Mensurations of all kinds; as in Longimetry, or taking of Heights, Distances, &c. Planome∣try, or Surveying of Lands, Woods, Roads, &c. Military Architecture, or Fortification; and in Navigation, Dyalling, &c. All which are dispos'd in such a Method as they ought to be read and practis'd by such as would attain to a competent Perfictency in them by their own Industry. By William Leybourn, Philomathes, in Fol. London, for Benjamin Took, &c. 1690. p. 984. IT is not at all to be wondred, that the Body of this Work does not perfectly answer to the Title: For that the Mathematicks are of so vast an Extent, that it is impossible to include them all in one single Volume; therefore how careful soever Mr. Leybourn has been to be con∣cise, he could not treat in this Volume of Mechanicks, Civil Archite∣cture, Conick Sections, Musick, Opticks, Diopticks, and the Parts that be∣long to them, and which he seems to reserve for a Second Part. Now in regard the Title of this Book sufficiently shews what it con∣tains, and that we cannot discourse of all the Matters therein contain'd, we shall only give you here the Extract of one single Treatise, to shew the Author's Method. And we have made choice of that of Navigation, because we thought it would be most delightful to a Nation so much concern'd to be perfect in the Knowledge of it. 'Tis in the Seventh Book, that Mr. Leybourn undertakes to unfold the Art of Navigation. In the Preface,p 605. he ascribes the Invention of it to God only, and not to the Egyptians or Phoenicians, as some Au∣thors do; for that it was God who first discoverd to Noah the Know∣ledge of Ships and Navigation, in the Time of the Deluge; and for that it was according to the Model of the Ark, which rested upon the Mountains of Ararat, that the Neighbouring Nations built their Ships. The Body of the Work is divided into Four Parts. The First con∣tains five Chapters, which are subdivided into Sections, when the Mat∣ter requires it.
In the First Chapter,p. 106. the Author speaks of Navigation in gene∣ral; the Rules of which are only to furnish a Pilot with the safest ways to steer a Vessel whither he designs it. To which purpose, he must have a regard to four Things; the Longitude, the Latitude, the Course, and the Distance. They who are but never so little vers'd in the Sphere, know what the Longitude is: But the most Judicious are still igno∣rant of the Secret, how to find it exactly upon the Sea. There is not the same Ignorance about the Latitude; for there are several Ways to know it; either by the Meridional Heights of the Sun, or by some known Star, by the rising and setting Amplitudes, or by the Pole-Star. If Mariners could find the Longitude as well, they would have all that they seek for: But in regard we have but an imperfect Knowledge of the Longitude, we are oblig'd to have recourse to the Ship's Way, and the Distance of the Vessel; but more especially to the Latitudes, to de∣termine the most exactly that may be, the Place where it is. The Ship's Course is the Way which it steers upon the Sea; which is easily known by the Compass or Needle, great Care being taken to observe its Variation. As for the Distance, which is the Length of the Way which the Vessel makes, it is not so easie to conclude it: But this is the way to take it; They let down into the Sea a Plummet of Lead fix'd to a Line, and at the same time they turn an Hour-Glass; then they observe what quantity of Line the Log-Line draws out of the Vessel, thereby to know how much way the Vessel makes in such a prefix'd time, with the same Wind, and the same Number of Sails. But there are several Inconveniences in this way of Practice; so that there is no building upon it: For it is not certain that the Log-Line stays in the same place where it was thrown: 1. By reason of the Tossing of the Waves, especially in a rough Sea. 2. The Wind does not always blow alike, and it is a hard thing to measure the Briskness of a Gale. 3. The Tossing and Shogging of the Ship will not let the Hour-Glasses which they make use of to measure the Time, run ex∣actly true. 4. The strong Currents which are met with in certain places, may occasion Mistake in the knowledge of Distances; so that you must endeavour to discover them by their Strength, their Rapid∣ness, and their Course. But you may in some measure attain your Ends, if instead of the Log-line, you make use of a piece of Wood, or a small Bucket, with a piece of Lead fix'd to it, to make it sink into the Sea about 60 or 80 Fathom: For then by observing the quan∣tity of Line, the Sand, and the Compass, you may in a great measure avoid the Mistakes which the Currents may occasion in the Distances.
Now suppose that you know the Distances in Feet, or in Miles, and the Rumb, or Course of the Vessel, it is easie to observe the Point, and under what Degree you are, provided you know the Latitude of the Place from whence you set Sail, and where you are, and how ma∣ny Miles and Feet there are in a Degree. The Author tells you, ac∣cording to Mr. Richard Norwood, that there are in a Degree 367200 Feet: But for the easiness of Calculation, and because it is better to suppose that there are less than more, he allows but 360000 Feet to a Degree. C. 2. After this,p. 600, 617. he discourses of the Instruments made use of in Navigation, as well for making Observations, as for the Easiness of Operations. He gives you the Description, and sets down the Use of them. The Instruments are, The Plain Compass, the Azimuth Com∣pass, the Ʋniversal Ring-Dial, the Cross Staff, or Fore-Staff, the Quadrant, or Back-Staff, and the Nocturnal. C. 3. He shewsp. 618. the manner of finding out the Latitudes; and in the following Chapter,p. 621. he treats of the vulgar Notes of the Julian Year, of the Motion of the Sun and Moon, and gives some short Rules to find them at any time; explaining afterwards their great Use in Na∣vigation. C. 5. In regard the knowledge of the Tides is very useful to a Pi∣lot,p. 633 the Author, in the last Chapter, gives you Tables, and sets down Rules how to know them. Part 2. In the Second Partp. 634. he discourses of Plain Sayling, and puts in practice the Doctrine of Rectilineal Triangles, for the Solution of sun∣dry Nautical Problems and Questions in Plain Sayling; all which are performed with Scale and Compasses, by Trigonometrical Calculation,p. 646 either by Tables, or Proportional Scales, or wrought upon the Chart it self. Part 3. After this,p. 656. Mr. Leybourn proceeds to the Third Part; where he explains Mr. Wright's Method, vulgarly call'd Mercator's Say∣ling; and he applies to practice the Doctrine of Rectilineal Triangles, with the Supply of Meridional Parts, in the Solution of Nautical Pro∣blems in Sayling by the true Sea-Chart; and all this is performed by Protraction, by Calculation, and upon the Chart it self. There is also a Parallel between the Plain and the true Sea Chart.
P. 4.p. 667, 672. As the Method call'd Mercator's Sayling surpasses the Plain Sayling; so that which is set forth in this Fourth Part, and is call'd Circular Sayling, surpasses the other two Methods. He therefore resolves by Trigonometry, and the Projections of the Sphear, the Pro∣blems of Sayling by the Arch of a Great Circle. After which, you shall meet with some Tables, the Use of which is very frequent in Na∣vigation. The Tables bear the Title of Calendarium Nauticum, and Astrale Calendarium. There are also some other Tables in this Trea∣tise, and quite through the whole Body of the Work, where they are necessary to be inserted. Neither has he forgot to add the famous Tables of Logarithms, of Sinus and Tangents, &c. He has also taken care to cause such Figures as the Discourse requires, to be neatly en∣graven upon Copper Plates, and placed at the End of the Book for the Conveniency of the Readers. A Letter of the Honourable Mr. Boyle to the Author of this History of Learning. Sir, I Here send you an Experiment which made a great Noise In the Court of King Charles the Second, and which will resolve all the Difficulties in the Questions which you propos'd to me, concerning the Coldness of Water. It was made by a Captain of a Ship, a Man of very good Sense, and in the Presence of a great many Persons; insomuch that there can be no manner of Doubt concerning it.
XVII. An Account of some Observations made in the great Congregation of Waters, by lowering Bottles down into the Sea six hundred Foot deep from the Surface, January 2d. 1677/;. THis Day, in the Lat. of 36 d. and 40 m. about 30 Leagues distant from Cape St. Vincent, it bearing from us E. N. E. having receiv'd some Command from the right Honourable the Earl of Danby, and Mr. Boyle, concerning making Experiments in this Nature, we lay by with our Frigot, the St. David, whilst Sir Richard Munden, with some other Gentlemen, was pleas'd to go along with me in the Pinnace, up∣on the Trial of these Experiments. And having made fast to a deep side Lead and Line, one Vial-Glass fill'd with the Oil of Aniseeds, according to Mr. Boyle's Direction, to experiment the Coldness of the Deeps below; as also two ordinary Bottles only fill'd with Air, the one being firmly clos'd with a substan∣tial Cork, and the other with Wood, being all securely made fast, We lowered them down into Eight Fathom, and there remained fifteen Minutes; then haled them aloft to the Surface of the Waters. The Oil of Aniseed was congealed and curdled; which demonstrates the Coldness of those Regions below; the Cork-Stopple was suck'd into the Bottle; but that closed with Wood, remained as at the first; on∣ly through its Pores was forceably drawn in, about half the Stowage of the Bottle, with Salt Water; which boiling out from the little Crannies of the Wood, after haling the Stopple out, the Salt-Water moak'd, as though it had been some strong Liquor, or Spirit. Upon the Second Experiment, I seized fast, three Bottles to the deep-side Line a little above the Lead; two of them were firmly closed with Stopples made of a light sort of Lignum Vitae, which my Lord Treasurer proposed; the other, with a firm Cork; then lowered them into one hundred Fathom depth: And having remained there about five Minutes, I perceived upon the Surface of the Water the two Lignum Vitae Stopples; wondering at the Cause, I immediately haled up the Lead, and the Bottles were staved in many pieces, either by the weight of the Water, or condensing of the Air, that remained within them. The other Bottle, only clos'd with a Cork-Stopple, was suck'd in, and so fill'd full of Water, (probably near the depth of one hundred Fathom;) and being curious to taste thereof, it was not only my Opinion, but all the rest of the Gentlemen in the Pinnace
with me, That this Water was much fresher than that we tasted upon the Surface. I shall proceed the first convenient opportunity, as near as possible I can, by Experience and Demonstration, to resolve the great Enquiries concerning the Current of the Streights Mouth of Gi∣braltar. XVIII. Inscriptionum Antiquarum Sylloge, in duas Partes distributa; in Ʋsum Jnventut is Rerum Antiquarum studiosae edita; & Notis illustrata; à Guliel. Fleetwood, Col. Regal. apud Cantab. Socio. Octav. Londini, apud Tim Child, 1691. p. 572. A Collection of Ancient Inscriptions; Divided into Two Parts. Inscriptions being a great help to History, and Mr. Fleetwood having often observed, that the reason why the Study of them was not so frequent, was, because it required the turning over of a great number of Volumes, where they were dispers'd up and down; which it would cost a great deal of Time and Money to do; he thought fit to do the Publick an acceptable piece of Service, by collecting the most remarkable, and such as are most useful to clear the Obscurity of ancient Hi∣story. In the First Part, the Author has very nearly observ'd Gruterus his Method: And so it is divided into Five Parts. Of which, the First,p. 1. includes the Inscriptions relating to Pagan Divinities. The Second,p. 53. Those which concern publick Monuments. The Third,p. 92. Those which were made for the Emperors. The Fourth,p. 130. Those which are to be read upon the Tombs or Statues of them that officiated at the Altars of the Magistrates, and other Publick Persons. The Fifth,p. 171. contains the Epitaphs which Fathers, Mothers, and Children, Hus∣bands and Wives, Servants and Masters, Kindred and Friends made upon one another. The Second includes all the Christian Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and other Monuments that are extant, or at least, that are printed till the Ninth or Tenth Age. The Author has profitably made use of the
Words of Arcudius, Aringhus, Reinesius, Spon, the Travels of Whee∣ler, and the Fathers Mabillon and Germain; though sometimes he for∣bears not to refute them in his Notes. There are some which are no less profitable than learned; as that,p. 40.2. where he shews, that St. Je∣rom was mistaken in taking a supposed Inscription, for that which St. Paul alledges to the Athenians, Acts 18.23. Such are also the Re∣marks which are made upon the Inscriptions,p. 115. where they give to Dioclesian the honour of having abolished the Christian Name, with as much truth as the Flatterers of Lewis X V. endeavour to persuade him that he has triumphed over all Europe, and abolish'd the Protestant Religion. There is one Inscription in Verse,p. 379.2. upon the Roof of the Church of St. Agnes, in the Suburbs of Rome. Baronius pretends that that In∣scription was put there by Constantina, the Daughter of the first Chri∣stian Emperour, for having recovered her Health through the Inter∣cession of that Saint, over whose Sepulchre she cause that Church to be built; and after that vow'd perpetual Virginity. This Story being very improbable, had need of credible Vouchers: In the mean time, it is only founded upon the Testimony of Modern Authors, and those Roman Catholicks. On the other side, it is certain, that Constantina was twice Married: Whence Mr. Fleetwood concludes, That the Con∣stantina mentioned in the Inscription, was some other than the Empe∣rour's Daughter, and that she could not be living till toward the End of the Fifth Age; since Prudentius, an Author of the Fifth Century, and who speaks of the Sepulchre of St. Agnes, makes no mention of this Church. Now in regard there are no Passions more eloquent than Love and Grief; there are some of these Epitaphs which are Master-pieces in their kind: Such is that,p. 193. which Atimetus, the Emperour Titus's enfranchiz'd Bond man caus'd to be engraven upon his Wives Urn. And that other,p. 535. which is between his Collection of Christian Mo∣numents, whose Authors are unknown; where a Mother that had lost her Children, is made to speak. We should here finish this Extract, were we not to observe in the Author's Epistle Dedicatory,p. 3. one Scruple which a Christian Philo∣sopher cannot let pass without an Answer. If it be true, saith he, that Reason convinces us of the Unity of a God; how is it possible that the Pagans, who were Rational Men, adored several? It follows of necessity, that either they ador'd one and the same God under several Names, and consequently, that they were not guilty of Idolatry; or
else that Reason is not now adays the same as it was formerly, and so there is no certainty; or at least that Men did not make a right use of their Reason for so many Ages. Mr. Fleetwood asserts that it is the sameSi aa erat illorum ratio à nostra, vel (quod idem est) si aliter ratione sua usi sunt homines, ubinam quaes, ista adeò jactain Rations certitudo, qu due, per tot secula, omnes ferè via recta aberraverint? thing to have a Reason different from ours, and to make use of it in another manner. But I am not of his Opinion: For it is demonstrable, that Colours, Heat and Cold, are not in the Objects that produce those different Senses of Feeling in us. Nevertheless, 'tis but within these few Years, that a small number of Philosophers have retriev'd themselves from this Mistake: All the rest of Mankind is still in that Errour; and it may be there are above Three Fourths of the World that will never be undeceived. Tell a Country man, that Fire is not hot, Ice not cold, and Snow not white, he will deride your Simplicity; and if he thought it concerned his Temporal or Eternal Interest, to defend the contrary, you might expect for want of Proofs, to be treated by him as the Pagans treated the Christians, or as the Papists treat the Protestants▪ To prove that there is but one per∣fect Infinite Being, and that none ought to pay any Religious Wor∣ship to Creatures, let them be never so excellent, you must al∣ledge Reasons much more abstracted, than those that demonstrate, That Colours are not in the Bodies which affect our Senses. The Christi∣an Religion is the most perfect & sublime of all Philosophies; whence it comes to pass, that so few People understand it throughly, and that to supply the defect of Attention and Meditation among the greatest part of Men; the Scripture so often commands us to be∣lieve. If we made a right use of Reason, Faith would not be so necessary, but only for Matters of Fact, which are contain'd in the Sacred Letters, and which have all the Certainty that Histories can be capable of. But leaving here a Reflexion which would carry us a great way farther, we shall conclude with this Observation, That this Objection, which seems at first so formidable, is grounded only upon the equivocal signification of a Word. For in common Speech, Reason signifies both the Light of Nature, and the manner of thinking. In the first Sence, Reason is an infallible Guide which never leaves those that follow it, into Errour. But in the second Sense, it may be said, that Reason misguides and deceives us, because it happens too frequently, that Men determine themselves, without consulting the inward Light, and the eternal Reason.
XIX. The Falshood of Humane Vertue, done out of French, 8o. London, For Tim. Child, p. 308. MOnsieur Esprit, of the French Academy, proposes to himself, to prove in this Work, That all the Vertues of Men, considered in the corrupted State of Nature, have no other Foundation but Self-Love; not excepting the most glorious and beautiful; as, Prudence, Sincerity, Friendship, Clemency, Compassion, Generosity; nor even those that seem to approach the nearest to Christian Vertues; as, Humility, Liberality, Justice and Integrity. This is that which he does in 21 Chapters; which are so many Rhetorical Discourses upon every one of the Humane Vertues. There he sometimes handles Questions very material; as in the 19th. Chapter, where speaking of the Fidelity of Subjects toward their Sovereigns, he enquires, What is the Duty of Subjects, when Kings violate the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom? And after he has produced the Answers of sundry Politicians, and shewn, that their Reasoning engages them in Difficulties, from whence they cannot disintangle themselves, he concludes, That the best course a Man can take, not only for the Peace of his Conscience, but also in or∣der to a quiet Life, is not to meddle at all with Affairs of State, when he has no Call to the Government. For Liberty, and the Ease of the People, are loud Words which the Factious make use of, but that signifie nothing in their Mouths; they always found it mischievous who believ'd 'em; and the Disorder must be very great indeed, if a Civil War be not a Remedy worse than the Disease. As for Religion, the Author maintains. That how specious soever the Pretence may be, 'tis no better than that of Taxes and Imposts: That the Seditious, who make the most of this Argument, are they who have the least value for it; that it is well known that the Heads of the League against the Kings of France, Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. made use of Religion, as a Cloak to cover their ambitious Designs; and that it is better to follow the Example of the Primitive Christians, who during the first Four Ages, obey'd the Pagan Emperours, without murmuring and resi∣stance. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed in Foreign Parts; to be Sold by Abel Swall and Timothy Childe at the Ʋnicorn in St Paul's Church Yard. Some whereof were designed to have been inserted in this Journal; but we wanting room, have deferr'd it till the next, when they shall be more sully describ'd. SAncti Caecil. Cypriani Opera omnia, Recognita & Illustrata per Joan. Oxoniens. Episc. Accedunt Annales Cypriani; five XIII. Annorum quibus S. Cyprianus inter Christianos versatus est, Brevis Chronologice delineate, per Joan. Cestriensem. Huic Editioni annexae sunt Dissertationes Cyprianicae, ab Henrico Dodwello. Juxta Ex∣emplar Oxonii à Theatro. Amst. 1691. Folio. Though this Book is very much known to the Learned, yet we have resolv'd to give a large Account of it in the next Journal: The Writings of that Father being one of the most Venerable Monuments of Antiquity, and his two Commentators, Dr. Pearson, ihop of Chester, and Dr. Fell, Bishop of Oxford, two of the most Learned Men of this Age; to say nothing of Mr. Dodwell; since he being yet alive, it would look too much like Flattery. We shall only now add, that this Edition is very well Printed in a fair Character and Paper, and with the Addition of Mr. Dodwell's Dissertations. Phil. à Limborch de Veritate Religionis Christianae, Amica Collatio cum Erudito Ju∣daeo. Amst. 1691. in Quarto. This Book contains some Conferences between a Jew, Doctor of Physick at Amster∣dam, who died there some Years ago; and the Ingenious Philip van Limborch, Pro∣fessor or Diviity amongst the Arinians at the same City; and is an excellent De∣fence of the Christian Faith, answering all the most specious Arguments of the Jews against it. But there being several things relating to both the Authors, and the Boak wherewith the World is not acquainted, it is thought fit to defer till our next, to give an Account thereof, Ejusdem Phil. à Limborch Theologia Christiana ad Praxin Pietatis ac Promotionem Pacis Christianae unice; directa: Amst. in Quarto. Lud. Ellies du Pin de Antiqua Ecclesiae Disciplina Dissertationes Historicae, excerptae ex Conciliis Oecumenicis, & Sanctorum Patrum ac Actorum Ecclesiasticorum Scriptis. Quarto. Amst. 1691. Whatever hath relation to the Primitive Ages of Christianity, is so much look'd upon by the English Divines, and Dr. du Pin, though a Roman Catholick, is so im∣partial a Person, that we believe they will be well pleased to find an Abstract of it in our next. Joan. Spencer, de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus, & carum Rationibus; Editio se∣cunda, priori Indice Locorum S. Script locupletiore, necnon Indice Rerum & Verborum memorabilium novo aucta. in Quarto. Lud. Thomasini Vetus & Nova Ecclesiae Disciplina, circa Beneficia & Beneficiarios. In tres Tomos seu Partes distributa. Opus ex Sanctis Patribus & Conciliis, ex quorum{que} Temporum Historicis decerptum. 3 Vol. Folio, Paris. This Book being one of the best Pieces of this Age and written by one of the most eminent in Learning, we shall give an account of it in our next. Anglia Sacra; five Collectio Historiarum, partim antiquitus, partim recenter scri∣ptarum, de Archi-Episcopis & Episcopis Angliae, à prma Fidei Christian susceptione,
ad Annum 1640. nune primum ex MSS Cod. in lucem editarum s Prim, de At∣chip▪ & Episcop Ecolesiarum quas Monachi possiderunt. Edire. Henrico Wharton, olio Lond. Of this we shall give a particular account in our next. Edmund. Richerii Historia Conciliorum Generalium, in IV Libros distributa; & ejusdem Vindiciae Doctrinae Majorum Scholae Parisiens de Authoritate & Infallibilitate Ecclesiae in Rebus Fidei & Morum, contra Defensores Monarchiae Universalis & absoluta Curiae Romanae, Lib. IV. etiam{que} Libellus ejus de Ecclesiastica & Politica Potestate. 7 Tom in Quarto. Which with his late Treatise, de Potestate Ecclesiae in Rebus Tem∣poralibus, compleat the Works of this Learned Author. Lud. Eies du Pin Bibliotheque des Autheurs Ecclesiastiques, Quarto. Vol. 4•• & 5um. sparatim. Joan. Leusden Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, in quo omnes Universi Novi Testam. Voces una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur. Editio ultima ab Authore Recognita & Aucta. Lugd. Bat. in Octavo. Testamentum Novum Latine, Sebastiano Castalione Interprete, cui in Margine ad∣dita sunt Loca parallela S. Script quae Steph. Curcellaeus Graecae suae Edition. adiunxit necnon Variant. Lection. Amst. Octavo. Well Printed in a fair Character and good Paper; and is by much the fairest Edition of this esteemed Book. Petri Gassendi Metaphysica Disquisitio Anti-Cartesiana, seu Dissertationes & Instan∣tia adversus Renati des Cartes Medit. Ʋltraj. 1691 in Octavo. D Aug. Quirin. Rivini Introductio ad Rem Herbariam CLXXIX. Figur aeneis Plan∣tarum Rariorum illustrata Fol. Charta mag. Lips. 1691. In which not only the excellent Figures of several very rare Plants, but the Author's Method, express'd in his general Introduction before the Book, deserves the esteem of all the Lovers of Natural Philo∣sophy. Opuscula Philosophica; quibus continentur Principia Philosophiae antiquissimae & recentissimae, ac Philosophiae Vulgaris Refutata in duodecimo. Amst. 1691. This Book contains Two different Tracts: The First is made up of some Eagments found, as tis pretended, in the Closet of an English Countess, who by the reading of the ancient Philosophers, forsook the Opinions of Des Cartes. The other hath several Dialogues between a French and a Spanish Philosopher; in which the Frenchman hath the better of it, and vindicates the new Hypotheses, Authores Classici varii cum Interpretatione & Notis Doctissimorum Virorum, Jussu Christianisimi Regis editi, ad Usum Serenissimi Delphini, in Quarto. Paris. Most of which are here to be had. Authores ad Usum Delphini, quos juxta Editionem Parisinam, Londini editi sunt, in Octavo. viz. Virgilius, Terentius, Horatius, Cornel. Nepos, & Juvenal. A Prospect of Chlsey. Colledge, curiously drawn, and engraved in a large Copper-Plate, with a Prospect also of the Country contiguous; By J. Kip, who designs to Publish the Draughts of all the King's Houses. Books now in the Press, which will be Published in a few Weeks. Les Oeuvres d'Horact, Lat. & Franc. avec des Remarques par M. D'Acier. 10 Vol. in 12. Les Comedies de Plante, Lat. & Franc avec les Remarques du la Même.  3 Vol. 12.
