L2849 12413364 61607
A CATALOGUE OF The most vendible Books in England, Orderly and Alphabetically Digested, Under the Heads of Divinity, History, Physick and Chy∣rurgery, Law, Arithmetick, Geometry, Astro∣logy, Dialling, Measuring Land and Timber, Gage∣ing, Navigation, Architecture, Horsmanship, Faulconry, Merchandize, Limning, Military Discipline, Heraldry, Fortification and Fire-works, Husbandry, Garden∣ing, Romances, Poems, Playes, &c. WITH Hebrew, Greek and Latine for Schools and Scholars. The like Work never yet performed by any. Also, All sorts of Globes, Mapps of the World or in Parts, either Kingdoms, Provinces or particular Counties; French and Duch Pictures and Landskips; Paper of all sorts from 5s to 5lb a Reame: The best perfumed India, and English Wax, &c. All to be sold by the Author at his Shop in New-Castle. Varietas Delectat. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1657.
TO THE GENTRY, MINISTERS of the GOSPEL AND OTHERS. Of a Peculiar Choice TO THE Wise, Learned and Studious in the Northern Counties OF Northumberland, Bppk of Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland. GENTLEMEN, (For such should be Scholars, and Scholars are no less,) THis Work seems of right to chal∣lenge your protection: The true Nobleness, Virtue, Learning and Wisdome of many I know, has brib'd me to honour your re∣membrance, and bring my endea∣vours to the test of your sober and judicious Judgments; which if accepted and candidly interpre∣ted,
in earnest, it's all I expect and crave; nor shall I valuewhat others disprove, if you do but approve of my inten∣tion: Nobility of Blood, Gentlemen, is but the fruits and effects of Learning, and culture of the mind, where∣by the Country has ever tasted the sweet fruits thereof: and thus Virtue and Honour become Rivals, when vice and baseness become extinct: Honours and Titles, are but attendants on the most Noble deserts of a Learned and virtuous mind; nor can they be accounted above Apparel and Drapery to a comely person; for true Gen∣tility hangeth not upon the Nothing of vulgar applause, but is absolute in it self: I remember a story of Doctor of the Civil Law, that having Knighthood hung to his Estate by Sigismund the Emperour, presently accounted the Society of his fellow Doctors at a cheap rate, only valuing Knights as most fit consorts for his new Degree; for which great folly he was publikely accosted at the Counsel of Constance by the Emperour in these words; Fool who preferrest Knighthood before Learning, the gingles of Fame before that true worth of the mind; I can coin a thousand Knights in one day, but cannot one Doctor in a thousand years. You may imagin he wisht himself out of the Senate: Such men are not wanting in all ages, that overvalue their fortune, and undervalue their best and truest riches; which I hope is not a fault that sticks to your more sober and solid esteem of Knowledg and Learn∣ing. To be endowed with both, is that (Gentlemen) which priviledges your free access to the Title of Honour, and proclaims you the very Honour of your Country. But if there be any so unfortunate, as naturally to fall under the Rank of my Dedication, and are not poised with apt endowments for the service of their Country for want of Learning and Knowledg; or not using both to the best end; I am sorry to think how they disrobe
themselves of that Title which by birth they claim: For either Reason mocks me, or else I think to be born a Gentleman (and not bred a Scholar, nor studiously bent to gain Knowledg by study and reading,) may well in∣vest him in his Fathers Lands, whilest he is uncapable to govern himself as he should, or his Country as it must be; and is a greater blemish to the true Honour of a Gentleman, then the vastness of an Estate can compen∣sate; for though hereby a man may be Richly respected, yet is he not honoured for that true Worth, which is ri∣veted in by Learning and Knowledg; which indeed are additions beyond Nobility of Birth or Honour of Blood. without them its but a glorious Ignorance: and therefore it is accounted amongst the most Judicious Rusticks sim∣plicity, to take the gayest Courtier for the Wisest man, though the latter wears the more gorgeous and rich Ap∣parell, that of the mind: in as much as Riches are only the Ornaments to Gentility, whereas Learning and Know∣ledg is the Essence, and true being of a Gentleman. Yet must we not forget, that there is a true Worth to be found Accomplisht by the Elsewhere enlarged. study of Books, where Learn∣ing never advanc't: but where Learning meets with a Generous and Brave mind, all must needs acknowledg and bow to him with respect: These are the best Instru∣ments to open the Veins of true Worth and Wisdome, as well as the Seal and Stamp of Double Honour: so that if wrong education have produc't Ignorance in some Gentlemen, yet may they here make up that defect, by their Industry in seeking after Knowledg above that of Pleasure or Vice; which will install them into the Privi∣ledg of their naturall Birth. What need then Gentlemen, is there to Read and study
Books, whereby to gain so great a Purchase; TheAdvantages of Translations of History, &c. from the La∣tin, Italian, French, &c. the neglect of which (to such Gentlemen as have been so unfortunately dealt with by their Parents, as not to know other Languages then their own) is the grand Reason that many of great Estates, can hardly make their mindes or thoughts, stretch to a Geometricall measuring of their own Lands: thus too many idly sit down in the Chaire of Ignorance, travelling by the fire side, with the Wandering Knight Sr John Mandevil, or it may be Bevis of Southhampton; whilest the Laws of Nations, admirable foundations of Common-wealths, pass undiscovered or dived into. Others, Hunt and Range, and hope to hit it to a Hair. These are Escapes somewhat too hard for excuse in the Gentry; who certainly, if any be, they are born for better and more Noble ends then the Vulgar; there are sparks and seeds, which are naturall Plants in the minds of Gen∣tlemen, that in others seem not to be known; and for these to take any growth than according to their naturall tendency to Learning, Generosity, Urbanity, Knowledg, &c. is a greater pity than can be expressed. It's noysed of Alexander the Great, that he had Virtues by Nature, and Vice by Accident. Let Tinkers and vulgar Brains, drown and soak their meaner wits and conceptions, in draining a Country Alehouse. Let Gentlemen seek their own Honour, and blazon their own Reputation, by their Noble and brave deportment; which is only to be ac∣complished by Study, Reading, and converse with Discreet and Wise men; and thus may you prove Thorns in the way of Wickedness, rather than Supporters and nourish∣ers of Debauched courses, to the ruine of your own For∣tunes, and blush of your Relations: Thus may you strive to recover your selves
from the Tyranny of commonEducation, which lies now much in wearing fine cloathes, eating, sleeping, drinking, and know nothing above the degree of common and low understanding; many being only by their rude demeanours, the constables slaves and a derision to all, drowning those parts, bestowed with their Parents cost, and it may be purchased with the sweat of their own Industry: thus like high spirited Horses that beat out their fiery lives in their own litters. Pure oyle cannot mingle with water, nor the extracted Quintessence of true nobleness (in a right Gentleman) with the dregs and subsistence of unworthiness; and this is all the harm I wish to the Gentry of these parts: who I hope are more ge∣nerous then to storm at what I say, or exile this Councell and advice, by a prejudicate acception. I love not to be so unnaturall to my own relation, as to blemish the name of a Gentleman, because so; I hope I am not so ill read in Ethicks, as to blot others and defile my own nest; such thoughts I beg may have no roome to step over the threshold of your entertainment; let them harbour only in base and degenerous breasts▪ what I say, desire, and in this work design; I do really profess to be only intended, for the ge∣nerall good of these parts, which I hope wise men will see and so Judg. These thoughts create in me, aswell as in others, a great fear of a dearth of Knowledg, for want of study, whereby we shall have little of Nobility or Gentry left, but that of Birth and Pedegree quod omen Deus avertat. Those that are not equally fitted for the use of their Country, as well as themselves, are only to be accounted stakes in ditches that rot rather then grow. These Counties recorded for Honour, have not been yet worthy to be branded with any thing, that could truly stick to them so much, as the
present want of StudiousGentlemen; and though I reckon Learning of late daies, to be that which the misery of these Tempestuous winds of a civil War, (worse then Euroclydon that troubled Paul) hath made too great a stranger to these parts, yet now it seems to plead for it self, by the generous education of ve∣ry many hopefull branches, from good families: whereby I hope these Counties will call back the Ancient daies, when by their valour and noblenesse, they seemed to at∣tract the Estimation of all the rest to themselves. Chro∣nicles will free me from the least tincture of flattery, if a∣ny think I am beyond the bounds, either of sincerity or truth. For the next order of such as I boldly beg leave: Gen∣tlemen you are such as (Indeed ought, and amongst the best of Men and Christians) are dignified with the largest respect, and that as by your Knowledg and Learning in the best things, you are made capable to instruct others, so are you also thereby fitted to receive advice, in as much as true knowledg puffs not up: Yet will I not undertake to direct, but wish you may on all occasions, promote the ge∣nerall designe of Learning and Knowledg: which may be much gained upon and improved, by Reading and Study∣ing; encouraging, and helping, such as desire it, and prompt others to it; you know the great advantage that's to be got by reading; besides it will make mens minds so pliable and beget such a reducement, as that they need not alwaies beat as on an Anvill: for you have more to do to peice a dull and ignorant understanding, then one more already verst in some Knowledg; this will break a way for your more facile aproach to the very hearts of men. For such as are in the lowest form they may by the help of Book-ushers, climb to the highest pitch of Knowledg; a
thing that none can despise but the ignorant; and that onlybecause they have it not; they indeed depose themselves of Human society, that give it not the advancement above all things in the World. And now Gentlemen seeing learning and knowledg are such Real things, as need no other props to support them but what is cut out of themselves; and also that this de∣sign I have undertaken, is to sow knowledg, which the whole Nation may reap, a better medium to effect it then by reading Books I know not: and to let all know what Books are daily prest for their service, seems to me as good an expedient to follow it as any; and though there be a complaint that the world seems opprest with Books, yet do we daily want them; and indeed, there is no reason, any should deny, but that they are the best furniture, nor do I know any reason, why others with my self, should not think their variety the most excusable Prodigality; Therefore have I for the advantages of these Northern parts, where I am so much Indebted; endeavoured not on∣ly to have such choice both of Divinity, History, Law, Phy∣sick, Mathematicks, &c. as never yet were in the Country, but also intend, that not any in England, of esteem, or of easie purchase, shall escape me: and that's not all, but have taken the paines to let you know all, whereby you may fathom them, and by your sober choice, retain the best, whilst the chaffe you may refuse; that your judgments may like deep Rivers let weighty things sink, whilst sticks and straws swim down the stream. Now I have nothing left but to Intreat your Candid acceptance, and (Gentlemen) to place me in the number of those; that Honour your true Worth, and am no less then in the greatest measure Your Humble Servant, Wm. London.
TO THE MOST CANDID AND INGENIOUS READER. Reader, IF ages past and we present, esteem the Register of actions, as well as sayings, to be of greater value and use, then to trust them with our slippery memory (that never was yet known to be a good accountant,) how necessary then, to re∣tain the knowledg of Books, which are only Trustees of such Treatises: if profitable to record and re∣member things, how fit to know where to find them? Else may we happily seek for them in an empty store-house. It was this which made that Honourable Sr. Wa. Raleigh his voyage so unfortunate; in that he knew there was a mine, but knew not how to find it: and there seems to be no less, then as great need of a Register of Books, which else may be buried with their Authors. He is to be accounted a schismatick from man kind, that values not Learning and knowledg in their general and particular extents, above the rate of more ruffling and gaudy enjoyments. Had the poor
Indians the treasures ofknowledg contained in Books, who will not say they would surfet of Knowledg, compar'd with many in this age, that in the midst of means to accomplish Wisdome and Know∣ledg, are only like moths in Books? Much of the ignorance in many places may be attributed to the want of Books, but in this Nation for want of their use; and many a good Book lies asleep as not known, (that I dare say are as great strangers to many that would purchase them at their greatest worth) as Learning is to Ignorance. Many a good Advantage is smo∣thered in the swadling cloaths, for want of the very knowledge of Books: and as many Books are Still-borne, so no few are stifled in the sheets, and never come to be co∣vered from the injury of forgetfulnesse. For not being published, they cannot be nourished by the favourable acceptance of the world, and so pine away and come to nothing. These and many more reasons are sufficient to justifie any attempt from ignorant censure. He is miserably sordid, that sets a low rate upon Knowledg, or the wayes to it; he hath too much knowledg of his own coining, and too little of himself, that doth despise it in others. As there are many with the Fox in the Fable, which despise, only because they cannot reach: so are there none greater enemies to Learning, then the ignorant. Now because that in all sublunary actions there is an end that gives life to every motion in a design, therefore may some labour to Flie-blow my Reputation, and disinherit my candid intentions from the priviledg of their Birth; alluding to Hortensius that spruce Orator, who suffered for his Encomiums of eloquence, because (say they) lifting her up, was only that he might go with her. To which give me leave to say; that all men are not here chosen umpires; those I appeal unto, must (according to the custome of our Na∣tion) be the sole Judgers
and Condemners; and good Rea∣sonit is, that the Wisest and best able should be accounted most fit. I have received some remark of encouragement from the most solid Judges, in other peices of different na∣ture: therefore I do the less Question this; Especially when I can also say, this has past the test and approbation of such as (if known) would sufficiently pass me free from the danger of Censure; I know Wise men stand not upon punctul's, nor are Scholars generally Courtiers, though Courtiers should be Scholars; That which wise men account the staple Commodity at a feast, is the solid food, not the gaudy attendants; they are Children only that cry for Or∣naments and flourishes; and this will somewhat excuse my task, when considered, that I aim, and intend good, which I wish may so fall out; and I hope, may I think, I need not Question, but all men will allow me (as well as themselves,) somewhat for the shrinking. Thus prepared, I once more adventure (in print) my own fortune, to repair and Careen my Countries; I dare not deny neither, but that the design had seem'd more clear if others had handled it: But to be free; we all know there's no acti∣on whose Naturall tendency is not to Meum, Tuum, or both. To deny the first, would hinder that I am for the last; neither do they look to me, To be such great opposites, as in this case; to wrong my repute, if I play Ambo-dexter, I cannot be for the publick, but my particular self falls in as one of the Number; That therefore there may be no schime in my resolutions (to speak in the dialect of Arithmetick) I'le make an Intiger the product of fractions: Resolving to be for all; for the Publick, and the Private, for thee, and for my self, yet wrong neither. I hope none will discommend the saying of Cassiodore, who concludes him, a worthy Citi∣zen, that seeks the commodity of his own Country; it's reckoned an useless
clod of earth, that sucks in the rain, andbrings forth no fruit; so must he be that drinks, the sap of his native soile for his own nourishment only. If this undertaking seems to wrong any mans purse, he that Imagines it, hath the wrong end of the Book upwards; he that gets Books for his money, has in my mind as good a bargain as our Mariners, who trade with the Indians, and get Gold for Knives, Rattles, Glasses, &c. None is so absurd sure, as not to know which scale weighs heavier: I smile to think of that Scholar (which I fear is this Custo∣mer) who had a good Library and a bad Head-peice stitcht together: to whom one (coming into his Study) wittily said:Mr Fullers Holy state. Salvete libri sine Doctore: Such indeed had bet∣ter keep their money, which (like Jewels in a Swines Snout) may adorne their acceptance amongst foolish Worldlings: but never priviledge their society in wiser company. I plead not my own cause, I profess, Such as know me best, least of all believe it; and were it fit, many reasons might be brought in to Convince all that read me, I do not alwaies expect to sell what I so greatly value, I am more ambitious to read then to sell them; but the chief end is to Invite men to value the means of knowledge above trifles, which cannot be better impro∣ved, nor more prudently expended then in such a purchase. What can a mans rusty bags affoard him to the profits and treasures of Books. Plato was accounted a Wise man, and we find it Mr St Philosophy. recorded of him, that he accounted it a rich pur∣chase when he bought three Books of Philosophy belonging to Philolaus a Pythagorean in Sicily, though at an incre∣dible rate. Mr Leigh of Learning and Religion, Ep. Dedica. to him. And that Atlas of Learning, that Orthodox Scho∣lar, The Usher of Learning and Knowledg, one whose name is Anagram'd in the choicest memories, one that stands in Renown amongst the greatest Worthies that either pole can Boast of: He it was that sent to Samaria for sundry
copies of the Samaritan Pentateuch; and with a dear purchase it was also that he brought the Syriack Bible, with other Books from Syria: and when his own, yet proved a free do∣nor to those that wanted them. I know some men love rather to keep their estates free from such purchases, then know the difference. I will not wrong the other part of my work, to speak of the difference betwixt Riches and Knowledg. I am indeed limited in this place from that which my mind begins to kindle at; certainly if mens minds would but nibble at these baits, they might be trapt to their best advantage, which in time they should ful∣ly see beyond what now they do believe: but I leave all to as much liberty, as the Press seems to take, which now gives as little quarter to paper as ever. For the Work in general, the Inclination and Tendency of it will support it in the greatest throng of censures, and not suffer it to be crusht or smothered in a popular tumult; when I remember those favourites, and patrons of it, Ile let it run the gantlope and never fear a lash, unless from the curled furrowes of prejudice, emulation, and malignity. I turn it loose into the World, and if it cannot shift for it self amongst such, it knows where it may have shelter: to get the respect of all, is too much popularity, which in Courts is not accounted the greatest safety, but rather a pleasing mis∣chief, and too often strikes up it's own heels by the ruine of such as court and affect it. For the imperfections of the Work, for want of a good architect: I think to confess them, is to the Wisest men a penance sufficient; in greater crimes I am sure this is a great satisfaction. Yet because I steere a new course, bring∣ing opus sine exemplo, standing singular in my method: some reason will be expected. Therefore First, I would not have any expect it a possible, or
think it a profitable thing, to have a Catalogue compleat; yet this I dare promise, that there is no choice Book omitted, but the best and most Books printed in England are here inserted: but why I shoud crowd in Latine Books, and but some few of them neither, is a strong objection from my self, but that I quiet it with the conveniences and advan∣tages which I know will abound by the knowledg of some, rather then to omit the knowledg of all. I only take such as come in my way; I wade no further then I know I can with safety give an account, and with Honour retire; and such as I mention, are to my own knowledg usually sold in most places of repute in the Country, and is fully useful to the private end I first intended by this Catalogue, viz. the use of these Northern Counties. Nor do I think my self so much too blame for this, as others are for not publishing a Latine Catalogue: and though what I have done, may be found of small use to such as may see it beyond the Seas, yet is of great use to England. They may (I confess,) disor∣der method, which I look upon as a thing not essentiall to the generall knowledg and sale of Books. If it prove usefull for this Nation, and especially for the Meridian of these Counties for which it was calculated, and wherein I am placed; I reckon it of a repercussive force to all objectons that bandy against it; and though I cannot promise, yet do I hope to produce, a Catalogue of the most profitable and use∣full Latine Books which are sold; especially such as are at a more easie purchase then the strictest rate. If my resolutions in this set others at work and produce such a Catalogue; he that enjoynes the benefit, shall not more rejoyce, then my self, seeing it is for the publick good. That the Titles of all Books in this Catalogue are at large and so swell the bondary of such a Work; producing rather an Inundation to
drown, then a showre to make it grow: is ea∣silyreduc't to reason, if we consider the very native use, and primitive intent of Titles themselves, as placed to their Books; nay the general defect of this in Catalogues, makes many good profitable Books strangers to the World; whereas if fully discovered in their Titles (which should be the scope of each Book in short) would be eagerly looked after; and this is the reason why many (as they have good reason,) are time∣rous to adventure on what they know not; for a full Title tels us the purport and intent of the Books, whereby we may not be deceived: which in many hundred Books might be instan∣ced: take only two or three for brevity: Parr. on Rom. Sibbs on Corr. Cotton on John, Burgess on John, Heldersham on Psal. accounted by all (if they judg according to the shortness of the Titles usually given in all Catalogues for∣merly,) to be of the whole Epistles or Gospels; whereas indeed some are but part of an Epistle, others a sin∣gle a Chapter, and others again but some verse or ver∣ses of Chapter, which are great deluders and deceivers of mens expectations. So most Books, by their short and usuall Titles, are not half discovered to strangers: now this method provides against this cheat, in having par∣tem pro toto; nay many have been cosen'd by a short title, that when they expected a Book to treat of one thing, it hath the clean contrary. Therefore we see that the ve∣ry advantages got by this method, condemns the Object∣ion; for here they have all books brought to you lying open; shops open'd in your studies; and to me it lookes like a walk∣ing Library. I will not stop the Currant of a generall knowledg of Books, by leaving out all that are accounted Heterodox, then should I, with others, leave out all that are so in my fond and choice opinion, and insert only such as please my own humour; when it may be such as
dissent from myjudgment are more Orthodox then my self: I like not his resolution and opinion, that lately thrust out a Cata∣logue in print, and out of a comendable Zeale, refuses to insert Heterodox Books, as unfit to be sold (to some indeed they are so:) To hinder the knowledg of such Books when once born, is not to stifle their errours, for they grow out of their own ruine ofttimes; and if they be not chrusht in the Press, 'tis a grand folly, and a fault against the experience of these times, to do it when their liberty is expanded beyond the power of a Curb, their ashes too often prove a second seed time; though I am against selling them to such as may be seduced by them, yet will I not hinder their acquaintance to such as may confute them. The Apostle hints to us, that Errors, which are the very Apes of Truth (must be, that the truth may more clearly be discerned and pried into; yet not that they ought to be, but that they will be, it can∣not be avoided. We are bid to contend for the Faith: and sure contention is not (I am certain it ought not to be) a∣mongst friends, nor can it be above, it's only sharp and most constant amongst Enemies, as Truth and Error are one to another. I resolve to condemn to secrisie every pernitious Piece as soone as I know it, yet cannot but think them, when once out to the knowledg of all, that such should also know them that are best able to Confute them; which is the best weakner of Errour, and most compendious road to their ruine; besides, the blessed advantages to the establish∣ment of Truth, which stands surest by often shaking. To know errours is the shortest cut to destroy them. For Romances, Playes and Poems, I do indeed take less paines to promote their study though I hinder not their sale; their names are not so wiredrawn as others are; Ld Mount. Essayes. They are least usefull of any. The two first may properly be said to be
Incentiva vitiorum to some; heare a Learned Authorspeak to the first; Romances are the trash of writings, and tey could never have the Credit so much as to allure my youth to delight in them; The wonder in this is the greater, that he was a French man. The matter is not so small an Evil as the manner, The language is indeed the kernell of worth, but the design is like the green Walnut, that both de∣files all it touches, and is bitter in the tast, unless you peel the bitterness away, which how to do in Romances I am igno∣rant to direct. For Poetry as it is in it self above praise, so is it of late too much corrupted in the praise of Cupid and Venus; proving also to some the bellowes to the fire of lust, yet may they be very well used, if quallified by a regular pro∣portion of their use to a good and true end. Such Books as have been printed from the year 1650, to 1655, have this Charracter *, and you are led by the ☞to all such as are come forth since. It only now remaines that I let the World know my care to promote this design, by resolving an annual Supplement of all new Pieces that are prest into the service of this Common∣wealth: which will I hope preserve the remembrance not only of good Books, but the durable and lasting fame of their Authors to posterity. And though the Wise man saies, that of writing Books there is no end (which I think is meant of such as are writ to no end) yet I hope this reducement of Ma∣ny into One, may prove of some good advantage, and to some good end, and that without prejudice to Solomons Text. W. L.
AN INTRODUCTION To the Use of BOOKS: IN A short Essay upon the Value and Benefits of Learning and Knowledge. THe end of the Creation seems to contract unto all men these two duties; to know, and to learne; First, to know Gods will, Secondly, to learn to Obey it: The want of the first, will not excuse our neglect of the last; we cannot serve God without the knowledg of him, nor know him unless we learne; for man was born for knowledg. It was the Devill at first, that perswaded Adam, by his soliciter Eve, to value Knowledg at a greater rate then an Apple; and ha∣ving gain'd us this advantage by so deare a purchase, he now thinks it as good Logick, to perswade us to be ignorant: and we may a little guess, what a value nature hath set upon Knowledg in the minds of men, in that Adam would venture to know upon pain of Damnation. Oh that he had never been so forward a Pupill to so subtil a Tutor! He learnt to know what we may all wish had never been known; Yet may we now sound those depths by al∣lowance,
which he to doe, broke the Royal Command; there's now no Scilla on one hand, nor Caribdis on the other, to break this priviledg; no Law to dock the Entail of this so Costly an In∣heritance; We are privilidg'd to learn without sin, that which before contain'd a world of sins; and oh, that we could know how to learne the right Improvement of so Rich an Advantage! that we could arive to the All of Knowledg, even God, and our selves. now if Learning and Knowledg be the threds, which lead us through the most knotty parts of Divine and Humane Affairs; what need is there then to acknowledg them our greatest Riches; the best Counsellers and Advisers, in our greatest businesses and deepest straits; accounting all true worth epitomised and envellop∣ed in them. They seem to be born as if they were twins and ought not to be seperated; yet for methods sake, we must unlink the chain, and place them in their proper stations: for I think our unhappy predecessor, learned to know, before he did know to discern between Good and evil: to dissect therefore my under∣taking, I will first begin with Learning in it self; then with Know∣ledg, without the acquisition of University Learning, then rivet them together again, and see them in their issues and producti∣ons in generall; and therein, first of Divine, then Humane Know∣ledg: The great esteem the wisest and best men, alwaies had, and still have, of them; Their excellency, and that above Riches or vainer pleasures; The Honour and advantages accruing to the possessors of them; in fitting men for the Government of them∣selves, and their Country, either Millitary or Civill: The ma∣ny and main evils they prevent, as they are Antedotes against I∣dleness, and a supine life, the Roote of all: Then of the difference betwixt them and Ignorance the only Coine currant amongst beasts. Lastly, the severall parts of Learning and Knowledg, in particular: wherein first and principally, that of God, that Divine knowledg treasured in that sacred Book, is chiefly to be studied: and may serve as an Imprimater to all other studies; and which no doubt, if well poised, will bring us to the knowledg secondly of our selves: and of this as we stand related to God; then to the world: especially the advantages, of the Countrey wherein we live, and that by the several parts of Humane study, as History, Poetry, Law, Physick, Mathematicks, &c. And all by the favourable aide and knowledg of
Books, which are treasured up and set inorder for the use of the Learned and studious. Now In earnest at the entrance, I am affrighted to think of what I have undertaken, since I am so little able to perform what I promise; especially considering that I have not so much as the parings of Learning, nor capable to be an Apprentice to the Inqui∣sition of Knowledg. I can only with children admire what I cannot comprehend, and greedily wish for what I think so well worth admiring; and if I speak my mind frankly of things not within my own jurisdiction, I hope to be censur'd only, as I manifest the proportion of desire; of insight into the nature of things, rather then to take a measure of them. A Blind man indeed cannot judge of Colours, yet do I think a distanc't sight is here on the ad∣vantage ground; and it's not accounted a good eye that must have the object drawn too nigh it: the Richer lusture the scarlet hath, the more it admits only of a transcient veiw as the best triall; Howsoever, if I doe err, sure it's on the better side, for that it's a Rule given in Politicks, rather to speak well, then ill, of things or persons: and if weakly done, it's the more pardonable, because my own, without the ayde of better helps. I stand upon stilts, and may on anothers shoulders see what a taller cannot: For my own part, I think this Catalogue loaden with Riches, commands me to baite the entrance, with somewhat which may probably pull in some to seek after Knowledg: and though I am conscious, that some may justly say, I doe with unlearned bold∣ness, seems to warp more then I can well weave, yet doe I choose rather to run the Censure of the best, in craving their pardon, then neglect the many advantages, I propound may ac∣crue, to the worst. I aim at the white, and if I hit it not it's nere the worse shot. It's not my intention, by an Appologie, to darken their lustre, which indeed shines not with borrowed lights, but stands upon better propes cut out of themselves, then can be lent by any; though I think truly, I could not say so little in defence of Learn∣ing and Knowledg, were I to defend them, as the baffling pretenders to Ignorance speak against them; their very names, advances their worth, above the darts and dints of envy it self: yea says one; they are tacitly commended by their enemies, whilst they are proud of that little Learning they pretend to: my taske, is only to shew, the great advantages, of Learning and Knowledg, &c. which I have al∣ready
anatomized: And first of Learning, which, one saies,Ld Bacon Adv. is the per∣fection of Reason, the only distinguishers of men from beasts; deli∣vering the mind from wilderness and Barbarisme. It is Religions handmaid, the great honour and accomplishment of a person or nation, the most universall and onely usefull instrument that God vouchsafeth to the sons of men. Of Learning in general It is an excellent Drug, to re∣duce mans wilder nature (for that nature without learning is blind) softens our ruder dispositions, making them pliable to the choicest desires; banishes levity, temerity and insolency; extir∣pates vanity. Cato misses not the mark. Irst ue praeceptis animum nec dicere cesses; Nam sine doctrina vita est quasi mortis Imago. With learning store the mind, cease not to learne; Without it none can life from death discerne.Distichs. Learning, is a thing confin'd, yet not limited, for all may be sharers if they contend for it; the nature of it, of such a diffusive quality, as it fills all, and the more a man hath of it, he is wise∣ly ambitious to purchase more; of other things, whereof a little gluts, here a great deale, doth but excite and quicken the appe∣tite; like a man in a dropsie, the more he drinks, the drier. Methode for Sciences. This is that, which is the porch to that Beautiful and Spacious fabrick of Knowledg, by this, a man is taught the art of Diveing, into all the secrets of Nature and Art; this gives us with the Bee, wings to range for knowledg, and ravish the very hidden misteries of Divine and Humane things: we may joyne with him that saies; the Rarest and most understanding men have avered, that all we know is nothing, to things that are unknown to us. Now though Learning be of such singular advantage, yet are not all men the wisest that are learned, no more, then all that have learning are wise; and yet the wisest of men are such as are learned, and without learning they could not be so. There is I say, learning without wisdome and sound knowledg; our times produce such monsters, as we see are filled with parts and learn∣ing, and can (as one saies) utter their Complaints in Greek and Latine, or begg in half a dozen Languages; yet are not so much as fitted in any measure for their Country, unless to
devourethe fruits thereof; and many such have been lopt off from pub∣lique imployment; For, though Learning in it self be good, and many men are found great engrossers of it, yet are they not bene∣fited by it, nor advantage others in wisdom and knowledg, to which Learning seems only of worth: These are only great devourers of Learning yet like great feeders, are for want of good digestion (by a retentive and understanding faculty) like Pharaohs lean kine: whom One well calls,Ld Mountague Essa. Letter-strucken-men, knockt on the head, dazzel'd with learning; Only some parts of literall doctrines floating up and down their braines, They know the Theory of all things, but you must seek who shall put them into practice: and many there are, who only aim at the name, desiring only to be accounted Scholars, yet are the broad Butt of knowing men to shoot at; they are but at best learned fooles: and you may partly know them by their jangling bels at the top of their fooles Capes, their heads: which as One well saies, is the Cockloft of these Learned build∣ings, for they are the shallowest Rivers which make the greatest noise: and I had rather be no Scholar, than a meer Scholar; for as One that knew well, saies:M. Got Essa. Bare learning, though of the best kind, is but a map of Happiness, and no Real felicity. Of Knowledg without Learn∣ing.Now there is a knowledg in some men, who though they want the Education of Learning, yet are not only accounted, but even valued, at the Rate of Wise men; There is I say, a knowledg be∣low the name, and that never advanced, to the threshold of Learning, and this is improved by the study and habit of Books; for Naturall abilities, saies One of no small abilities:Ld Bacon. Essa. are like natural plants, that need pruning by study; then he conlcudes, that reading makes a full, Conference a Ready, and writing an ex∣act man: what must he then be, that reads, Conferrs, and writes? to such, I would very much commend the use of Books, the ad∣vantages of them are spacious and wide. These I say thus accom∣plished, are not less a glory to themselves, and honour to their Country, than a shame to such as by their university-study, are made Capable, to attract a greater part of knowledg to them∣selves, than seems possible, to be acquired by others, who have only the Auxilary aid of Books. Now what great pity is it, that such as Range, and turne diligent free-booters, to seek after knowledg, should have missed of the best ends, to attain the very perfection of
it. By this wee see how fortune distri∣butesunequally, in giving advantages to empty braines, whereby those that are best fitted for the greatest Improvements, and Im∣ployments, wants the help, which others have too much of, not to be even better than the best, by arriving to the perfection of all kind of knowledg. I cannot therefore reckon it of small use, that such minds as are intended for study, should be boared as they do with mines; for if aptness, and fitness, were dived into, wee should not have so pitifull effects, by forcing of mens minds to be scholars, because rich; when those whom nature ha's adopted to be frank engrossers of all learning, should be stifled, and crush't in their ripe conceptions; and because young brothers by birth, they must be alwaies, and in all things, kept so. This is to clip the Wings of Industry, and like the spiders webb, proves only a net to entangle the Industrious Bee: upon this ground it seems to be, that Antipater demanding of the Athenians, fifty of their Children for Hostages, was thus replied; They valued their Countries Education so much, that rather than part with such a number of plants, they would double it with twice the number of Men. Let us not therefore rob the latter of it's due, above the former; because they spend on the stock of their Natural abilities; being greedy pursuers of that which others are forced upon; the one fals in by accident, the other acquired by the sweat of the mind, that which a man seeks after, is sweeter than what is found, it tasts like venison of ones own hun∣ting. We see there is learning without knowledg, and knowledg with∣out learning, that there is a good, distinct in either; yet do they grow and have alwaies flourished best together, therefore to spel a Right man, is to joyne them together; and so they become rare and excellent Qualifications, Ennobling the minds of men, making Capable of the vastest comprehensions, and fit for the largest Employments; they must needs be well furnish't that have two such principles, to adorn and Enrich their minds. Whether (sayes one)Cornwallis Essa. a naturall man speak in his best, I can but say Witty; there my commendation is at a full point: but the mind and tongue, steeped in true understanding, incident to learning, hath wisdome for his Reward. Therefore those that want learning, yet are full of knowledg, should study, a little to be acquainted, with that which is such a foile, as well
as a guard, to defend knowledg, andthen they shall be able not only to know, but to know what's best; for many men know enough, yet are no better, unless they have the Knowledg of that which is most worthy to be known. Of Divine Knowledg. The foord thus sounded, we have a more easie passage to the partitions of Knowledg, which are Divine, and Humane: and first, of the True Worth and Excellency of the Knowledg of God, which is, the Summum bonum, the chiefest of studies, which indeed is superlatively above all. Spiritual Knowledg is a thing in it self, above the span of our slow capacities, but that it's Gods great condescension to stoop and teach us; For all things are from him and by him, every good and perfect thing is from above, from the Father of Lights. This is the knowledg that speeds our passage to Eternal Glory, that is the shortest cut to Immortal Happi∣ness. This is that Knowledg, which hath not only the stamp of Gods Command, but also the Seal of his approbation; the study whereof, is usually accompanied with his Divine benediction. Aristotle could say, The Knowledg of Divine things, is the head of all other Sciences. And whether can Knowledg better bend her force, or Learning her power, than to break a passage into the Mysteries of Divinity? We need not erect an Altar with the Athenians, to the unknown God,Act. 17.23. unless we will be behold∣ing to our own ignorance. Blessed St Paul gives the Garland to this Knowledge, and that with an Emphasis, and from the testimony of his own experience; For (saies he) I account all things dung and dross in comparison of the Knowledg of Christ Jesus my Lord. To know God, and Christ whom he hath sent, is to know all things; and to know all that is to be known, without the Knowledg of God in Christ Jesus, is to be a beggar in Knowledg I may well say, that the Knowledg of God in Christ, is the Philosophers Stone in Divinity; by it we may turn all events into golden advantages to our souls. When the wisest of men advises to Knowledg, What is it less, than Christ himself under the Metaphor of Wisdom? He thinks it of great advantage, to spend the morning of our daies in seeking after this hid Treasure, this Pearl of price, that to sell all for the pur∣chase is the safest bargain: Prov. 3.13, &c.Happy is the man that findeth Wis∣dom, that getteth Ʋnderstanding! Wherein is this happiness? The merchandize is better then fine gold, all things desirable not to compare with it; length of daies in one hand, riches and
honour inthe other, her waies pleasant, her paths peace; happy he that can get and keep her. Nay further, God himself to encourage our in∣dustry, and honour such paths and studies; lets us know, that he hath founded the earth, established the Heavens, and broken up the depth, and that by Wisdom, Ʋnderstanding, and Knowledg. The study of God in his Creatures, his Attributes, the Works in nature, &c. are sweet, pleasing, and no less profitable to man, as they are wonderfull; but to know God in Christ, is that the Angels prie into, and would gladly interest themselves in this Knowledg, which God of his infinite grace hath afforded to us that live under the Gospel; our neglect will be our con∣demnation. I wish, I could as easily take hold on my own ad∣vice in this, as freely as I can give it to others. To study and seek after moral Knowledg, is so lawfull, that the very neglect contracts guilt, and sinks us under the burden of ignorance; But we are first to study the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then expect the performance of all other things to be added to us. The many advantages now in print, by Learned, Reverend, and Holy Ministers, will be one day a witness against such as make it not their chief study to train up themselves, and relati∣ons therein; It should be our duty to hug our selves, and re∣joyce in the multitude of Gods mercies, wrapt up in these graci∣ous advantages, and pious helps; The times are glutted with precious conveniencies of the Gospel, by Preaching, and Books, which makes them dis-relish with so many, and not relish as they should with the best: and therefore our Saviours words are here fully verified, and it is our condemnation, That light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil, Joh. 3. & 19. Of humane Learning and Knowledg,Now as all other Knowledg is not to be compared to this of Di∣vine, yet is not Moral Knowledg out of the road to it; and indeed, ought properly to be subjected to it; That as we have said of Learning and Knowledg, a man that hath both, speaks the best accomplishments; so he, that is full of Divine, and Humane Learning, is most compleat; We may guess a little at the Major by the Minor; The worth of Humane, must needs set a value on Divine Knowledg. If there be found any worth in the former, the latter must sure be of greater; For as they are gifts of God, and are
commonly set as gates to pass to thisspiritual Fabrick of Divine Knowledg, so are they eagerly to be pursued, and purchased above all terrene felicities; If they be steps to Divine Knowledg, then are they not to be thrown aside, as Children do their toyes, when they grow either weary of them, or not well pleased with them. But some, as a hedg to this discourse, may quote Solomons Summary of Vanity, wherein he leaves not Learning and Knowledg behinde; For what's Humane Learning, and Moral Knowledg, but the devils edg-tooles to cut asunder the truth? What are they, but Satans Anvill, upon which he knocks the Divine Truths of God in pieces? Are they not blocks in the way to the best Knowledg? the only props for error and popery? Therefore the wise mans Text is well interpreted in his own words, and so I conclude with Solomon, Omnia vanitas. Well met ignoramus, if you will be as wise as Solomon, you must be his fool; for if you will take all in the literal sense, (as such will do that can snatch at what's for their turn) you are by a plain Text fools in print. However, let me advise you to take along Solomons interpretation as the best Comment. 2. They are indeed vanity compared to the true Knowledg of God, which is the highest pitch; and thus considered, if you can now pin this vanitas upon the front of Humane Learning and Knowledg, you have better skill than farre wiser men, and so you may prove famous for somewhat. Yet must it not be denied, but that if these studies intend not to the best end, they will prove as unprofitable as pernicious: and yet (if not thus used) nothing below their own proper worth and value. Valued by the wisest men.To guess a little therefore, at these so cryed up possessions, let's prie into the esteem of the wisest men, who are the onely favourites of Learning and Knowledg. The great value they that knew them best, set upon them: A Kings Ransome is below the rate of a peasants possessions, if he have only These inward En∣dowments: Let's see what desires Wise men have had, and how by all means they strove to accomplish the taking sweetness of these occult Treasures; who above all things, rather let slip the profits, Honours, pleasures, and sensual delights of this de∣ceitfull world, than the knowledg of things; who desired, rather to know the world, than enjoy it; who rather strove, to know the vanity of all terrene enjoyments, by studying them in the
Theory, than Practically to embrace or use them. A Wise man will hear and encrease Learning, sayes the Royal Philosopher.Prov. 1.5. You may as soon turn the Sun out of his course, as a wise man from this choice. Socrates thanked God for three things chiefly; whereof one was, that he was a Philosopher, and not unlearned; esteeming the gifts of nature, far below the orna∣ments of the mind. What shall we say to Diogenes in his Tub, prouder than Alexander in his Court or Camp; despising this great Monarch, who in his gorgeous pomp and warlike splen∣dour, deigning to give this poor rich man a visit, did not so much trouble him, to see the difference betwixt himself and Alexander, as that he should interpose betwixt him and the face of Heaven. Speed. Chro. The Learned Henry the first of England often said, He esteemed an unlearned King but as a Crowned Asse. King Alphonsus had rather lose all his Kingdomes than his Learning; his Ensigne was a Book opened: when he was told that the King of Spain said, Learning was not fit for Princes; he frowningly answered, that it was the speech of a beast, and not of a man. It is very observable, that of all those that flock∣ed to the Olympick Games, those were accounted the wisest, that came to Philosophize their time, in reaping knowledg by their observations, and not with the rude multitude, only to gaze at the active valour of the Combatants, but to enrich their minds by contemplation, valuing the sight of the mind, beyond that of robes or valour; and Caesar, that wanted but life, to begirt the world by his Conquests, as Drake did by his Adventures, in his Letter sayes, I had rather excell others in Learning than in Power: And Pythagoras delivers it thus; He that knoweth not what he ought to know, is a beast amongst men; he that knoweth no more than he hath need of, is a man among brute beasts; but he that knoweth, or striveth to know, that which is to be known, is a God amongst men. When Plato was at Dionysius Court, he must again to Athens, or else his life was clipt from that true content which his mind found in the society of Learned men, valuing the study of Philosophy above the pleasures of the Court. Stanly. Philos. Some Wise men, that might (by reason of age) plead for a Writ of ease from the toyl of the mind (by studying to learn and know,) have rather chose, to wade in Learning and Knowledg at their dying day; so eagerly have
they followedafter, and dearly esteemed Learning above life it self; for that it teaches how to live as we ought. Solon, at the hour of his death, hearing some Philosophers disputing in his chamber, he suddenly raises his body upright, and being demanded the reason, replies;Burtons Mel. when I have learned that whereof you are now disputing, I may end my dayes; and so he did, in the eighth year of his age. Democritus put out his eyes, that he might be more intent upon his study: yet sayes one,French. Acad. he saw more than all Greece besides. A notable story there is of M. Aurelius Emperour, whom Lucius meeting in the streets, accompanied with a single servant, demands, which way? to Sextus the Philosopher (replies this Noble and brave Emperour,) to learn what I know not; for it becometh even an old man to learn. At which Lucius breaks forth, Oh! I see an Emperour, grey headed, carrying his book like a childe to be taught. And Robert King of Jerusalem and Sicilia, a wise Prince and great lover of Learning, often said; He had rather choose to lose his Kingdome than his knowledg. And so did Robert King of Naples, esteem his Learning more than his Kingdom. It was Great Alexander that laid Homer under his pillow; and him we see, conquering more by his Wisdome, than Hector or Achilles by their Valour; using Learning as a diversion from the toile of Martiall thoughts; and in the vacancy and intervals of publick occasions and battails, he used as Cordials to refresh him; hold∣ing as it were a Sword in one hand, and a Book in the other: Ld Bacon. Essa.Some contemn, others admire, but wise men value Study and Know∣ledg. And if I did not here intend to do homage to the com∣mand of Brevity in this task, I could usher upon the stage of observation, severall great Persons, and as great Scholars, that advanced the Nobility of Learning, by their forward assistance and Contributions, to the Honour and esteem, as well as the support of it: one or two shall serve. Ptolomie Philadelphus the Egyptian King, with vast charge, raked into his Study, five hundred thousand Books; and by his means was the Septuagint translated, Card. Richeleiu, his erecting of the famous Aca∣demy at Paris, comes up to be registred among the valuations which great men, and not less wise, had to Learning and Know∣ledg. And Francis the first of France, with infinite numbers both of Fame and Power, might be introduced, as pregnant witnesses to the truth: of that great
value that has, in all ages, been treasur'd up, as the attendants of all humane Learning and Knowledg. To close this part of our discourse: We find the Lord giving countenance to humane Learning and Knowledg; by letting the world know, not transiently, as it were, to be told as a story only, but with the sound of Applaue and Commendation; as the livery of Gods Bounty and Honour; as a full testimony of the laudable and lawfull use of Learning. It's recorded by God, to the Honour of Moses, (whom One calls Gods first Notary,)Ld Bac. Adv. that he was fill'd with all the Learning of the Egyptians; which Nation is observed, to have contained the most ancient Schools in the world. We find also in the Scripture, eloquent Apollo; and who is it we find in these daies, to disparage that commen∣dable ornament, of civil and decent demeanour, setting it against the simplicity of the Gospel; but such, as despise it because they want it and others have it; it's not lawfull because they cannot attain to it: What say we to Daniel, who is recorded to be no small proficient in the cunning of the Caldeans: and Solomon, that gulph of knowledg, whose parts spread so farre, as the Queen of Sheba (a great lover of Knowledg and Wisdome) tra∣vel'd farre to hear him: It seems, Learning was then in great esteem among the Wise; and the Eccho of Wisdome sounded farre. We read also of Learned Paul, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel and as the Learned Lord Bacon observes; Naturall and Morall Philosophy, Politicks, Poetry, History, Mathematicks, &c. are strewed up and down the Divine Scriptures; and not a few of them in that book of Job. Dr. Jackson Creed. And it's also observed, that Learning and Knowledg, in Christs time, was strongly pursued and valued; that the most curious Arts flourished in great splendour; the Grecians flock't after the search of Wisdome and Philosophy; whilst the Romaes, no less busie in the hunting of Policie: and yet must it not be let slip; that all was put into the fire and burnt, when they proved stops in the way to Christ. The excellen∣cy of Learning and Knowledg.Let us now see their excellency; and should I fathome this depth, my shallow capacity would be drown'd ere I came nigh the bottom, I should be lost in the pursuit; should I travell over these vast Perrenian Mountains, I should be too long a coming to my journies end, and perhaps tire the Reader to go with me; but Ile court Brevity. Herein
consists a part of their excellency,that they cannot be purchased with Riches or Monies, but with the sweat of the Mind only: for were it not so, fools that are rich would be wise men, and all that have Monies would be Scholars, which is too great a Paradox to interpret; And herein lies ano∣ther part of the Excellencie of them, that such Minds that are soaked in Learning and Knowledg, have their Intellectuals clari∣fied, their natures softn'd, Reason, which before lay fallow, and in the Thory only, is now forc't into practice; That which was in Bullion, is ow coined, and minted, having the stamp of Ma∣jesty put upon it; the mind, now flourishes with strong abilities, is made capaple to help and guid others, and it self; Others are better, himself no worse. In the full view of this, Cicero cries out: Oh Wisdom! the guide of our life, the enemy to vice, and supporter of Vertue. And, we may believe him, for this is that mouth from whence proceeded the best Maxime for a well order'd life. Let a man be never so well qualified, with the laudable accomplishments of Fencing, Dancing, Musick, &c. other accute Properties of Gentlemen, yet, if Learning and Knowledg be not mixed, all other Embellishments are cloud∣ed, and prove as abortive. I cannot pass by an apt story to this purpose of Ismenius, whom by his great improvement in Musick, puchased the deserved Name of an excellent Musician, to which Antisthenes (to commend Learning and Knowledg above all) saies: 'Tis true, he was no less than report fam'd him, he handled his Instrument with a commendable and ravish∣ing dexterity: but (concludes) otherwise, he is good for nothing. Study and Knowledg (saies a Learned Author)Ld Bacon Essa. perfect nature, and are perfected by experience. And this a known Author judiciously amplifies in the life of Boetius: For (saies he)Causs. H. Court. Learning and Knowledg vindicate from stupidity, and a savage life; they cleanse, refine, and store the soul, made only to know great things; they open the Ʋnderstanding, by reading so many excellent Books, and even unloose the tongue, an Instrument that's the mannager of hearts; they make one more mild, civil, and courteous, contracting much respest and credit. And, there must needs be a vast and hidden Treasure in Learning and Knowledg, else Alexander sure would never have wish't he were no King so he were but Diogenes: and, that he esteemed it more to excell others in Learning, than in power
or Empire:whose ample Territories stretch even to the Heavens, and grasp greater things then Authority or Command can compass. Riches, Plea∣sures, &c. not to compare with them.The fame of Learning is below the pleasure of it. Antist∣henes saies, he could talk with himself; and it's no small pleasure and happiness to live comfortably within doors; What is Riches to Learning and Knowledg? What is it to be called a rich fool? Glister within and spare not; Inlay your minds, and cast away your gilded Trappings, more fit for Butterflies than men; He hath the most right to outward bravery, that hath inward to boast of. What's a rich man, and no more? but with the Peacock, proud of his Tail: like a Tulip, hath no sweet smell, is only for shew; like a painted and gilded Sign-post to an empty Inne, tells you what there should be, but leaves you to seek for what there's not to be found. Know∣ledg and Wisdom, saies the Philosopher,Hermes. garnisheth riches, and shadows poverty. And another,Pythagoras. That Knowledg is that which can never be forgotten, nor flie away. The Riches of both Indies, cannot fill, nor ballast a truly noble and aspiring mind in the midst of his possessions, without Learning and Knowledg as an Adjunct. If Riches prove his Portion by Inheritance, he reckons them only as the Antecedent, which without the Relatives of Learn∣ing and Knowledg, are no more to him, than what they are in themselves, slippery vanities, fading and perishing pleasures. He reckons his best fortune shipwrackt, if he should be tempted to spend the least time to pursue them for their own sakes; For a man to be rich in Knowledg, is to be rich in all things. Solon. Riches can bring no Light, or profit to, but fetches a luster from the soul, when yoked with Learning and Knowledg. Have you a thousand Acres of Land, he that prises Learning, scoffs at it, he can embrace the world and account it his own, and if it will not be so, he cares not. Ld Montague. Essa. For as Cato saies, A man of great Knowledg, cannot be poor; and that as in warre, Iron is to be preferred before Gold, so is Knowledg before Riches. These are the true Riches which cannot be taken from me, which are situate from the fingers of the greedy Plunderer; The evil fate of cloudy times, cannot make me compound for these Riches within, nor can the Sequesterer deprive me of a thought, they are beyond his reach; The freedom
of my soul hath a Charter to uphold it, that envy it self cannot touch nor break. I can traffick for Knowledg, in the midst of fiery combustions and perturbations, and no Cannon can reach me; I can sit in a contemplative Cabin, and no Martial Alarme can disturbe me; These Riches cannot be decimated; that's my happiness, saies a noble mind thus loaden; I can hide the greatest Treasures in the world, and yet carry them with me, and not a burden, more then the feathers of a Bird, or leaves of Trees are. Give me (saies one)Whitlocks Essa. that which will not put me to the charge of por∣tage to carry, though I travell the world over. The more a man hath of Learning and Knowledg, the less burden they are to him: Nay, these take away all burdens, and make such burdens as will stick, rather to hang ready for shaking off, than to fix fast, as Paul did the Viper. Bias the Philosopher, when his Countrey was invaded, and all fled away with their richest Moveables, he being demanded why he did not follow the example, and secure his choicest things: answered, I can carry them about me, I have nothing of worth but what I can∣not part withall. And Val. Maximus saies, He bears them in his breast, not to be seen by the eye, nor toucht by mortal hands. For indeed, experience tells us, there's no true content can be ex∣pected from the large confluence of a full estate, when ad∣verse fortune appeares; but a mind steer'd with Wisdom, ac∣complished by the best meanes, Learning and Knowledg, teaches the soul to stand steddy in the greatest stormes and vicissitudes here below. The vast hazards to fetch Merchan∣dize, storming the curled waves, bending under the violence of Herecan's, are testimonies produceable, that there's no less hazzard than life it self, which is above the worth of what's adventur'd for; And, when they have rifled the Treasures of the Indies, uncertain Riches. Nor can such hazardous adven∣tures bring any thing, which have escaped the painfull searches of former industry: But those (saies One)Sr Rich Tem∣pests Medita∣tions. that flies over the flowery-field of Learning, are mounted upon the wings of sublimer enquiries, and come home loaden with the Nectar of Knowledg, brim'd with inseparable Riches. For, if a man lose all he hath of the world, yet hath he left him that which is better than all he could ever lose; and, it's no ill management of our losses, if we choose, with the
Philosopher, rather to be thankfullfor what is left us, then repine at what escapes us. Dionysius the Tyrant, demanding the reason why Philosophers frequent∣ed Kings Counsels, and rich mens Houses, was thus answered by Aristippus: Quoniam Philosophi norunt quibus egeant, divites nesciunt. They know what they want, rich men don't. I too much doubt, many that are rich, had rather be so, than Learned; And as One in another case saies, so say I: His voice is, hang Learning, give me twelve-pence; I love to read my summes writ upon my bags, rather than think there's any value in Knowledg bound up in Books; I had rather be bound seaven years to the first, than trouble my brain a day with the last: I love to work in these silver Mines, though I be con∣demn'd to be a slave all my daies, my Children shall be Mer∣chants, hang Learning; to be compassed about with my best friends at a feast of my own cost, is as bad as the torments of hell; I laugh to think what fools those Kings and Emperours were, that made so much of Scholars and Philosopers, as to give away their riches upon such slaves to Learning. Oh! thou miserable soul, from whence cam'st thou, from Hell? Canst thou have any true content or pleasure, like to those of Learning and Knowledg? Thou sordid Mole, that digst under∣ground to find Hell, doest thou know how nigh thou art the Pre∣cincts of it? 'Twere thy happiness if thou didst know the misery in thy full enjoyments; Unless thou hadst a heart to use them to their appointed end, thou dig'st in the earth to undermine thy self; thy bags will take fire by some flash from Hell, and then thou art blown up bags and all; when death comes with a Habeac corpus, and sets a ne plus ultra to thy miserable life, what wouldst thou then give to learn the Knowledg of God, thy self, or thy sad condition? Oh then, that thou hadst known and learn't to be wiser! 'Twas a sharp E∣pitaph given to such a Miser, as suits our present dispo∣sition. Here lies ten i'th hundred fast ram'd, 'Tis a hundred to ten but his soul is damn'd.Cambd. Re∣ane. Is there any pleasure will hold comparison with this
pleasanfruit of our labour and study? If any be, these are the utile and dulc, the profit and pleasure; these are the constant hand∣maids of Learning and Knowledg; These are the Honey and Honey-comb; and if so, then the Knowledg of God, must needs be sweeter than both. If the one be positively and com∣paratively sweet, the other must needs be superlatively so. If it be such a sottish thing to want Knowledg, if such a brand of bruitishness and savage barbarisme to be ignorant, What must it then be to be Learned, Knowing, and Wise? the first may well be as a foil to set off the two last. I remember a notable example, to prove that the wisest men found sweetness and pleasure in these things: French Acad. Antigonus, King of Macedon finding Cleanthes alwaies turning the Mill-stone, I turn it (saies he) to get my living, but forsake not Philosophy for all that; For, the same hand which turned the Stone, wrote of the nature of God, and the Heavens. Now I say, if so pleasant to such as were poor, and stole Knowledg and Learning from the extremi∣ty of time, how much more delightfull and easie to them who may better make it their recreation, by reason of outward con∣veniencies? for certainly, most mens minds are crusht in a time of adversity. The Honour of Learning above all other Honours in the world.Is there any which seeks after Honour, let them tell me if the truest Honour be not enveloped in this rich Mantle of Learn∣ing and Knowledg: and that also the greatest Honour, in that it appeares God himself is the Grand teacher of Wisdom and Know∣ledg; These are the very Loadstones and Attractives of all Honour; These are they which Aggrandize a mans acceptation, to the most wise with great affection and courtesie; His worth is perpetuated with the remembrance of Honour, when his dust is offensive; The beauty and luster that Learning and Knowledg sets upon him that enjoys them, are their natural Escutcheons. He that is thus qualified, is honoured at home, in the City where he lives, beloved by his Countrey, and is indeed the Honour of it. It's better to be envied for thy Parts above others, than pitied and laught at for thy igno∣rance. This Priviledges his access to strangers, honours him in a forrein Nation, makes his Name survive his life; The want of these (necessary set-offs) so dis-robes and unmans us, that we are to be
only accounted things of scoff and pity. Tobe well seasoned with Learning, Knowledg, and Wisdom, per∣fumes our society; To blazon a rich goale of many descents, what honour is that to the study of the universall frame of na∣ture? Is it like to the honour of either, of natural Philosophy that teaches what things are, or moral Philosophy, to know how to use and improve them? Nay, Learning and Knowledg teaches how to mannage the honour it attracts, whereas igno∣rance when it hath surreptitiously snacht at honour, cannot weild it for want of the former; And it's pity any should know what 'tis to have honour, that hath not Knowledg and Learning to use it. Knowledg and Learning (saies One) are Endowments and Honours greater than Nobleness of birth, or estate; Careless Heirs may darken the two last, but Immortal Honour attends the first, making a man like God. We may guess at it a little by what honour is added to the Possessors of Learning and Knowledg even by ignorance it self, because they carry a stamp of Authority in the countenante even of young men, when gray hairs, and a vicious conversation dwarfs gra∣vity it self. It's not gravity in countenance (saies Cato) that carries authority in the front, or contracts respect in the rear, but a life steer'd according to the true end of our being: and to such saies the Philosopher, age, which in it self is grievous, yet by Knowledg and contemplation, they rather grow than grieve; for that their minds receive sap and nourishment whilest their bodies peele away. For what is it, I pray tell me, that Caesar stands on Record so much, as for Learning? so Homer, all the Royal Philosophers, and thousands that can now be only reverenced in their Graves: their thoughts are as perfumes to study. This it was that carved Trajans Name upon the wall, with the Cha∣racter of Parietaria Walflower, for of all the Emperours that reigned, he was the most renouned for Learning and Arts. And it's recorded with no small honour to the feminine sex, and well may be also exemplary, that Cornelia was so Learned, that she taught her two Sons the Latin Eloquence, so that Cicero admired her. Eudoxia Theodosius Empress wrote Lear∣ned Poems, and one concerning Christ was accounted singular. Aristippus was taught Philosophy by his Mother Aretia: and Zenobia, Queen of the Palmirians instructed her Sonne in Greek, Latin, and
Aegyptian Tongues, and penn'd an Epitome ofthe Esterne Stories. And if we descend to our Times, many like Examples might be introduc't: I only light on the Lady Gray, who was skil'd in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. Mr Torshea. Glory of Wom. May not these few, indeed of many, revive the footsteps of that Masculine word which our Predecessors left us, as paths for succeeding ages to tread in. Now to leave this part of our Discourse, who will not conclude it of the greatest advantage and Honour in the world, for men to be fitted for the service of their Countrey: which in the next place falls in to be considered. That Learn∣ing and Know∣ledg makes wise, and only fit for publick affairs in City or Common-wealth.Is it sweet, pleasant, profitable, and honourable, by Learn∣ing to govern our selves in all affairs, vicissitudes, exigencies and straights? How much then will Knowledg guide us to the government of others, which is no less profitable, honourable, &c. Learning and Knowledg are the very essence of Magi∣stracy, and the countenance of Authority and Majesty. It is of great advantage and benefit to a Nation, to have fit sup∣porters for the Fabrick of a Town, City, or Common-wealth. Wise and Learned men are the surest stakes in the hedg of a Nation or City: they are the best conservaters of our Liberties; the hinges on which the welfare, peace and happiness hang; the best publique good, and only Common-wealths men. These qualifications meeting with a true and brave mind, can conquer men, and with the Bazilisk, kill envy with a look; Knowledg and Learning are the guards of a City; if comman∣ded by wise and Learned men; are the gates of a Town, that by disorder it may not thrust it self out, the Bulworks of a Nation. Learned men are the only well Orderers of Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities, in the constitution of a safe Government, by establishing good and safe Laws, which accordingly are in∣stituted and mannaged, as the Agents are fitted with Learning and Knowledg. For saies one,Ld Bacon Ad∣vancement. If they be illuminated by Learning, they have certain anticipate notions of Religion, Pol∣licy, and Morality, which preserveth, and refrain them from all ruinous and peremptory errors and excesses, whispering in their ears when Counsellors cannot; They also proceed upon safe grounds and substantial Principles, which men only of experience, cannot so well direct unto; seeing dangers afar off, and repulsing them betimes, whereas men of experience see things at hand, seeing only
that which is ready to fall upon them, and trust to the agility of their wit (upon the very point of danger) to ward and avoid them. And who so (saies Seneca) thus cometh to hold the Helm, will find easie access to the most knotty Parts of Government; Weild it with Honour, whilst others fitted only by long experience, though at last they attain to sit at the Helme of Government, and steer it well, yet is to the great damage of the State: as much, as a young Chirurgion is forced for lack of Knowledg in some extraordinary cure, to torment the Patient with more pain, than could be expected from a more experienced Doctor in that faculty. Experience doth much (saies One)Cornwallis Essa. but it is too full of scars and wounds, and is bought with gray hairs and danger. Hence the Persians Elected none to rule amongst them as King, unless he were a great Philosopher; And this advantage accrues to one Learned above experience and know∣ledg only, in that our Scholar and knowing States-man, having laid his fame upon the eminency of Learning, early practising on lesser matters, which by degrees compleats his ascention, gradually signalizing his publick acceptance, (which courts him daily) and so by Learning and experience, is better com∣pleated for publique imployments, then the latter of the two is able to perform alone. Caussin. H. Court. And One producing some examples of wise Governours, lights on Moses, one whom God chooses to a great charge of Government, who it seems could not be better fitted, than by attaining to know somewhat of all those Sciencies that was in request amongst the Aegyptians: and there be Learned Areth. Geom. Music. and all other great Sciencies of Phylosophy in the Hyerogliplicks. Pray who is it which stands on Record for good Government, but such as were great Scholars? And as Ld Bacon well saies:Adv. Learning. It's almost without instance, that ever any Government was disasterous, that fell into the hands of Learned Governours. And it's very ob∣servable, that the Ages which passed from Domitians death to the Reign of Commodus, was a succession of six Princes, all Learned and choice Favourers and Advancers of it: and those times wherein they lived, the most flourishing that ever Rome saw, which was then the Module and Epitomy of Government in the world. So that in this continued sequence of six Princes, a man may see the happy fruits of Learning in
Authority, paintedto the life, upon the greatest Tables of the world. And such saies,Ld Bacon Essa the general counsels, plots, and modelling of affairs, come best from those that are Learned. Burtons Mel. It was said of Democri∣tes, that for his Learning, Knowledg, and Wisdom, he was sent to Abdera in Thrace, to be the Law-maker or Recorder. And the Ld Bacon alluding to Empericks in Physick, concludes: That it cannot but be a matter of doubtfull consequence, when the Govern∣ment must be at the dispose of Emperick States-men. Causs. H. Court. And another saies, That Sciences well managed, adde a marvellous luster to one in Government. Cornwallis Essa. Aristotle hits it, when he saies, It's no small utility which groweth to a Common-wealth by the sapience of a Learned Governour. And he misses not the mark, that saies, He governs by guess, that's not a Philosopher. And me thinks, the Answer of Themistocles fits this part of my Discourse fully: There were some that Ironically desired him to play and sing, I cannot (saies he) fiddle, but (which is the proper Orbe of a Learned man) I can make a little City a great one. Not much unlike Tiberius, who could steer the Senate with his eye. Methode for Sciences. They are unprofitable Citizens (saies One) which can contribute no∣thing to the good of a Common-wealth, or Ornament of a State, by their parts and Learning. Innumerable Instances might be pro∣duc't in this behalf; The best Law-makers were the wisest of men, as well as Scholars; all good Laws produc't from their care; others may steer the Helm, but they are the fittest to order it. How many persons of no mean quality, have been coined out of the Schools of Philosophy, to be Governours and Rulers of the vast Continent; And tell me, who stands upon record for good, but such as Learning and Knowledg made wise and able to man∣nage. If we do but read the History of Solon,Stanly Histo. of Philosophy. we need no Ar∣guments but that example; he was a great Philosopher, and no less Ruler; he ascended gradually by his wisdom, which shin'd in the eyes of all with a wonderfull clearness and bright∣ness: and the Grecian Army being commanded by Clisthenes the Athenian, Solon must be sent for his Counsellor: He it was, that by his wise advice quieted the hot disputes of several facti∣ons and parties, in the City Cirrha; For, Solon was looked upon by the discreetest, as the only man fit to command them, whom they intreated to take into his custody his Helm of the
Common-wealth: He became both a Law-giver, and a Law-makerat once; he rul'd so well, and became so great a hap∣piness to the Common-wealth, as a Proverb ensued, and was often repeated; Equality breeds no strife. And some say, this Oracle was received by Solon from Apollo: Sit at the Helm of State, their Pilot be, The Common wealth's glad to be steerd by thee. What excellent Laws were made by him, every Nation, Pro∣vince, and City, to this day experiences; they are so good that they need no other Name to know them by, but Solon. Il'e dismiss this Discourse with the Example of Xenophon, who by his Learning and wise conduct of Affairs, gave life to the bleeding condition of himself and followers, with one of the most notable Examples of valour that ever was yet read of in the world; testifying, that Learning and Knowledg fits for Government, as well of Armies, as Cities; Martial affairs be∣ing sharp and quick, require a wit and headpiece proportion∣able. Stanly Philos. Montagues Essa. Ld Bac. Adv. This Xenophon was a Socratick Philosopher of Athens, a young man, yet aged with Wisdom; his first assay of valour was in the Peloponnesian Warre, betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, where seeing his Master Socrates dis-mounted from his Horse, and fighting on foot, takes him upon his shoulders, and carries him many furlongs, till the enemy left the pur∣suit. He goes with Cyrus into Asia, in his expedition against Artaxerxes, he was never in Arms before, nor had seen the Warres; and now went only as volunteer for the company of Proxexus, betwixt whom there was knit a Gordian knot of friendship. Cyrus their General being slain, a message comes by the mouth of Falinus to the Grecian Army, (now a prey to their enemies, being but an inconsiderable few in the midst of Persia, many miles from their Countrey) That they would deliver themselves up into the Kings mercy; (One would take it for a good message in such a condition.) Now before a publick answer was returned, divers of the Army had discoursed with the Messenger Falinus, and amongst the rest Xenophon speaks: Falinus, we have but these two things now left, our Arms and Virtue; to yeeld up the first, stifles the last.
Falinus scornfullyreplies, If my judgment deceives me not, you are (young Gentle∣man,) an Athenian, and study Philosophy, you speak indeed neatly; but build not on such airy speculations, as to think Vertue can stand against the Kings Authority; But, as one of my Authors saies,Ld Bacon. This was the scorn, the wonder follows. This young Philosopher now displaies his Parts, Wisdom, and Valour, for the Honour of his Countrey, and discourse of the World; in saving the Grecian Army from the gulfe of ruin: when no hopes seem'd to remain; he made way for their safety, and the overthrow of the Persian Monarchy, which afterward Jason the Thessalian design'd; Agesilaus the Spartan commenc't; and Alexander the Macedonian pursued, till victor; and all by the means of this young Scholar: For, with an Army of ten thousand foot, he wades through Persia to Greece, fording fifty Rivers, and usher'd his well ordered few with so great skill, that he arrived to his own Countrey with safety, through the daily opposition of an hundred thousand enemies; yet never disorder∣ed with any skirmish, though he had many sharpe ones, besides Mutinies. Divers Stratagems in Warre, have produced much honour to the Learned Authors, and with great success; take only one in short. Stanly Philo∣sophy. Periene being besieged, Bias the Philosoper being be∣set in the siege, orders two very fat Mules to be sent out of the City: Craesus wondering at their plenty, desires Peace by a Messenger, which Bias hearing, did against his coming to the City, order great heaps of Sand to be made, and covered with Wheat: when information comes to the besiegers of their great abundance, they had their own termes accomplished. And what hath been said of Xenophon, might be almost paralell'd with Epaminondas the Theban, who abated the power of Sparta. The wonderfull Engines of defence and offence, to the great ad∣vantage of Armies and Cities, produced only by the power of of Learning, I leave to their proper places to be spoken of. These already hinted, with many other, were raised to the high∣est pitch of Fortune, through their brave aspiring minds stirr'd up through the Knowledg and Study of Philosophy. These were taken from the Schools of Philosophy, and being as it were minted out of the rubbish of the world, received the stamp of Honour, as a due debt to their Learning and Wisdom.
The Evils which Learn∣ing and Know∣ledg prevent.Let us now turn about, and as we have seen the Advantages of Learning and Knowledg; Their Worth above all things; their Pleasure, Profit, Honour, &c. you may set their opposites to them, and thereby judg of the several Inconveniencies and Dis∣comodities in the want of them; they will fall in of themselves, as necessary Consequences; I'le only touch at that, which is the great enemy to all good; the nursery and store-house of wickedness; the retarder and pull-backs of all kind of Virtue; the great Antagonists of Learning and Knowledg, this Monster, Idleness: The very lethargy of the mind; no man that's troubled with this epidemicall disease, can stirre a foot for it; nor make any progress towards any noble design; it's the sluce to let in all wickedness and vice: But the study of Sciences, the desire of Learning and Knowledg, rouses up the mind, and enervates this fosterer of Ignorance and Error, which if nourish∣ed stifles all the Heroick actions of the mind: for without the study and search after Knowledg, the mind is sick: Now a man cannot be idle, that is richly lin'd with Learning and Knowledg; there's no room to slow idleness, where the mind is full fraught with the merchandize of Knowledg; for, he is alwaies at work with contemplative thoughts, which are the souls life; and true Knowledg, sets the soul at work, to think on that which is good; and the will embraces it; else our thoughts may be flagitious and wicked: To converse with our selves in our studies, and pri∣vate retirements, is better company and society, than I see by most now adaies frequented. Cicero tells us, That idleness is the cause why the body and mind languish, and that to do nothing, is to do ill. The Romanes taught not their Children any thing which was to be learn't sitting They are a brood of mischeifs that are hatcht with sitting idle. The Romanes also enacted, that none should go about the City, but such as carried the badge of his Trade; so that when one had earnest occasion to dispatch a Let∣ter three daies Journey from the City, he found none so idle as to be his servant: Was not here a great evil cozen'd? Plato de∣scribes it as a Maxim for the health of our minds; For saies he, The Doctrine of Learning and Knowledg, is the safeguard of the soul, and certainly the mind must needs wither away, if not prun'd and sometimes lopt: It will rust without use. No Pilot exerciseth his
Office standing still; When once mens mindshave a taste of the sweet fruits of Learning and Knowledg, they never delight in other company, but such as may advantage their desires in Knowledg. What are deboist courses, but the proper branches of Idleness? Knowledg is the Bezar, the only cordial to the mind, in the deepest Melancholy: It's the best guard of safety in a field, to be alwaies in motion; Skip∣ping from bough to bough, preserves the life of the poor Bird: whilest the lazy and careless seate, courts destruction, and as surely embraces it. Idleness is the grave of living men, saies the Philosopher,Plato. and that a man is twice buried; in the body, and sloth; and a man that passeth the one part of his life with∣out profit, ought to have the rest of his life taken from him. And still I say, and with it conclude, that there's nothing fortifies the mind against all vices, as Errors, Ignorance, &c. in particular; and against Idleness in general, but Learning and Know∣ledg. Now in that I have placed diversity and variety of studies, in this Catalogue of Books; I will crave leave a little to speak somewhat of most; pointing as well to the particular studies, as generally what they are: not aiming so much to direct how, as what to use; That if Books be the Spectacles we see through to all Learning, let's then use them so; branch them forth, and spread their Knowledg, by discovering the benefits and advantages of each sect. For, if I mistake not, it's the counsell of a wise man, and great Counsellor of this Nation, rather to embrace and follow a general Knowledg, than be confin'd to any particular: and there seems no small reason for it. For, one who retains the Elements of all Knowledg, though but weakly, yet shall be fit for discourse in what company soever: but to be confin'd to an exact sight of our Knowledg, puts him out of that element, wherein he is only exquisite: he must then vaile to others discourse, and so keep consort with silence. There was never any Art yet (saies One)Cornwallis Essa that could fasten me to her service, for to know them otherwise than superfi∣cially, was more than he intended to do; he would not earn them so dearly, as to tie the mind to one thing; for by this her best power is taken away; for that her power is limited, which would walk universally, if she had her own will. It's injustice, saies another, to
fetter a mans spirit to any fixed labours. Hall. Essa. For what I see not at first view, I shall less see (saies Ld Mon∣tague) if I opinionate to it. The Apostle Paul seems to be the File-leader, when he bids Try all things, and hold fast that which is good. Therefore in reading Books, One said,Ld Montague Essa. He had a skip∣ping wit, for if one Book (saies he) seems tedious, I take another, and so I am not weary with doing nothing, nor with too much poreing on one Subject; which is not to do less than to dull our minds, and never suffer them to be relieved, but tired and jaded out like Hacknies, with continuance. Diversity of study, is found by most Scholars to be a great refreshing and nourishment to the mind, as well as variety of meats provoke the appetite to a fresh desire, when it may be one bit of another al∣ready tasted, will not down. The study of the Bible a∣bove all Books.Now in this diversity of Books, I must still keep touch with my duty in setting the Book of God above all; This we are all bound to, as the most serious and necessary; It pleads for it self against all gainsayers; The most considerate know so; and that it will at the great Day, plead against such as neglect or contemn it. There are here all sorts of Philosophy, as well as variety of History, &c. So, that if any be weary with the Children of Israel, and loath this sweet Manna of Heaven∣ly Knowledg of God in Christ, or in his creatures, there be all the Sciences sublimely comprehended in it. This sacred Verbum Dei, will teach us the true keeping of those Account-Books of our consciences, which one day must be open'd, when our Shop-Books are burnt. Mr Clarks Examp. Charles the Great, used to set his Crown upon the Bible, concluding, that Piety was the best Policy. All studies that are stoln from this, though good in themselves, yet are in their issues bad, unless necessary, accor∣ding to the Rules of Christian Prudence and Wisdom; to which I leave every one, as his own guide. A Divine said well to this purpose:Mr Church. If the Word be our Counsellor all day, it will be our Comforter at night. To step aside, and make it our only business, to take up the golden Apple of Atalanta; chiefly studying moral Knowledg; the Divine Race may be frustrated, and the Goale lost. M Clarks Lives, first part. It was holy Luther, that said, Odi ego meos libros, &c. He wish't his own Books lost, fearing they would hinder him of his time, which he thought two little, to
imploy in reading the Sacred Scriptures; This is the guide tothe deep secrets of God, and as short a cut to that de arte cordis. By this a man is taught to know God, and that well relished, will the sooner bring us to the true Knowledg of our selves. Though David had good Counsellors, yet saies he,Psal 119 24. Thy Testimonies are my delight, and the men of my counsell. We are taught by this our duty to God, and demeanour towards men; all the duties which we are indebted one towards another, are plentifully treasured up in this Book of our Instruction. To read what David saies of Gods Word, is enough to make us deeply affected with the study of it; The Law of God (saies he)Psal 19. is perfect; Converts the soul; his Testimonies sure, makes wise the simple, rejoyces the heart; pure, enlightning the eyes; true and righteous; They are my Meditation day and night, a light unto my feet, and Lanthorn to my paths, &c. Next to this sacred Book, are the infinite labours of Gods Servants to be valued, and prized; as Index's to find out the obscure parts of it; I have already glanced at them before, and therefore come now to the Advantages and Use of Moral Studies, beginning first with History.History: which I may well say is Speculum mundi: to praise the use of it, were in a manner to dispraise it; advancing it, would but clip its own wings, which is able to make it soare above the highest commendations. I would only, with a few chips of my own, strew the way to the profits of this study; and drive them home with more solid perswasions of wise mn. Cicero. The usual encomiums of that center of Eloquence, and others, are no whit pigmied by my refusing them; I think (as many others wiser than I can express) that History is the best Prospect into Humane affairs, a thing which consociates the remotest Regi∣ons; by which we may, as it were, be seated free from danger, yet be fully acquainted with all the ruptures, perturbations, tu∣mults, changes, actions and transactions, of all Nations, King∣doms, and Empires in the world; which many Millions have engaged their lives in. It's grand discretion, to learn to be∣ware by others Examples. In History are many Examples of Virtues, as Copies drawn for our imitation; as baits to allure us; And alas! no few of vice, as Sea-marks to warn us; as a glass to shew us the ugly deformity of sinne. For, they say, Examples are more taking, than Precepts binding. The
Law furnishes us with the last, and History with the first: accor∣ding to Seneca: Longum Iter per praecepta, breve & efficax per exempla. Here Virtue survives our Persons, and wicked men may per∣haps find it the truest Astrology to tell them their own fortunes. It was Thales, that said of History: Nil mortem a vit â differre: because, the life of the deceased, hangs upon the remembrance of the living; Ld Bacon else, to be vicious, and virtuous would be all one as to their Examples, if not transmitted to posterity. History: makes men wise and deliberate in their publick and private affairs; and indeed, wisdom got by experience, is very costly, and somewhat dangerous; it hazards a mans reputation, to pay any thing of it for the least part of wisdom. For as another saies well,Fr. Acad. Such as are studious in History, though young in Knowledg of affairs, have a very grand Aspect, and almost tell their experience in Knowledg, by their countenance. If that received Opinion be true; that Vultus est Index animi. But especially in the judicious deportment towards business, and men: You may read their minds by their eye, that card, and compass, which guides to the heart; Ʋt ex pede Herculem: Trace their fitness, for larger strides in more important affairs. One speaking of the accomplishments of the Gentry, saies,Mr Brathwaits Nursery for the Gentry. Would you be enabled for company? no better medium than Know∣ledg in History. And he that trod on the Theatre of History more than any other, could say, he never affected airy comple∣ments, which give only a sound to the ear, but never leave an impression behind them; a thing that History is not guilty of. History is that, which hath, as it were, reduced tradition into profitable Knowledg, tempers the mind, and formes it to a perfect shape and symmetry. We may by History reconcile the future and present tense: See Asia in England, travell the Holy Land; and go to the Holy Warre with Mr Fuller: See the Grand Seignory in the Seraglio, compass the world with Drake. Would you see the Warres and Actions of the Roman Empires? you may see them tread the stage again with less cost or hazard, than at first. You may by the study of History live in all Ages, see Adam in Eden,
sail with Noah in the Ark, sitand consult with Julius Caesar, converse with Seneca, conferre with all the wise Philosophers; go to schoole at Athens, and with a free access hear all disputes; and much more from this study of History; which one well calls, the worlds Recorder: G. Essa. Ld Montague. We cannot sure, deny that of the Sages, That no wise man could be an experienc't Statist, that was not frequent in Histo∣ry. And he is not otherwise to be accounted, than Learned and wise, who concludes: Historians were his right hand, being (saies he) pleasant and easie, from whence may be drawn, wise sentences, rare examples, and as rich precepts. Mr Torshell. One takes notice of Apollo, as a man not only Eloquent, but also much Learned in History. And a modern, and Divine Moralist, observes,Mr Herle. That to be acquainted with History, purchases more wisdom, than the strictest Rules of Policy, for that the first do furnish as with Instances as well as Rules; and as it were per∣sonates the Rule, drawing out more into full proportion, and linea∣ments. Again, (saies, he) We are weaued from a childish effeminacy, and habituated by the reading of History, to partake of what we most affect therein, training our minds to manlike actions, snatching us from the vanity of youth and corrupt society. Socrates tells us, that History best suits solid Head-pieces; and therefore was Caesars Comment, the bosome com∣panion of King Alphonsus, and T. Livy in no less esteem; and that when exquisite Musick assaid to ravish his mind, he com∣mands their absence, as a disturbance to the better content he resented in Livy; And I trow, there was good reason; for that this King of Arragon, and Ferdinand of Sicily, found the Physick which prov'd the life of their health, and health of their life; the first by reading T. Livy, the last from Q. Curtius, when all their physical doses could not effect the least change of their conditions towards their health. An Historian saies truly: One looks round about him, and sees things past, whereas a traveller in other studies, looks only forward to what he is a doing. For my own part, I account it with others, a usefull and beneficial study; A man needs not so much toil and beate his braines, as with other parts of Humane Know∣ledg, which shall not avail his cost and paines so much; Yet not to neglect other Studies; for this comes not up in account amongst Students, as a Sudy so full as others;
if it be, it'sthe easiest part of it, yet the most profitable, reckoning with what little paines it's to be purchased. Therefore with Plato, I think it best, when weary with other Studies, To sport thy self with reading of good Histories. Mr Leigh. Learning. Bartons Mel. Chronologie and Topogra∣phie, are the two eyes of History; Geographicall Maps (saies one) should please any man. But these I referre to their pro∣per places, as part of the Mathematicks, let's now slide into the sweet and pleasant paths of Poetry.Poetry and Poesy It's affirmed by some, that Poets were the first Prists Prophets, Legislators, Politicians, Philosophers, Astronomers, &c. in the world. La Montague Essa. Others, that Homer was the first and last of Poets; for that, having no Copy set him by any, yet hath left One unimitable by any, One admired by all; he was great∣ly valued by Alexander, who in the rich spoiles of Darius, ordered a Cabinet (there sound) of great worth, for the pre∣servation of Homer, saying: he was his best Adviser, and faith∣full Counsellor he had, in his grand Affairs: doubtless, he was of geat honour and estimation, that when Constantinople was fired, Homer (writ in Letters of Gold) shrunk under that general Martyrology of two Hundred Thousand Books. And Ali∣biades requesting of a Scholar Homers Works, no sooner was answered, he had it not; but was replied by a box on the ear, for that, he thought as a Scholar, he could no more want it, than breath to live by. Another, he calls Virgil the Prince of Poets: And, I. Scaliger, was so much affected with Poetry, that he protested, he had rather be the Author of twelve Verses in Lucan, or an Ode in Horace, than Emperour of Germany. We find Moses giving thanks to God at the Red Sea, in this Language; and David composed many sweet and heavenly Hyms and Songs. A Learned Writer saies well; That the Books of Job, Psalms, and Moses Song, are the best Pattern's of true Poesy. D Jackson. Creed. Mr Leigh on Learning. 'Tis certain, that Poetry and Poesy are well cal∣led the luxury of Learning; and quintessence of wit: serving principally, to vent extraordinary affections; But I could wish all Poets followed these spiritual Patterns; For, that corrupt Subjects defraude Poetry of her due praise. Therefore saies One, Impious Poets make Clio, a Thais, Helicon a Brothell house: and themselves contemptible. Now as the Ancients chief Learning consisted in Poetry, so did they
wisely improve that Talent of God to Sacred things; which indeed Adorned the use of it, commending it as lawfull; whereas, it seems now, so adulterated, as too many mens minds stand fixed to the ima∣ginary part of wickedness; staining their souls, with contempla∣tive vices; so strongly bent by their speculative lusts, that they on∣ly want occasions to turn them into practice; Many good wits, have abused their better parts, by sophisticating this Noble In∣stitution; fitting it only to serve the Devil, by being a pandor to all sorts of lusts and filthy drollery; lardeing their Writings with fictions, providing more poison than wholesome aliment. That as One saies:Mr Hall. Essa. If the rich fame of Poetry, which hath been improved in frothy love Stories, and fantastical Chimera's, had been bestowed on some rare Ideas, they might have produc't ex∣treme advantage to mankind. But let's now turn to examine our actions, by the Royal Standerd of the Law.Law: which is only distributive Justice; and a constant and perpetual Will, to render every man his own right, and that that according to Law, grounded on reason; and of what use Justice is, to the well ordering of men in peace and safety, who knows it not? and that the due execution of the Law, is the life and soul of it. God himself was the first Institutor of Laws: and Moses proved a conscionable pleader in Gods behalf. Those Cities, saies Plato, in which are no severe Laws for punishment of sinne, are rather to be accounted forrests for monsters, than places habitable for men. The Laws of this Nation are branched into Common, Statute, Civil, and Canon. Something only of the first, and a little of the last. The Grounds of the Common Laws of England (saies the famous Lawyer)Ld Cooks Ep. to Reports. are beyond the limits of time, and not bound∣ed in by any remembrance: that the Laws which W. the Con∣queror sware too: Were Bonae & approbatae antiquae Regni Lges. And those comprehended in Magna Charta. That as no Jewel is comparable to Learning, so none more excellent than the Knowledg of the Law; and none so necessary for preserving of life and goods, as the Common Laws of England: and indeed, it is so much the more noble, in that none can be Lawyer to any good purpose, or as they ought to be, but such as are Scholars: and not so, but also of very profound
understandings; acute apprehensions, and strong parts. The Law is the Touchstone of truth. And it's will said by One:Mr Noy. That most studies are private, retired, the Law is publick for all. The first, fitted only for Universities, the other for Common-wealths; and therefore it is that the Civil Law calls the Coun∣sellors and Interpreters of the Law, Honourable; to be free from publick charges, and to be wrote and sent unto as persons of special Worth and Dignity. Our Laws, saies Ld Cooke, seem dark and obscure, but they cannot bear the burden of that Imputation, it rather falls on their Ignorance, that understand them not; You shall (saies he) never find any strife arise a∣bout the Law, but through Instruments, Conveyances, and Wills, made by ignorant men; and as often with Acts of Par∣liament, overlaid with Proviso's; And really, if a man should speak truth, and as much reason as the Law speaks, there are none so great enemies to the Laws, as such as desire some liberty for their own advantage, which the Law denies; or such, as ha∣ving plotted some crimes against the Law, are afraid of the hammer and force of it; and such like they are, that either through ignorance or malice, raise the dust of an envious cla∣mour; which at last will reverberate, and blow into their own eyes. Reports (saies the grave Reporter)L Cooke. opens the windows of the Law, shewing the beauty of it, in the great reason it stands on; breaking the shell of difficult cases, so that the kernell slips into ones hand. And another very famous in the Law, saies: Plead∣ings are the most honourable, laudable, and profitable things in the Law. And this puts me in mind of an Antient custom of the Athenians (which might happily flow from this Opinion:) They put their young Gentlemen, to preferring cases in be∣half of the people, or pleading for the poor; and this conside∣ration may mind our Gentry, and stirre them up more to study the Law; in that they may not only be great helps (like some good Ladies with their Physick) to their poor Neighbours and Tenants, against oppression, (which the world cannot give more Honour) but also be able to keep themselves safe in their Estates. To be well read in the Law, is the greatest Orna∣ment of a Gentleman. No Study more Noble, Honourable, and Profitable. Gentlemen are thereby fitted for any pub∣lick imployment (for which the Gentry seem wholly above all others to be born to) for their Countrey, if
suddainly call'dto it; and able to discharge it with publick Honour and Credit. It's recorded of the Bp of Hereford, that he was of a very profound Judgment in the Knowledg of the Law; Which was (saies a good Author) both safety and solace to himself. Without the Knowledg of it (in some measure) a Gentleman lies un∣guarded, and open to the assaults of every base mechanick and troublesome fellow; and it's the reason many Gentle∣men are abused by their vassals, as blind men are led by their Boyes; and are tormented and wrack't, at the pleasure of such, whose eyes and ears they borrow: and to all such as are pesti∣lent in this case, I wish that Law might take hold; Charles the 9. France. That all that commenced any Actions, left a considerable Summe of Moneys in the Kings Exchequer, and to forfeit it, if it ap∣peared, they had no just cause for what they did. We find (indeed) ZenasTit. 3.13. to be a godly Lawyer, though now it seems a solecisme in Reason, which the bad practice of some hath made too great a Paradox to all. I durst almost distinguish, that he may be a godly man, that's not a godly Lawyer; but that touches not the Nobleness of the Science; the Law, is good and just: few follow it so, or according to conscience; the Name of it is enough to cast the scales, and be a general conviction to all. To say this is Law, is a word big enough to stop gainsayers. And he that wresteth any text, (saith a good Expositor)Ld Cooke. against his genuin sense, though to confirm a truth, doth against distributive Justice: which is to give every one his own. But I shall come short on brevity, if I treat so long on the Common Law, as to forget Civil LawThe Civil Law: whose body is thus epitomized. Hurt no body, live honestly, and give every man his due. The Civil Law was the Starre that led the wisest in the Roman Empire, to the due Government of that mighty Empire. And doubtless, the great success of that Monarchy, must a little reflect on their Laws, as the primum mobile of their great Fortune. His Excellen∣cy of the Civil Law. It's a wise man, that saies, though other Nations have their peculiar Laws, yet beyond the Seas, no Law is accounted of, or used, but the Civil Law; none suffered to plead in their Courts, or sit as Judges, but Sudents in that faculty. And it's a study fit to be looked into, though not
here practised. Butlet us now suffer our selves to mind our health, and look into the practice of Physick.Physick It cannot be of ill reflection to the Doctors of this Profession, if on the front I place Luke as a man taken notice of, for a godly Physician; and if we ascend from the lesser to the greater, it's a glory that Christ is compared to a good Physician; and indeed was a gracious, and is still to soul, as well as then to the body. Physick, saies One, is a Noble Art, and according to the Poets, descended of a gene∣rous Race; bringing in Apollo as the chief grace of Medicin, and Esculapius his Sonne, who was a God and Professor of Physick. Mithridates King of Pontus, was famous for Physick, and was the first compounder of Mithridate, which retains its Name from him. He was very Learned, and could through his Knowledg of twenty Languages, answer all Ambassadours in their own tongue. It must needs be a Noble Science, that's of so general a use to mankind; To see a well cut Herball, flourishing with all sorts of forreign and Dome∣stick Plants, Flowers, Herbs: with the Virtues of each Vege∣table, all which demonstrate the usefulness of this Art. Of what esteem ought such to be had, that with Galen or Hippo∣crates, dead many years, yet stand alive to this day by their Learned Parts and Knowledg in Mysteries of this Art; and the great discoveries of those greater secrets contained in the Mysteries of God in Nature. Alchimy and Chymistry.There are many Branches which flow from this, as the ge∣neral; many Rivers fall into this One of Physick; as distil∣lation, Alchimy, Chymistry, &c. The two last being very de∣lectable, and profitable as well as the former: though such as know them not, cannot say so: and no wonder, if ignorance be the judg. There goes a good Story, which reflects on Alchimy and Chimistry, it's the Fable of Aesops Husbandman, who dying, bequeath'd to his Sonne a vast Treasure of Gold, hid in his Vineyard; but the absolute place whereabout it lay, he forgot: The Sonne diligently searcheth, turning over eve∣ry place throughout the Vineyard, but finds nothing worthy of his vast toyl; yet as we say, It's an ill wind blows no body good; for, it proved of great good to the Vines, in a plentifull
Harvest the year following. So, saies my Author,Ld Pac. Adv.The search for Gold, procures much advantage in fruitfull ex∣periments, both of nature, and to the great use of mankind. And, it cannot swarve from reason, for that, though they make no Gold in Specie, yet virtually they get even the Phi∣losophers Stone, which turns all into the golden Experiments, of incomparable value; for who reckons not extractions of Oyl, Sand, Salt, Spirits, Stones, &c. of great use, the sepa∣ration and alteration of Mettals, &c. of great advantage? They are not few, but as well many, as rare Experiments, which might be produc't as the natural and proper effects of these occult Mysteries. But I cannot stay any longer from the Delectable Sweets, that are found in this Hive of the Mathematicks.Mathematicks: Which saies One,Mr Leigh. are most accurate and pro∣fitable studies. And Ld Bacon saies, They make men wise and subtile. And to their Honour, Abraham was a famous teacher of them, amongst the Caldeans; and Alexander as good a Scholar. Many Princes and great men, are upon record for their diligent search into this Noble Study: which one properly calls, Rich Gemms. Mr Hall Essa. Burtons Mel. What more pleasing study than the Mathematicks (saies One?) A thing he much delighted in him∣self. And Mr Diggs saies, Creds mihi extingui dulce erit Ma∣thematicarum artium studio. I could live and die in these Studies; they are above the childish babies of Riches. Burton. Demo∣critus Juniour observes, that Orontius the Mathematician, won∣dered so much at Archimedes, that he breaks forth calling him Divinum & homine majorem. Seth, who lived in the first age of the world, is said to have been skil'd in the Ma∣thematicks. It's somewhat prity that's said of Aristippus: whom, the adverse fortune of a stormy wind, and roaring Sea vomited out of the Ship, upon the banks of a forreign Countrey (who was you must think in great straits, to know whether his destiny was worse or better, than if a favourable Sea had given a quick and suddainer death, by sending him to the bottom, than to fall into the hands of wild Beasts, or savage men) whilst thus tortur'd with fear in his mind, he spies some Mathematical Figures drawn on the sandy Banks, (as the Antients then did use to do) suddainly he breaks forth: Salva inquit res est, amici, hominum vestigia conspicio.
Concluding,there must be some City nigh for their comfort: that those marks were the steps of more civility, than they could have expected from so barbarous and silent a Coast. The Emperour Charles the fifth, was a great Studient in the Mathematicks, and sate close at it in his Tent, in the midst of his Army. There is a very remarkable Story, recorded of the Delians:Mr Stanly Hist. of Philosophy. who being much infected with the Pest, consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, and had this answer; that it should cease when they doubled their Altar, which was of a Cubick Figure. And you may at large read their endeavours, which effects pro∣duc't not their desires: Wherefore again they repair to the O∣racle: the answer was, They had not yet doubled their Cube, which their ignorance could not teach them: so they repair for advice in this great strait to Plato the Philosopher, who returns them this answer: The Gods derided the Greeks, for the neglect of Philosophy and Learning; Yet would he be willing to serve them, and did double the Cube, and banished the Plague. Other admirable effects, I find as the natural Children of this Knowledg: which I referre to the proper places of the Ma∣thematicks. It's a Sudy, of late much engrossed by many in these parts, as well as other places of the Nation: and that it's somewhat kept under, for the want of variety of Books, which because of some small Knowledg, I have in some parts of them, I have inserted at large, whatever Books have come to my Knowledg; and shall reduce more to the obedience of this Catalogue, as they come either out, or to my Know∣ledg. Let us now see it in the Branches of it: and if we would keep our Accounts right, we must begin first with Arithmetick.Arithmetick, which Pythagoras is noysed to have reduced into an Art. Est Doctrina bene numerandi, saies One:Mr Leigh. Learning. Most parts of the Mathematicks hangs upon Arithmetick. It's as generally known to be profitable and usefull, as no less delight∣full; for, having tasted considerably of this Science, I can therefore say its both. By this you may, ex ungue leonem, pro∣portion the whole hody. By this (as One observes)Burt. Mel. from a little part, you may know the Dimensions of Domitians Amphitheatre, and vary the twenty four Letters, into more words than the world can contain. Here, by the Knowledg
of the square and Cubick root (suppose it as small as imagi∣nable) you may find the number of the sandy Mass, if even, the world were nothing else; if you know but the number con∣tain'd in that small Cube. So for Algebra, which is a part of t, of which One saies: Nothing can be more delicious to the mind, more bewitching and ravishing, abstruce and recondite; Yet so facile, as it swells it up to a perfect delight. Upon this hangs the Invention of Geometry.Geometry. By the Aegyptians, which when Nile broke down their hedges of distinction, they were forced to this excellent Art of measuring Land. Thales of Melita, first brought it from thence to Greece; Since Arithmetica Geome∣tria subsistere non potest, saies P. Ramus. It's said to be Ars omnium sine controversia certissima, the most sure of all Arts. And therefore it was that Plato wrote on his Study door: Let none ignorant of this Art enter here. He that shall see (saies One) the Geometricall Tower of Garsenda at Bollogne in Ita∣ly: the Steeple and Clock at Strasburgh, will ever after admire Geometry; Or that Engine of Archimedes, able to remove the Globe from Atlas shoulders, could a place to fix it, be found. The rare Geometricall Instruments to make a Chariot move, sine animali: I'ts no impertinent Story wich I remem∣ber is recorded of Alchimedes, the famous Syracusan Geomi∣trician, who being surprised from his studious contemplation, and requested to discover what advantage his deep Studies could produce for the good of his Countrey: he quickly brings forth such Engnes of terrour, that by their strange effects, (they exceed almost belief; he only accounting it an essay to farre greater exploits. He it was that by his Geometricall In∣struments, annoi'd the Romane Army, which had straitly be∣girt Syracuse) more than all the City could do by Arms and force, Making great and small Stones, fly nigh hand, and at a distance, like Hail-stones, to the preservation of the City. This was he that to the wonder of the world fram'd a Brazen Heaven, wherein the seven Planets had their motion. And, with his hand drew after him five thousand Bushels of Grain. Infinite might be the Instances of this kind, but take one for all, to shut up this discourse: Ferdinand the Emperour sent to Soly∣man the great Turk, the Heavens made of silver, wherein the
motions had their true courses with those of the Heavens; the Starres arising and setting, the Planets keeping their oblique Motions; the Sun eclipsed at his just time and the changing every Moneth, with the same in the true Heavens; and this was carried before Solyman, by twelve men, and taken in pieces, and reunited a∣gain by the Maker. Now though this be indeed a curious and admi∣rable piece of Art, yet is it the less, considering the customary use of Watches and Clocks, no less rare, but not taken notice of in regard so common. And the like Engines, with their terrible slaughter of men in the P. of Parma's Army, at the siege of Antwerp,Strada's Siege of Antwerp. is above a common wonder. I do not think it's to be paralell'd, that grave stones should fly in the air four miles; the Waters part (with the violence of this invention) to the discovering the bottom, the earth felt to move and tremble seven Miles off; it's tedious to relate the story at large. Have ye not read of Architas Ta∣rentinus, who made a Dove of wood (to which by weights equally poised within the body, and a proportion of air) flew like a living Dove. Of no less wonder was that Eagle, which mounting into the air, flew before the Emperour to the gates of Norimberge; with that Iron Fly made by Art, to fly about the Table at a publick Feast. Divers Arts hang on Geometry: as Astronomy, Opticks, Musick, Dialling, Geography, Archi∣tecture, and Mechanicks: as Husbandry, Navigation, Military Discipline, &c. A little of each: and first Astronomy.Astronomy is a Science whereby one may examine and calculate the motion of the heavenly Bodies; B. Mel. Their Magnitudes, Apo∣geums, and Perigeums, &c. their distance from the earth, with the bigness and compass of the Firmament; each Star with the Di∣ameters, by the aid of Glasses, Astrolobes, Sextants, Qaudrants, &c. This Art, saies One,Mr Leigh. exceeds all other in this kind; That Thales was the first that studied it. Plinie. Atlas the Libian was so de∣lighted with this Science, that he left the society of men, and lived upon the highest mountain of Africa, from whence it bore his Name; and from this ariseth the Poetical fiction, that he bore up the Heavens with his shoulders. And Endymion, spent his time upon Rocks and Mountains, studying the Starres and Moti∣ons of the Heavens. Doubtless, it must needs be a sweet and pleasing
study, to find out the wonderfull Works of Gods hand.David, sure was well studied in this Science, if we consider but how he spreads forth the glory of God, in the forming the Hea∣vens, &c. As a fruit of this proceeds Astrology.Astrology: which some say, is a profitable and usefull study, and not unlawfull, as others would affirm; For (saies One) Knowledg in the Starres and Caelestial Bodies, hindred not the wise men from coming to Christ. But I suppose it's judicial Astro∣logy that's condemn'd by most men, especially the godly, who urge it strongly as a great sin, breaking the Holy Command of God; and they bring in no childish Reasons to prove it so.Famous M. Gats. and O¦thers. There's a terrible example of Gods judgment, one who went about to calculate his future fortune from the judgment of the Heavens; Fox Acts. It's enough to bind our hands from fingering such unlawfull edge tools. And a neat Story goes recorded of an Augure in the Roman Army, who on their march espying a Bird hovering in the air, would needs by the chirping and flight prog∣nosticate the event of their present undertaking; (a thing of great account at that time;) a Souldier more bold and wise then the rest, steps out, and with an Arrow kills it for which pre∣sumption and contempt of the gods, he being call'd before the General, discreetly answered; how could they conclude, the Bird knew their fates so farre off, that could not it's one so nigh hand Chiromancy, is the neighbour of judicial Astrology; I cannot determine of what I know not fully, nor will I judg with blind Rashness but rather desire first to have some skill in the Opticks.Opticks, which also is a dependant on Geometry; and is only ars bene videndi; we all account, seeing especially that of the mind, to be above all things; To see with our eyes, and discern with our understandings, so as to judg of things that differ, may well be rank't amongst the Divine Opticks. Perspectives, burn∣ing and multiplying Glasses, (teaching (as One saies) to walk in the air) are not the less rare because of Old invented. A man had need of this skill in the Opticks, else he will be forced to see all things like a Staff in the Water, which only is crooked by a deception of the sight. But hearing the sweet melody of Or∣pheus, quavering upon his Harp, and the ravishing voice of the Syrian charmes, I am forced to skip from the Optick sense, into that Sea of pleasure Musick.Musick: which
indeed, awakens all the Senses. Musick.(saies One) is the Loadstone of fellowship, and delightfull Socie∣ty. It's (saies Another) a roaring-megge against melancholy, affects the very vital and animal spirits, cheares the countenance, expels austerity, abateth heaviness. The cheerfull mind of a Soul∣dier, can tell you, that death disheartens not so much, as Mu¦sick encourages against all far It even ravishes Reginam sensuum, the very soul it self. Some say Whales at the noise of a Trumpet, will appear dancing upon the liquid waves. The Rhodian Mu∣sician could say, His Musick would make a melancholy man mer∣ry, and a Religious man devout. 'Twas a prety fancy of One taken with Instrumental Musick, who thought the soul to be in the fingers. And Musick used moderately, (saies One) is the bodies best recreation. Vocall, is the daily Harmony of Saints and Angels, that which God delights in, Psal. 149.150. David commends all sorts of Instrumental Musick, as well as vocall, for which he calls upon the Angels, the Sun and Moon, Beasts, Birds, and other creatures that God had made; And, shall not man be in love with that which God delights in? It's the most proper end of Musick to praise God. Amongst all the beasts of the Field, the Asse only was found grazing, whilst the rest were gazing about, with admiration at Orpheus Harp; All sorts of Creatures almost, are affected with it. Many men there are, which stand upon record as rare Artists; and it's affirmed by some, that there's no one Science more delectable, and innocently recreative, to free and generous spirits, nor more stirres up the mind to commendable actions; Read 1 Sam. 16 23. And Physicians tell us, it lengthens the life, by reviving the spirits, holding a secret sympathy with them That deathfull and venomous bite of the Tarantula in Italy, is only cured by Musick. Plato calls it a Divine and Heavenly practice. It's reported that in Arcadia, the people forgetting this laudable practice, grew into sedition; and upon this it's supposed, that Order came forth, for every one to practice and learn Musick for thirty years. Nay, the rude Gaules, lost their babarity, by the delight they took in Musick▪ It's observed,L. Bacon. that in the Age before the Flood, those few Memorials in Scrip∣ture of those times, usher in the honour of Musick.Gen. 5. And they say, it was first found out by Pythagoras from the noise of the Smiths Hammers; However these be, or be not true, yet sure I am, from my own
experience, it conduces much to theexhilarating of the spirits, and even as the mind tends proper∣ly to good or evil, so will it be wrought up in contemplation; See 2 King. 3 Ch. 15 Vae. if a mans soul be principled from above, his thoughts are very much screwed up towards Heaven by Divine thoughts; and it will (if a mans mind be so set, and his soul so un'd) create carnal and vain rejoycings; so that it's in this, as in other sublunary things, temptations to evil, if our hearts are not byassed ano∣ther way. But it's not good to harpe too much on one string; therefore I conclude with Others, that my Musick hangs by Ge∣ometry, as well as doth Architecture.Architecture. Which though indeed it stands on it's own Ba∣sis, yet leanes upon Geometry; which as well as other parts of the Mathematicks, is accounted pleasant and profitable, and is (so much the more pity,) more esteemed and practised be∣yond the Seas, than in England: and that's the reason such rare Artists are in Italy, and other places; whereas ours, that should be Artists indeed, endeavour not by their study or desire to ex∣ceed; but if they can live, it matters not for their honour or credit. Some there are not thus culpable, but too few: but there may be somewhat in the sloth of such, as should be the foundations of Architecture for their encouragement; in that a rare Piece is admired and applauded by them that know any thing of Gentile Education, yet desire not to have any thing of this kind themselves worthy to be wondered at, or stand as a Monument to posterity. Had our Predecessors been so, many Palaces had tumbled into Graves, and we might have lived like Indians, who build such houses as stand one day, and fall the next. But it's time improved to spend it well; therefore let us look upon the front of this Architect, which should be acquainted with the usefull and necessary Ornament of a. Dyalling.Sun-Dyal; Which Art, some say, is very Antient; 2 King. 20. the Lord turning the Sun back ten degrees for Hezekiah's sake, whereby it had gone down in the Dyal of Ahaz, who was then King of Jerusalem in the first Olympiad, and in the 3200 years after the Creation. Mellesius found out the reason and proportion of shadows. The Caldeans were the first that divided the day into twelve hours. The Aegyptians had a hand in this Science, who called the Sun Horus, which by motion limits the time of every hour; and it seems,
a 100 years before Cicero's time, theywere common in Rome, for that the Parasite in a Comedy, envied against the many Clocks and Dyals. Optans ut suus enique ven∣ter sit Horologium. And it must needs be confessed by all, that it's no less rare and pleasant, than necessary; And oh! that we could tell how to number our daies, that we might apply our hearts to Wisdom; and I think it's not ill shadowed, if I set the Word of God as the best Hand-Dyal, to point us out the improvement of time. Let us now take a measure of what we have done, by the golden Rule of Geography.Geography: which saies One, should please any man, for to measure the World in Ones Study, know the distances, extent and site of remote Provinces, and all by the scale and compass. It's said Charles the Great took much delight in this study, and for that end, had three Tables of Silverion: on one, was cut the Map of Constantinople, the other Rome, and third of the whole World, all exquisitely and neatly done. Suavi animum delecta∣tione allicere, ob incredibilem rerum varietatem & jucunditatem, & ad pleniorem sui cogitationem excitare, saies a skilfull and Learned Geographer.Hondius Prefat Merat. Indeed, he that knows it, will assent to this, that it's a study exceeding delightfull to the mind, and of incredible sweetness and variety, provoking and stirring up ma∣ny profitable searchers in the bowels of History. We may know with freedom, the situations of the rich and opulent Cities, and Kingdoms in the world; their commodious advantages, to runne over a Map, and be more exact than those that have bought less Knowledg at a dearer rate; and from my own experience, I assure thee a world of pleasure, and of great ad∣vantage, especially if thou tracest thy History, with a Map ly∣ing before thee, it takes a double impression in thy mind; first of the History thou readest, and then of the remembrance of all circumstances about both, not without a deep impression of the situation of all places. But least I digress, by directing to the use of what I intend not; let's now come to answer part of Geometry, which is the Husbandry and Gardening.Mechanicks. Il'e touch at three of them only, and first of Husbandry, which is no less profitable, than very necessary; though the pleasantest part thereof be Gardening, an Art so courted with delightfull contemplation, that though a man be in a
wilfull sweat, he shall not feel it; the recreation sweetensall his labour, like Adams first task, who is observed to have delight in the greatest toyl. L. Bacon. Many by reading Books of this Art, may advance their Knowledg very much, when they walk into a Garden, discoursing fully, freely, and skilfully of any Plant or Flower, more then a Gardener himself, who in a manner grows there, and dwells night and day. Besides, there's infi∣nite variety and delight, to see a rarity Spring out of our own labour, even provoking nature to play. To see how nature in the Spring puts on her new cloathes, and appearing in a rich dress, to tempt the eye and ravish the contemplation. When Flora and her Children come dressed to this solemn As∣sembly, at which time (saies One) if a cunning Herauld saw the variety of colours, he would condemn her Coat to be of no Ancient bearing. From hence may we magnifie the great Crea∣tor of all things. This hath been the practice of Kings, without the least infringent upon their greatness, or straitning their more important affairs. And very much delight there is known to be found amongst the several tribes and kindred of Natures Beauty; many profitable Advantages to be snacht from this plentifull Treasury of Natures Store, as well for use as plea∣sure. Let's now put to Sea, and lanch into the depths of Navigation.Navigation: which, though in Solomons time it was but in the Embrio, yet now it is at its full growth Nor is it amongst o∣ther things of value, to be accounted small, that enriches the whole world with Treasures, which is the supports of King∣doms and Empires. We had not been able to boast of such strong Bulworks, as blessed be God we repose our selves in, if Navigation were not in its perfection; the invention, is by all accounted both noble and admirable: by which, the Riches of the world, is by transportation, brought from farre Coun∣tries; does, as One saies, consociate the most remote Regions, in participation of their fruits and commodities, and may I adde Countries; breeds acquaintance; without which many places had lyen hid with Terra incognita to this day. Many wonders of the Lord have been discovered in the deep waters; those that have gone into the depths can best experience this. But dis∣covering danger by the foresight of a suspected enemy, I must make ready to understand and use the Art.
Art Millitary.Military: for Mars and Minerva are no enemies, nay are oft found nigh friends: as in Caesar, Xenophon, Alexander, &c. I never was a Practitioner in earnest of this polemicall Art, so cannot properly be a Judg of it; yet this I sadly know, that by our Civil and Bloody Warres, it hath been anvil'd into the braines of so many, that I fear 'twill hardly out again; Ma∣ny have been taught the Art of taking up Arms, that forgets to lay them down; and many have learnt to advance what they cannot order; I wish this Nation, that hath paid so much Blood and Treasure, to learn both the Theory and Practice, may have a good occasion to forget both. For Warre is good Physick, but i'ts not good diet, 'Tis the best Art to study to be quiet. Painting.Next is Painting which is a silent Poetry, as well as Poe∣try is a speaking Picture; Zeuxis and Apelles were famous in this Art, and the story of the first, and Parrhasius, the one cosening the Birds, the other Zeuxis himself, is a known story to the ho∣nour of that Art: It's a very laudable accomplishment of a Gen∣tleman. It was in high esteem with the Romanes: and amongst the Grecians it was held too high to be taught to any, but the Children of Noble-men. Among the Ancients, it was held the first of the Liberal Arts; many Princes and Noble-men, might be introduc't as famous to their honour; and many rare Pieces there are to the eternal praise of the Authors. I remember a Story of two Dogs painted in Italy, striving for a bone, and it being set on the ground, a third Dog coming in, flew upon the Picture with such earnest violence, as he brake them in pieces. This is such a comely Ornament to a Gentleman, that without it he cannot arrive to the Noble and Gentile exercise of Heraldry.Heraldry, which is a contemplation full of variety, and natu∣rally Sympathizing with every generous mind; A great disho∣nour it is to a Gentleman, not to blazon his own Coat. As it was for a Noble-man of France, who at an etertainment of some Friends, had at the last course served up a Marchpane, rich∣ly gilded with his Arms: and when almost eaten up, he calling back his thoughts, saies, It was told me my Arms were represented in this, but I have
looked about me, and perceive them not. Towhich one of his men replied, Your Lordship hath eaten them: at which he was angry, that he was not told of them before, that he might have known them. How shall greatness and No∣bility of birth be distinguished and snacht from the pretences of ignoble persons without this? It's as necessary for Gentle∣men as dividing Inheritances: What's the reason that other Nations are in confusion, and so poor, as one Coat must be borrowed to serve almost all, but for want of the due regula∣tion of this Art? Peacham. For in France, every Peasant is a Moun∣seir, and in some parts of that Kingdom, all claim an alliance to the greatest blood. In Spain, a Groom is Signour, and will not open a Note wherein he hath been indebted for his Bootes to the Shoomaker twelve Moneths, unless Don be superscribed. And my Authour saies, that in the Low Countries, his Host in Arnam changed his Coat and Crest three times in a fortnight; that a common Shop-keeper will have his Armes with a Beaver full fac't in his Glass-window, which is a Coat allowed only to Kings and Princes. This should, methinks, irritate the Gen∣try, especially of these Parts in the North (where Antient and Honourable Families are plentifull) to outvie these Mechanicks, that boast only of their folly and impudence, where there's as little right as worth; and such Gentry as belong to Honourable Families (to which is annexed as an Inheritance, a rich Coat) may not by their lewd and unprofitable courses, dishonour their Families, blot and tear their Coat in pieces; that too oft to support their wickedness, morgage their Honours and Credits. And now I have done with all that concernes the Parts of Hu∣mane Study, shewing how fit it is for the Gentry to be exem∣plary in their Studies after Knowledg and Learning; how com∣mendable, how profitable, how above Riches and vainer plea∣sures, how fitting them to serve their Countries, &c. Let The diffe∣rence betwixt Ignorance and Knowledg.Therefore the mouths of the ignorant be stopt; If God ap∣prove of Humane Learning, and Moral Knowledg, I account i a plasphemy against discretion, for any to condemn them: and it's only the want of them surely, that opens mens mouths a∣gainst them. It's the Devil that prompts men to think (and it's strange) themselves somebody, and only because, they suppose themselves above others in Knowledg, and yet will not grant
preheminence to the most Knowing and Learned upon the sameground; And what's the Reason? oh, away with pluralities, they love to be singular. These men seem to me to be the De∣vils shooing-horn, to pull contempt and scorn upon Learning and Knowledg, as well as upon wise men that possess them; If they did but know how the truly Learned and wise men thought of themselves, they would blush at their horrid thoughts and malice against them: suffering their own accusations to serve against them, and not with their father, devise lies for slander. For true Science (saies a studious and Learned Gentle man)Sir Rich Tempest Me∣di. is a solid thing, and carries rather to the bottom and depth of things, than to lift one up with aiery estimation. And I remember One undertakes to disparage Learning and Knowledg, but not in themselves, but in himself; which to me is a Testimony, it cometh nigh to grace; for it was no Mo∣ses that saw his own face to shine; True Knowledg dimmes the sight of it in ones self; Ignorance is never known to be ignorance, till it be matcht with Knowledg, like to that wise Philosopher, who knew not any thing till he thought he knew nothing: or like another no less fam'd for Learning, that never answered to any question possitively, but rather, I think it's so, or it may be so. And if it were not thus, wise men would be otherwise; for the first step to Wisdom, is to be sensible of ignorance. Amongst wise men, he is wisest that knoweth much, and sheweth to know little; and he is wise that knoweth his Ignorance; It is the proper ecco of Wisdom to conclude with one that saies,—The perfect Seal of wit is wits distrust. There is nothing more certain, then that the loyalest Sub∣jects to ignorance, are the most perfect and stubborn re∣bels to Knowledg; And this was the reason why Licinius (Constantines Colleague in weilding the Government of the Empire) finding a barren understanding to all Learning, calls it the publique plague and poyson of the Empire. And because this Ignis fatuus, this fatal ignorance, is the only ene∣my to Learning and Knowledg, they are therefore to be the more valued; for fools hate Knowledg,Prov. 1.22. but Justificata est sapientia à filijs suis.Mat. 11.9.
Now, that I have in some weak measure unravel'd my fancy, and shewed what Treasures Knowledg and Learning are, it remains, that I speak of Books, which are the Cabinets of these rare Jewels; It's certainly concluded by all, that Books are the next helps to Gods Blessing upon all our stu∣dies, and we shall find them greatly estimated by those that know best how to value true worth. Dionysius the Tyrant said of Plato, that he desired nothing but Books; And I remember a great Scholar said, all his Comfort was in his Books. Books (saies One) are the Instruments of Wisdom. To have the mind well dressed, where is it to be had, if not in these Learned Wardrobes? It's recorded, that Solomons Library was the feather in the Plume of his glorious Enjoy∣ments: a part whereof, he thought as the choicest Present to the Queen of Sheba, for the recompence of her great paines in travelling to profit her self, and honour him. These are the dead Counsellours, which afford us the Know∣ledg how to prepare and accomplish men. Zeno tells us, That it's good to live with the dead; to read Books. And Ptolomy was advised by one of the Interpreters, that reading of Books, which daily offer'd their service, was an exercise beyond exception; the profit above commendation. These are Minerva's Tower, where a Treasure lieth hid to igno∣rance and idleness, but open to Industry and diligence. And seeing the variety of sorts (saies One)Burt. Mel. he must needs be a block, that's affected with none. Reading of Books is not steril, but like a good steersman to the best Knowledg. King James, when he saw the Oxford Library, wished, that if ever it hapned he must be a prisoner, that there he might be kept, and that those chained Books might be his fellows, and the chaines his fetters. W. Esa. These are the viaticum, the houshold-stuff of the mind; the magnes animorum, the irresistable attractives to Scholars, lifes best business. They are indeed, feeless Counsellours; whereas a Lawyers lips are lockt without a see; you cannot squeeze any advice from them, unless you boare your way with an Angelicall Instrument; or at least, pawn a Crown for their counsell: I gene∣rally enquire after Books (saies One that knew how to use them.)Mont Essa.
Now what cau vulgar Societies, and sordid embraces afford to the advantages, that's to be got by studying Books; no Society is to be valued, without they comment upon these dead, yet living Authours. W. Essa. Therefore follow his ad∣vice, that bids, Count thy Books, thy best Inventory Jewels, things, whose right use is the best Husbandry. Times capti∣vated and snacht from them by incursions of affairs, and thefts of visitants, is by them redeem'd. Yon can only cut with your Sword, Titulum Sepulchri, when Books are their Au∣thours Epitaphs. And One saies,M. ur. where can a man be bet∣ter accompanied then with wise men, or reading Books; Therefore Another saies, He is a wise man, that knoweth wise mens company. You may discourse with them though dead. For to keep company with them makes a man bet∣ter. Xenophon saies, Good Consorts are worth my acquain∣tance, and good Books my perusall. Corwallis speaking of Advice, saies,Essa. Thus let Books and Advice rectifie, and prepare us for the entertainment of all things. And this will be found to be true in fuch a9 read much, as they ought, that they shall upon occasion find their Arms to reach further, than they could expect or promise to them∣selves. Banquet of Essa. Of all Companions, Books are the best, for there one may, solace himself, yet hear nothing but the echo of his own words; Of all Glosses Books are best, for being Inspe∣ctive, are both prospective and reflective. Ld Cooke. He was a wise man, that in his vacaucy from publique Services, took his old acquaintance Industry, and so conversed with his Study and Books, as well as company. And who will not say, that good Books and good company are the very Epito∣my of Heaven; a solace when the greatest adversity threatens. For my own part, I wish no other outward Enjoyment or Comfort in the world. (And to be free and ingenuous from the taint of profit or hope advantages) I do wonder, how so many men, as I have observed in the world, to be rich, and have occasions enough, nay and raised to places, which should force them to it; yet study not, nay read not any thing, but their own simple profits of this world, which how little to be valued to Knowledg, (if it were but in
History or Humane Learning,) I havealready discovered. Were I never to discourse in company, or frequent wiser society then my self, or appear upon the stage of my own Countrey in any publique Service, but lived to converse with my own thoughts: yet would I, (if no less then a good part of my Estate could purchase) then have a sufficient stock of choice Books for my private retire∣ment; There's nothing comparable to the purchase of Knowledg, and when ever men begin to taste it, they will say I speak truth with a witness.
DIVINITY BOOKS Alphabetically digested.
A. *ASsembly of Divines. An∣nota. on the whole Bible. 2 vol. folio. *—The grounds and principles of Reli∣gion, by way of Catechisme. 8o. *—The Confession of Faith and Ca∣techisme at large, approved by the Generall Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, with the League and Covenant. 12o. Dt Airay. A Commentary on Philip. 4o. Bp Andrewes. 96 Sermons all together in one vol. folio. —Catechisticall Doctrine at large, or A learned and pious Expos. of the ten Commandements, with an In∣troduction, containing the use and benefit of Catechizing, the generall grounds of Religion, and truth of Christian Religion in particular, proved against Atheists, Pagans, Turks and Jews, now perfected from many errors in former Im∣pressions. folio. —An Expos. of the Prophesie of the Prophet Jonah. 4o. —A Treatise on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. —Catechisticall Doctrine. 12o. —A manual of Private Devotions and Meditations. 24o. —A Catechisme, containing the grounds of Christian Religion. 8o. Mr Aynsorth. Annotations on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deutero∣nomy; the whole Book of Psalms and Canticles, all in one vol. folio. —The Marrow of the Bible, or a Logi∣co-Theologicall Analysis of every Book of the Holy Scripiure. 12o. —The Communion of the Saints; A Treatise of the fellowship that the faithfull have with God, his Angels, and one with another in this pre∣sent life. 8o. —An Arrow against Idolatry. 12o. Mr Austin. Devour, godly and learned meditations. folio. Mr Attersoll. A Commentary on the Epistle of St Paul to Philemon; wherein the Apostle delivereth sundry high Misteries; And the practice of Duties Oeconomicall, Politicall, Ecclesiasticall: moving all Ministers of the Gospel, to a diligent labouring in the spirituall harvest, and the people to a con∣scionable attending to the word of salvation. folio. —A Commentary upon the whole Book of Numbers. folio. G. Amesio. Bellarminus Enervatus, sive Disputationes Anti-bellarminianae, in quatuor tomus divisus. 8o. —A Treatise on Conscience, with the power and Cases thereof. 4o. —The Marrow of sacred Divinity. 12o. —Medulla Theologica. 12o. —De Conscientia. 12o. —Lectiones in omnes Psalmos. 8o. —An explication of the Analysis of the Epistles of St Peter, illustrated by Doctrines out of every Text, and applied by their Uses for a further progress in holiness. 4o. —The same in Latine. 8o. —Technometria & demonstratio Logi∣cae verae & disputatio Theologica. 12o. —De redemptione generali & electione ex fide previsa. 12o. —Anti-Synodalia. 12o.
*Mr Ash. A Sermon at Mr Whitakers funerall. 4o. *—A Sermon at Mr Gatakers fune∣rall. 4o. *—A Sermon at Dr Spurstowes Sonnes funerall. 4o. *—A Sermon of Zeal. 4o. *—A Sermon at Mr. Strongs fune∣rall. 4o. ☞Mr Ambrose. First Things: or the Doctrine of Regeneration, the New Birth. 4o. —Media or middle Things; the Means, Duties, Ordinances, both private and publike for continuance and in∣crease of a godly life till we come to Heaven. 4o. —Ʋltima, or last Things; being certain Meditations on Life, Death, Judg∣ment, Hell, Right Purgatory, Hea∣ven, &c. all reprinted in one vol. 4o. Mr Adams Sermons and Works, all col∣lected into one vol. folio. —A Commentary upon the Epistles of St Paul to Peter. folio. St Augustines Confessions illustrated with Marginall Observations. 12o. ☞Mr Allington. The grand conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their King. 12o. ☞—Englands faithfull reprover and monitor . To the Church of Eng∣land, inferior Ministers, Nobility and Gentry, the seduced of the Nation, such as are separated from our Mother Church, &c. 12o. *The ancient and durable Go∣spell. 12o. ☞Mr Abbot. A Christian family build∣ed by God; directing all Gover∣nours of families how to act: shewing 1. Gods timber and fra∣ming, 2. Gods foundation and up∣per-building, 3. Gods finishing, 4. Gods furnishing. 8o. ☞—The Young-mans warning piece: A Sermon at the buriall of Mr Ro∣gers, with a History of his sinfull life and wofull death; shewing al∣so the use of such Examples. 12o. —Milk for Babes, or the Mothers Ca∣techisme; shewing all the Principles of Religion through the whole Body of it. 8o. —4 Sermons, viz. on Judg. 11.22. Mat. 7.12. 1 Tim. 1.19, &c. 8o. —3 Sermons, viz. on Mat. 13.45,46. Psal. 31.5, & 19, & 12. 8o. *—A Triall of Church-forsakers, proving the Church of England a true one, hath a true Ministry, &c. 8o. St Ambrose Christian offices, in 3 Books; with his Conviction of Symmacus the Gentile. 4o. Mr Archer M.A. Instructions about right Beleeving; severall Sermons lead∣ing unto Christ, directing unto saith, and encouraging thereunto; shewing the nature, measure and necessity of the sense of sin, Christ the bread of life a sufficient reme∣dy for mans misery. 4o. St Augustine. A pretious Book of Hea∣venly Meditations, or a private talk of the soul with God, which who so zealously will use and per∣use, shall feel in his minde an un∣speakable sweetness of the ever∣lasting happiness. 12o. ☞Abert the Great Bp of Ratisbone. A Treatise adhering to God, English∣ed by Sr Kenelm Digby; also a Con∣ference with a Lady about change of Religion. 8o. Mr George Abbot. The whole book of Job paraphrased, or made easie for any to understand. 4o. *—Brief Notes upon the whole book of Psalms, put forth for help to such as desire to exercise them∣selves in them: being a pithy and clear opening of the scope and meaning of the Text to the
capa∣citycity of the weakest; with Mr Vines Epistle. 4o. —Vindicia Sabbathi, in answer to Mr Broad, with a survey of all that have handled that subject. 4o. Dr Abbot. An Exposition of the Prophe∣sie of the Prophet Jonah. 4o. —Two Volumes against Bishops. 4o. *Mr Angier. An help to better hearts for better times, in sundry Ser∣mons: wherein the zeal and fer∣vency in Gods service is declared, hinderances discovered, and sutable helps provided; all out of Gods treasury, in hope to revive the memory and reinforce the pra∣ctice, if the Lord please. 12o. An Apologie for the gesture of Kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper. 4o. *Mr Ashwell. Fides Apostolica: A dis∣course asserting the received Au∣thors and authorities of the Apo∣stles Creed, with a double Appen∣dix touching the Athanasian and Nicene Creed. 8o. Mr Archer. Christs Personall Reign on Earth. 4o. Mr Alcock. Plain Truths of Divinity; of Antichrist, and Christs coming to Judgment, and Reigning with his Saints for ever upon this Earth af∣ter the restitution of all things. 8o. ☞Agreement of the Associated Mini∣sters and Churches of the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerlad, with something for explication and exhortation annexed. 4o. J. Armin. Examen thesium D.F. Gomari de praedestinatione, &c. 8o. *An Assertation of the Government of the Church of Scotland in the point of Ruling-Elders, and of the Authority of Presbyteries and Sy∣nods, with an Answer to a Trea∣tise, itituled, The Presb. Govern∣ment examined. 4o. Astrologie Theologized. 4o. ☞Mr Armitage of Norwich. The Son of God walking in the fire with the servants of God, in 9 Sermons up∣on Daniel 3.25. with a Sermon on Eccles. 9.10. at the entrance of the Major of the City into his Office. 8o. ☞Dr Arrowsmith. Tactica Sacra, sive de milite Spirituali pugnante vincente, & Triumphante dissertatio, tribus Li∣bris comprehensa. 4o. B. R. BOdii. in Epist. Pauli Apost. ad ∣phesios praelectiones supra C.C. le∣ctione varia, multifaria eruditione, & pietate singulari refertae. In quibus praeter textus Apost. accuratam Ana∣lysin & explicationem copiosam ad dilucidum, &c. Passim interseruntur locorum communium, Quaestionum & Controversiarum tractationes, &c. fol. Mr Barnard. Thesaurus Biblicus: A Con∣cordance of the Bible. folio. Mr Bayfield. A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of the first Epistle of Peter: wherein are most judiciously and profitably handled such Points of Doctrine as natural∣ly flow from the Text, with Ap∣plication and Rules for a Godly life. folio. —An Expos. upon the Epist. to the Colossians: wherein not onely the Text is methodically analysed, and the sense of the Words by help of Writers both ancient and modern is explained, but also by Doctrine and Use, the intent of the holy Ghost is in every place more fully unfolded and urged; the very marrow of most Common places is atly diffused
throughout the body hereof, with many Cases of Conscience resolved, all with convenient variety and bre∣vity. folio. —The Spirituall Touchstone, or signs of Godliness; also how the weak Chistian may establish his Assu∣rance. 12o. —An Exposition of the Apostles Creed. 4o. —The Marrow of the Oracles of God, being divers Treatises of the weightiest matters that concern a Christian life. 12o. —The summe of the Principles of Christian Religion. 12o. —A Treatise of Gods Promises. 12o. —The Doctrine of the Sabbath vin∣dicated. 12o. —A Treatise of Faith, the life there∣of, and way of holiness; shewing what to beleeve, and what to suf∣fer in this contending age. 12o. —Directions for reading the Scri∣ptures, Rules to read it with profit, and pithy Directions to reconcile different places. 12. —The practice of Christianity, or an Epitomy of Mr Rogers 7 Trea∣tises. 12o. Mr Baine. A Commentary upon the Ep. of St Paul to the Ephesians. folio. —A Commentary upon the 1, and 2d Chap. of St Paul to the Colossians; the Text opened, Observations per∣spicuously deducted, Uses inferred and applied, sundry holy Medita∣tions extracted, with divers places of Scripture explained. 4o. —Directions for a godly and holy life. 4o. —Christian Letters. 12. —Spirituall Armour. 12o. —The Diocesans Triall. 4o. *Mr Anthony Burgess. Spirituall Refi∣ning, a Treatise of Grace and Assu∣rance, handling the doctrine of As∣surance, the use of Signs in self-examination: how true Graces may be distinguished from coun∣terfeit: severall true signs of Grace, and many false ones: The nature of Grace under divers Scripture-notions or titles, as Regeneration, the New-Creature, heart of flesh, vocation, sanctification, &c. Many chief Questions occasionally con∣troverted betwixt the Orthodox and Arminians, with many Cases of Conscience tending to comfort and confirm Saints, and undeceive and convert sinners: being 120 Sermons. folio. *—Spirituall Refining the second Part; A Treatise of Sinne, its cau∣ses, differences, mitigations and ag∣gravations, especially of the deceit of the Heart; of presumptuous and raigning sins, of hypocrisie and formality in Religion: all tending to unmask counterfeit Christians, terrifie the ungodly, comfort doubting Saints, humble men, and exalt the grace of God. 4o. *—Vindiciae Legis, or a vindication of the Morall Law and Covenants, from the Errors of Papists, Armi∣nians, Socinians and Antino∣mians. 4o. ☞—The true Doctrine of Justifica∣cation asserted and vindicated from Papists, Arminians, Socinians and Antinomians, 1 Part. 4o. ☞—The true Doctrine of Justifica∣tion asserted, &c. 2d Part. 4o. —Publick Sermons on sundry sub∣jects; viz. The difficulty of, and encouragements to Reformation, Mark 1.2,3. A Sermon before the Court Marshall, Psal. 106.30,31. The Magistrates Commission, Rom. 13.4. At election of the Lord Mayor. Romes cruelty and apostacy, Rev. 19.2. on 5• Novemb. The Reformation of
the Churchto be endeavoured more then the Common-wealth, Judg. 6.27,28,29. before the House of Lords. Publick affections pressed upon, before the Commons: all in 4o. ☞—145 Expository Sermons upon the whole 17th Chapter of St John: or Christs Prayer before his Pas∣sion explicated, and both practi∣cally and polemically improved. fo. J. Brentio. In Scriptum Apostoli & Evan∣gelistae Mathoei, de rebus Gestis Do∣mini nostri Jesu Christi Commenta∣rius. folio. J. Christi Dom. nost. Nov. Test. sive novum foedus, cujus Graeco contextui respon∣dent interpretationes duae: una ve∣tus; altera Theod. Bezae, ejusdem T. Bezae Annotat. in quibus ratione Interpretationis vocum redditâ, additur Synopsis Doctrinae & Evangelica Historia, & Epistolis Apostolicis comprehensae, & ipse quo{que} contextus quasi brevi Commentario explicatur, &c. folio. Bp Babingtons Works compleat. folio. Mr Browning. A Treatise on publick Prayer and the Fasts of the Church. 4o. Dr Bastwick. The Church of England a true Khurch. 4o. Mr Brown. The summe and substance of Christian Religion. 8o. Mr Bradshaw. A Commentary upon the Epistles of St Paul to the Thessa∣lonians. 4o. —A Treatise on Justification. 12o. —A Treatise of the sinne against the holy Ghost, grounded on 12th Mat. 22,23. tending to comfort such as are afflicted for sinne, are at the brink of despair. 12o. —A preparation to the receiving of Christs body and blood: directing weak Christians how they may worthily receive the same. 12o. Dr Bilson. A Treatise of the sufferings of Christ. folio. —On Government. 4o. Mr Robert Bolton. A discourse of true Happiness. 4o. —Some generall Directions for a comfortable walking with God. 4o. —Instructions for a right comforting Afflicted consciences, with speciall Antidotes against some grievous temptations. 4o. —Of the 4 Last Things; Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven; with his Assize Sermons, and Notes on Justice Nichols funerall; the Life and Death of the Author, review∣ed, with marginall Notes; with the Sermon at Mr Boltons funerall by Mr Estwick. 4o. —A Cordiall for Christians in the time of affliction. 4o. —Meditationes in diebus Dominicis de vita futura. 4o. —A discourse concerning Usury. 4o. *Dr Sam. Bolton. The arraignment of Errors; serving to curb the wan∣tn spirits of men in the enter∣tainment of Opinions. 4o. ☞—The true bounds of Christian freedom; or a Treatise wherein the Rights of the Law are vindi∣cated, the liberties of Grace main∣tained, and the severall late Opini∣ons against the Law are examined and refuted; with a discourse an∣nexed of the Learned I. Camerons, touching the three fold Covenant of God with man, translated. 8o. *—The Wedding garment or Guard to the Tree of Life; A Sacramen∣tall discourse; shewing a Chri∣stians priviledg in approaching to God in Ordinances; in his Sacra∣mentall approaches, with the dan∣ger if he do not sanctifie God in them. 12. *—The tossed Ship. 8o-
☞—The dead St Speaking to Saintsand sinners living, in severall Trea∣tises, viz. The sinfullness and greatest evil that is in sinne, 2 Sam. 24.10. The nature and royalties of Faith, Joh. 3.15. The slowness of the heart to Believe, Joh. 1.50. The causes, signs and cures of Hy∣pocrisie, with motives and helps to sincerity, Isa. 58.2. The wonder∣full workings of God for his Church and people, Exod. 15.11. prepared for the Press in his life, and never before published, with Mr Calamies Epistle. folio. Mr Breerwood. A Treatise on the Sab∣bath. 4o. *Mr Ball. A Treatise on the Covenant of Grace; wherein, the graduall breakings-out of Gospel-grace from Adam unto Christ are clearly dis∣covered. 4o. —A Treatise of Faith: the nature and life of Faith. 4o. —The Principles and grounds of Christian Religion in Question and Answer. 8o. —Against Cann. 4o. —Against Separation: the tryall of the new Church-way in New Eng∣land and old. 4o. ☞—The power of Godliness, doctri∣nally and practically handled; wherein the nature, comprehen∣siveness, parts and properties of a Godly life are discovered; with distinct Treatises of the Affections, Spirituall combat, government of the Tongue, of Prayer, and of the Lords Prayer. Published by Mr Ash. folio. Mr T. Ball Fell. E. Coll. Pastorum pro∣pugnaculum; or the Pulpits patro∣nage against the force of unordain∣ed usurpation and invasion. 4o. Mr Bulkley. The Covenant of Grace opened, wherein are explained the differences betwixt the Covenant of Grace and of Works; the diffe¦rent administration of the Cove∣nant before and since Christ; the blessings and benefits of it, with the conditions and properties of it. 4o. Mr Brightman. An Exposition of the Revelation of St John, illustrated with Analysis, with a most com∣fortable Expos. of the last and most difficult part of the Prophesie of Daniel. 4o. —An Exposition on the Song of Songs or Canticles. 4o. —Brightman Redivivus: Or the Post-humian off-spring of Mr T.B. in 4 Sermons; 1o. Of the two Cove∣nants, from Gal. 4.22,23, &c. 2o. The danger of scandals and offences, from Matth. 18.7. 3o. Gods Com∣mission to Christ to preach the Go∣spel, from Luk. 4.18. 4o. The Saints security, from Jude 20, & 21, verses. 4o. *Mr Burroughs. Exposition of the first 13 Chapters of Hosea. 2 vol. 4o. *—Irenicon, Heart-divisions, the evil of the Times. 4o. *—Gospel-Worship, or the right way of drawing nigh to God in 1o. Hearing the Word, 2o. Receiving the Lords Supper, 3o Prayer. 4o. *—Gospel Conversation; shewing 1o. That the conversation of Belie∣vers ought to be above what could be by the light of nature: 2o. Be∣yond those under the Law: 3o. Su∣table to the Gospel; with the mi∣sery of those men that have their portion in this life. 4o. *—The rare Jewell of Christian con∣tentment; containing 1o. The holy art and mystery of contentment: 2o. Directions to work the heart to contentment: 4o. The excel∣lency of it: 5o. The evils and aggravations of the sin of murmu∣ring. 4o.
☞—Gospel Reconciliation, or Christs Trumpet of Peace to the world: wherein the nature of Reconcilia∣tion is fully opened. 4o. *—Earthly mindedness, the evils of it, and reasons against it: of conver∣sing in Heaven, and walking with God. 4o. ☞—The Saints Treasury: shewing 1o. The incomparable excellencie of the Holiness of God; 2o. Christ all in all; with a preparation for Judgment. 4o. ☞—The evil of evils, or the exceed∣ing sinfullness of sin. 4o. ☞—Treatise of Faith, of Hope; the Saints walk by faith on earth, by sight in Heaven. 4o. —Moses choice with his eye fixed upon Heaven; discovering the hap∣py condition of a self-denying heart, from Heb. 11.25,26. 4o. *—The glorious Name of God the Lord of Hosts. 4o. —The excellency of a gracious spi∣rit, from Numb. 14.24. 8o. —A Treatise of Self-denyall, upon Heb. 11.24. 8o. *—3 Sermons before the Parlia∣ment. 4o. *—Jacobs seed; or the excellency of seeking God by prayer. 12o. *Mr Baxter. The Saints everlasting Rest: or the blessed estate of the Saints in their enjoyment of God in glory. 4o. —Of Baptisme. 3o. ☞—His Confession of Faith, espe∣cially concerning the interest of Repentance and sincere Obedi∣ence to Christ in our Justification and Salvation. 4o. ☞—His Apologie against Crandon, Blake, Eyre, Kendall and Colvi∣nus. 4o. *—Christian Concord, or the agree∣ment of the Associated Pastors and Churches of Worcestershire; with his explication and defence of it; also his exhortation to U∣nity. 4o. ☞The Quakers Catechisme, or the Quakers questioned, their Questions answered,, and both published for the sake of those that have not yet sinned unto death, &c. 4o. ☞The unreasonableness of Infide∣lity: 1o. The Spirits intrinsick witness to the truth of Christiani∣ty: 2o. The Spirits internall wit∣ness: 3o. For prevention of the unpardonable sinne against the holy Ghost. 4o. Proud arrogance, the cause of Infidelity. 8o. *—Aphorismes of Justification; the nature of the Covenants, satisfa∣ction, righteousness, faith, works, &c. opened. 8o. ☞—A Sermon of Judgment preach∣ed at Pauls before the Lord Maj∣or, from 2 Cor. 10,11. 8o. ☞—A Sermon at Worcester: True Christianity, or Christs absolute dominion, and mans necessary re∣signation, from 1 Cor. 6.19, & 20. & Psal. 2.10,11,12. 8o. *—32 Directions for setling peace of Conscience and spiritual Com∣fort 12o. ☞—Making light of Christ and Salvation too often, the Issues of Gospel-Invitation. 12o. *—A defence of Worcestershire Petition for the Ministry and Maintenance in answer to 16 Queries. 4o. ☞—Gildas Salvianus. The Refor∣med Pastor; The Nature of true Pastorall Work, especially in pri∣vate Instruction and Catechizing, with an open Confession of our too open Sinnes, prepared for a day of Humiliation, &c. 8o. ☞—Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments
and the trueNature of visible Christianity; against the Reverend Mr Blake. 4o. ☞—The safe Religion, or 3 Disput. for the Reformed Cath. Religion against Popery, that its against the holy Scriptures, unity of the Cath. Church, consent of the antient Doctors, plainest reason, and com∣mon judgment of sense it self. 8o. ☞—Of Conversion. Published for use of those that are strangers to it, especially to the grosly ignorant and ungodly. 4o. ☞—An Account of his present thoughts, concerning the Contro∣versies about the Perseverance of the Saints. 4o. ☞Mr Birbeck. The Protestants Evi∣dence, taken out of good Records: shewing that for 1600 years after Christ, divers worthy guides of the Church have taught as the Church of England doth, namely in the 9 Articles; with an Answer to a Romish Antidotist. folio. ☞—A Treatise of Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven, commonly called Quatuor novissima. 8o. ☞Mr Beesly. The souls Conflict with the sins of vain-glory, coldness in professing Christ, envy, ingratitude, forgetfullness of God, revenge, &c. 8o. *Mr Bedford. A Treatise against Anti∣nomianisme, being an examination and confutation of their chief Te∣nents, with an Answer to the com∣passionate Samaritan. 4o. *Mr Blake. Vindiciae Foederis: A Trea∣tise of the Covenant of God with mankind, in the severall kinds and degrees of it: wherein the condi∣tion of the Covenant of Grace on mans part is asserted, &c. severall Corollaries containing many con∣troverted heads of Divinity, &c. Infant-baptisme maintained in its latitude, &c. 4o. *—Birth-priviledge, with a Treatise of Baptisme against Blackwood. 4o. —The Covenant sealed, or a Treatise of the Sacraments of both Cove∣nants polemicall and practicall, espe∣cially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace. 4o. *Mr Bridge his WorKs: viz. The bene∣fit of Christs Priestly office: 2o. Sa∣thans power to tempt, and Christs love under temptation: 3o. Thanks∣giving required in every condition: 4o. Grace for grace: 5o. Spirituall acting of Faith: 6o. Evangelicall Re∣pentance: 7o. Spirituall life: 8o. The Woman of Canaan: 9o. Vindica∣tion of Ordinances, with some Ser∣mons annexed, all in one vol. 4o. ☞—Three Sermons on 2d Pet. 1.19. Scripture-light the most sure light, compared with Revelations and Visions, natutall and supernaturall dreames, impressions with and without the Word, Light and Law within, Divine providence, Chri∣stian experience, Humane reason, Judiciall Astrology. 2o. Christ in travell. The greatness thereof both in soul and body, the first and after-effects of his death, his assu∣rance of Issue, his satisfaction therein; in three Sermons on Isa. 53.11. 3o. A lifting up for the down-cast in case of great sins, weakness of grace, miscarriage of duties, want of assurance, affliction, tentation, desertion, unserviceable∣ness, &c. in 13 Sermons on Psal. 42.11. also added four Sermons of the sin against the holy Ghost: 2o. Sins of Infirmity: 3o. The false Apostle tried and discovered: 4o. The good and mean of esta∣ment: all in one vol. 4o. *Mr Corn. Burgess. Baptismall Regene∣ration. 4o.
—A Treatise of Zeale. 12o. *Mr Bithner. Lyra Prophetica David is Regis, sive Analysis Critico-practica Psalmorum. 4o. *Mr Bowles. De pastore Evangelico tra∣ctatus; in quo universum munus pa∣storale, tam quoad postoris vocationem, & praeparaetionem, quam ipsius mune∣ris exercitium, accuratè proponitur. 8o. Mr R. Bridge. A Treatise opening the Promises and threats of the Scri∣pture. 8o. ☞Mr Bisco. The grand tryall of true Conversion, or sanctifying Grace appearing and acting first and chiefly in the thoughts; wherein is opened the Mystery of Iniquity in mans thoughts by nature, and of holiness in the thoughts of sancti∣fied persons; with pretious pre∣servatives against evil thoughts. 8o. ☞—The Mystery of Free-grace in the Gospel, and Mystery of Gospel in the Law. 8o. ☞Dr Barnard. The Life and Death of the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church Dr J. Ʋsher late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland, in a Sermon at his funeral at Westminst. Abby, now reviewed with enlargements. 8o. Mr Barlow. A Commentary on the A∣postle St Paul to Timothy. 4o. Mr Barnard. A Commentary upon the divine Revelation of St John. 4o. Behm's. Mysterium magnum; or an Ex∣position of Genesis. folio. —Principles of the Divine Es∣sence. 4o. —The three-fold Life. 4o. —4 Questions of the Souls original and nature. 4o. —On the two Testaments, Baptism and the Supper. 4o. —Mercurius Teutonicus. 4o. —The Tree of Christian Faith. 4o. —The way to Christ discovered. 12o. Mr Batt. A definition of Faith. 4o. Mr Benefield. A Commentary upon the Prophesie of Amos. 4o. ☞Mr Brookes. The unsearchable Ri∣ches of Christ, in 22 Sermons on Ephesians the 3d and 8. 4o. ☞—Heaven on Earth; or a serious discourse touching a well ground∣ed Assurance of mans everlasting Happiness and Blessedness. 8o ☞—Pretious Remedies against Sa∣thans devices, or Salve for Belie∣vers and unbelievers sores. 8o. ☞—Apples of Gold for young men and women, and a Crown of Glory for old men and women; or the happiness of being good betimes, and the honour of being an old Disciple; with Objections an∣swered, and doubts resolved. 12o. Mr Bayly. A disswasive from the Errors of the times; wherein the Tenets of the principall Sects, especially of the Independents are drawn together in one Map, and examin∣ed by the Touchstone of the holy Scriptures. 4o. *—A Scotch Antidote against the English Insection of Arminianisme: which little Book may be, through Gods blessing, very usefull to pre∣serve those that are sound in the Faith, from the Infection of Mr J. Goodwins great Book. 12o. —An Historicall vindication of the Church of Scotland. 4o. —Anabaptisme the fountain of Ind. Brown. Antino. Familis. and most Errors. 4o. ☞—Catechesis elenctica errorum qui hodie vexant Ecclesiam. 12o. ☞—The disswasive from the Er∣rors of the time, 2d Part, vindi∣cated from the Exceptions of Mr Cotton and Mr Tombs. 4o. *Mr Brinsley of Yarmouth. The
mysticall Brazen Serpent, with the magne∣ticallvirtue thereof; or Christ exalted on the Cross, with the blessed end and effect thereof, in drawing the elect world unto himself, to believe on him and be saved by him. 8o. *—The Saints joynt-membership, with the mutuall respects and of∣fices which on the account there∣of they owe each to other. 8o. *—The one and only Mediator be∣tween God and man; the Media∣torship of Christ, and the great Gospel Mystery of reconciliation betwixt God and man, opened, vindicated and applied. 8o. *—Mysticall Implantation, or the great Gospel Mystery of the Chri∣stians union and communion with, and conformity to Jesus Christ, both in his death and resurre∣ction. 8o. —Stand still, or a bridle for the times; A discourse tending to still the murmuring, settle the wa∣vering, stay the wandring, streng∣then the fainting: Published as a proper antidote against the pre∣sent epidemicall distempers of the times. 4o. —The Communion of Saints. 12o. —Sundry Sermons. 4o. ☞—Two Treatises: 1o. Three sa∣cred Emblems. The mystical Stars, Sword and Sun, in the hand, mouth and face of the Son of man; shewing the authority, dignity, duty and security of the Gospel Ministry, &c. 2o. Tears for Jeru∣salem; or the compassionate la∣mentation of a tender-hearted Sa∣viour, over a rebellious and obdu∣rate people. 8o. ☞—The sacred Ordinance of Or∣dination by Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery; with an exhortation to the Ministers after their Ordination. 8o. Mr Bunnies Resolutions for a Christian life; shewing how we should re∣solve our selves to become Chri∣stians indeed. 12o. The burthen of a loaden conscience, or the misery of sinne, set forth in the Confession of a miserable sin∣ner. 8o. *—Mr Began. A view of the Threats and Punishments recorded in the Scripture, alphabetically compo∣sed, with some brief observations on sundry Texts. 8o. *Mr Bohemius. A Christian delight, or Scripture meditations, wherein many difficulties are unfolded, and sundry Texts profitably applied, with an Appendix against pro∣miscuous admission to the Lords Table. 8o. *—The Peace and Concord of the Churches. 8o. ☞—Dr Brough, Chaplain to his Ma∣jesty. Sacred Principles and Soli∣loquies, or a Manuall of Devotion: 1o. The Grounds of Religion, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, as it differs from the Ro∣man and new Reformed: 2o. Daily Prayers fortified with Scriptures: 3o. 7 charges to Consc. in a body of Divinity; which is the Art not of Disputing but Living well; with a preservative against schisme. 12o. ☞—The holy Feasts and Fasts of the Church, with Meditations and Prayers proper for Sacraments, and other occasions leading to a Christian life and death. 12o. Ld Brookes. The nature of Truth, its union with the soul, which is one in its essence, faculties, acts, one with Truth. 12o. Mr Buchan. Institutiones Theologicae, seu locorum communium Christianae Reli∣gionis ex Dei verbo, &c. 8o.
—Psalmorum Davidis Paraphrasis Poetica. Argumentis ac melodiis explicata at{que} illustrata: Opera & studio N. Chytraei. 12o. Mr Barton. A Book of Psalms in metre, close and proper to the Hebrew, plain and easie to the times; with musicall Notes, Arguments, Anno∣tations and Index. 12o. Man's Monitor, or the Free-school of Virtue; holding forth the Duties required, and Sins forbidden in the two Tables of the Law, in easie English Verse. 8o. Bp Bramhall. A fair warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline, as being of all others most injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most op∣pressive to the subject, most perni∣cious to both. 4o. *—An Answer to Mons. de la Mili∣tiere, Counsellor to the King of France, in his book intituled, The Victory of the Truth for the Peace of the Church, to the King of Great Brittain, to invite him to em∣brace the Roman Catholick Faith: with Milliteeres own Epistle. 8o. ☞—A Defence of true Liberty, from Antecedent and extrinsecall Ne∣cessity; against Mr Hobs Liberty and necessity. 8o. ☞—A defence of the Church of England, from the unjust Asper∣sions of criminal Schisme: Where∣in the nature of criminal Schisme, the divers sorts of schismaticks, liberties and priviledges of Na∣tional Churches, right of Sovereign Magistrates, extortion and schism of Rome, &c. are all manifested to the world. 8o. *—A Replication to the Bp of Cal∣cedon. 8o. Mr Broughton. A view of the holy Scri∣ptures. folio. —An Expos. of the Prophesie of the Prophet Daniel. 4o. *Boisi. Veteris interpretis cum Beza aliis{que} recentioribus collatio in quatuor Evangeliis, & Apostolorum Actis; in qua ac non saepius abs{que} justa satis causa hi ab illo discesserint disqui∣ritur. 8o. ☞Biddle dispossessed; or his Scri∣pture perverting Catechisme re∣formed by Scripture. 12o. Dr Boys's Sermons, expounding the Dominicall Epistles and Gospels in the English Lyturgie. folio. ☞Mr Badle. The Journal or Diary of a thankfull Christian; presented in some Meditations upon Num∣bers 33.2. Book of Psalms: with the Hymns E∣vangelicall and Songs Spirituall, composed into 4 Parts by sundry Persons, with such severall Tunes as have been and are usually sung in England, Scotland, Wales, Ger∣many, Italy, France and Nether∣lands. 8o. ☞Mr Broxolime. The good old way; or Perkins improved, in a plain Exposition and sound Application of those depths of Divinity briefly comprised in his six Principles. 8o. ☞Dr Brown. Religio Medici, with illu∣strations, reprinted. 8o. *—A Catholick medicine for the diseases of Charity. 8o. *Mr Boreman. The Countrymans Cat∣techisme, or the Churches plea for Tythes; plainly discovering the duty and dignity of Christs Mini∣sters, and the peoples duty to them. 4o. Mr Buck. A Treatise on the Beati∣tudes. 4o. Mr Bentham. The Christian Conflict; shewing the difficulties and duties of a Christian War are, with a dis∣cussion of
the Case of Usury and depopulation, with Errorsof Antinomianisme. 4o. —The Society of Saints. 4o. Mr Belkes. A Scripture inquiry, or helps to the memory in duties of Piety. 8o. Mr Bourton. A Translation of Alstedius of the thousand Apostolicall years, or the Saints Reign on Earth a Thousand years. 4o. Dr Boughen. An Account of the Church Catholick, where it was before the Reformation. 4o. Mr Bond Mr of the Savoy. Divers Ser∣mons on sundry occasions. 4o. Mr Beacon. The displaying of the Po∣pish Mass, shewing the Idolatry of it. 12o. Mr Rob. Barnard Rector of Battencomb. Bible battels. 12o. —The Isle of Man, or the legall pro∣ceeding in Manshire against sinne; wherein by way of a continued allegory, the chief Malefactors disturbing both Church and State are detected, with the Arraign∣ment and Tryall according to the Laws of England. 12o. ☞Mr Bulstrode. A golden Chain, or a Miscellany of divine Sentences of the sacred Scriptures, and of their Authors, collected and linked to∣gether for the souls comfort. 8o. ☞Mr Bell. Incomparable Company-keeping; or a conversation on earth in Heaven. 8o. ☞Mr Bazlee. Predestination defend∣ed against Post-destination, in An∣swer to Mr Pirce on Reproba∣tion. 4o. C. Mr CAlvin. The Institution of Chri∣stian Religion in English. folio. —The same in Latine. folio. and in 8o. —A Commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, English 4o. —Sermons on Jacob and Esau, Eng∣lish. 8o. —An Exposit. of the Book of Gene∣sis, English 4o. —A Harmony upon the three Evan∣gelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, with the Commentary, English 4o. —A Commentary upon the holy Go∣spel of Jesus Christ according to St John; Translated by C. Fether-stone. 4o. Mr Cocks. A Survey of Gods Houshold on Earth, both before and under the Law. folio. Causins Holy Court in 5 Tomes: 1o. Of Motives which should excite men of quality to Christian perfection: 2o. Of the Prelate, Souldier, States∣man and Lady: 3o. Maxims of Christianity against profaness: 4o. Command of Reasons over the Passions: 5o. The Lives of the most famous and Illustrious Cour∣tiers, taken out of the old and new Testament and modern Au∣thors. folio. The Holy History. 4o. A Christian Diary. 12o. ☞Mr Cotton. A Commentary on the first Epistle of John with observa∣tions, reasons and uses. folio. —Powring out of the 7 Vials, being an Exposition of the 16th Chap. of the Revelation of St John. 4o. —Christ the fountain of life. 4o. —Way of Life, or Gods way and course in bringing home sin∣ners, &c. 4o. —The way of the Churches of Christ in New-England, walking in brotherly equality or co-ordination, without subjection of one Church to another; measured and examined by the Golden Reed of the Sanctua∣ry, being a full declaration of the Church-way in all particulars. 4o.
*—The Gospel-Ordinance of sing∣ing of Psalms vindicated; wherein is handled, 1o. The duty it self: 2o. The matter to be sung: 3o. The Singers: 4o. The manner of sing∣ing. 4o, —On Baptisme. 4o. —Gods Mercy. 4o. —The Keys of the Kingdom. 4o. —A Commentary upon Zachariah; on Acts the 12th and 2d of Pro∣verbs. 4o. —A Treatise of Publick Prayer. 4o. *—The Holiness of Church-mem∣bers. 4o. ☞—An Exposition with Practicall Observations on the whole Book of Ecclesiastes. 8o. ☞—A brief Exposit. with practicall Observations on the whole Book of Canticles, never before printed. Published by Dr Tuckney. 8o. ☞—A Treatise of the Covenant of Grace; discovering the great work of a sinners reconciliation to God. 8o. —Gods Promises. 4o. —Against Dr Twiss: clearing many doubts concerning Predestina∣tion. 4o. —A Letter. 4o. ☞—An Exposit. upon the 13th Ch. of the Revelation of St John. 4o. —The constitution of Churches. 4o. Mr Clement Cotton. A large Concor∣dance to the Bible, last edit. en∣larged, with a Concordance to the books of Apocrypha. folio. —None but Christ: the 9th Edi∣tion. 12o. Corn. à Lapide. Commentaria in quatuor Prophetas majores. folio. —Commentaria in duodecim Prophetas minores. 2d vol. folio. Bp Cooper; All his Works collected in∣to one vol. folio. Mr Cartwright. A confutation of the Rhemists Translation, Glosses and Annotations on the new Testa∣ment, so far as they contain mani∣fest impieties, heresies, idolatries, superstitions, profanness, treason, slanders, &c. by occasion whereof the true sense and doctrine of the Scriptures and humane Authors (by them abused) is now gi∣ven. folio. —An Off-spring of mercy from the womb of cruelty: a Passion Ser∣mon at Christ-Church Oxon. 8o. —A Catechisme of the principall grounds of Christian Religion. 8o. —Electa Thargumico-Rabinnica; sive Annotationes in Genesin ex triplici Thargum, seu Chaldaicâ paraphrasi, nempe Onkeli, Hierosolymitanâ, & Jonathanis; Item ex R. Salomone, & Aben Ezra, aliis{que} Hebraeis pariter ac Hebraizantibus excerptae, una cum Animad versionibus subinde intersper∣sis, &c. 8o. —A Sermon on the Soul. 4o. —Of the Power of the Civill Magi∣strate. 4o. ☞Mr Calamy. A Sermon at the Fu∣nerall of Mr Bolton. 4o. *—The monster of Self-seeking ana∣tomized: a Sermon before the Ld Mayor. 4o. ☞—The godly mans Ark, or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in divers Sermons: the first at the funerall of Mrs. Eliz. Moore, with her evidences for Heaven. Other 4 Sermons from Psal. 119.2. 8o. ☞—The City Remembrancer: a Sermon preached to the native Citizens of London. 8o. Mr Caryl. An Exposition of the first 27 Chapters of the Book of Job, in sundry volumes. 4o. —A Thanksgiving Sermon, pressing to, and directing in that great duty of praising God, from Ps. 111.1,2,3,4,5.
☞Mr Collings. Responsoria bipartita, sive vindiciae suspensionis Ecclesiasticae ut & Presbyterii Evangelici; against Batman, Humfrey, Brabourn, Mar∣shall, Barkdale and Timson. 4o. *—Vindiciae Ministerii Evangelici; or the Vindication of the great Ordi∣nance of God, a Gospel-Mini∣stry. 4o. —Responsoria ad erratica pastoris, sive vindiciae vindiciarum; or a revindi∣cation of the great Ordinance of God; Gospel Preachers and preach∣ing. 4o. ☞—Respnsoria ad erratica piscatoris: or a caveat for old and new pro∣fanness: against Fisher and Dr Ham∣mond: against Festivall days and Christmas day, &c. 4o. *—A Cordiall for a fainting soul; or some Essayes for the satisfaction of doubting wounded Christians, la∣bouring under severall burthens: The first Part in 14 Sermons. 4o. *—A Cordiall, &c. The second Part: Shewing the power of Faith in the conquest of slavish fears, and irre∣gular disquietments of spirit: in 22 Sermons. 4o. *—A Cordiall, &c. The third Part in sundry Lectures: all three in one vol. 4o. *—Five Lessons; 1o. The lost Sheep bought home: 2o. The Spouse raised, from under the Apple tree: 3o. Her carriage in the Wilderness, leaing on her beloved: 4o. A Lesson of Self-deniall: 5o. A right way to true peace. 8o. *—Comforts against the fear of Death. 8o. *—Faith and experience; or a short narration of the holy life and bles∣sed death of Mary Simpson of Nor∣wich; with her funerall Sermon. 8o. ☞Elisha's lamentation for Elijah: a funerall Sermon for Mr Carter. 4o. Mr Chillingworth. The Religion of Pro∣testants a safe way to Salvation: or an Answ. to a Book intituled, Mer∣cy and Truth; or Charity maintain∣ed by Catholicks; which pretends to prove the contrary, folio. —Chillingworthii Novissima. ☞Mr Crave. Timothies vade mecum; or a pocket-companion for the Sons of the Prophets, treating of matters appertaining to Ministers and such as intend for the Mini∣stry. Mr Cudworth. A Treatise concerning the true use of the Lords Sup∣per. 4o. *Mr Craddock. Gospel-holiness, or the saving sight of God. 4o. *—Mount Sion, or the priviledg and practice of the Saints. 4o. *—Gospel-liberty in the extentions and limitations of it. *—Good News from Heaven, to the worst of sinners upon earth. 4o. *—Divine drops distilled from the fountain of holy Scriptures. 4o. *—The Saints fullness of joy in their fellowship with God. 4o. *Mr Cawdrey and Mr Palmer, Sabbatum Redivivum; or the Christian Sab∣bath vindicated: first and second Part. 4o. *—The power of the Keyes in 4o. *—The Inconsistency of the Inde∣pendent way with Scripture and it self. 4o. ☞—Church-reformation promoted, in a Sermon on Matth. 18.15,16,17. with some Animadvers. upon Mr Humphries Vindication, and Mr Saunders Antediatribe. 8o. ☞—Independency a great Schisme: against Mr Owen, His Apologie in his Tract of Schisme; also shewing the inconstancy of the Dr, and in∣consistency of his former and pre∣sent opinions. 8•.
☞—Against Dr Hammonds Dia∣tribae. 8o. ☞—Family-reformation promoted, in a Sermon on Josh. 24.15; by short Catechismes fitted for the three∣fold relations in a family, of Chil∣dren and Parents, Servants and Masters, Husbands and Wives. 12o. *Mr Crompton, M.A. An Exposition on the 4th Article of the Apostles Creed. 8o. Mr Culverwell. An elegant and learned Discourse of the light of Nature, with the Treatises of Schism; Act of Oblivion; The Childs return; The panting Soul; Mount Ebal; The white Stone; Spiritual Op∣ticks; the worth of Souls. 4o. *Mr Cobbet. A vindication of Chil∣drens right to Baptism. 8o. *—The Civil Magistrates power in matters of Religion, modestly de∣bated, Impartially stated, accor∣ding to the bounds and grounds of Scripture; Answ. all weighty Objections, with an Answer to a certain slanderous Pamphlet called Ill news from N.E. 4o. *—On Prayer; Ejaculatory, closet, family, and publick. The nature, duty, and qualifications, with the necessity of it, and Engagements to Prayer, with Cases of Consci∣ence about Prayer resolved. 8o. —A fruitfull and usefull Discourse touching the Honour due from Children to Parents, and Parents to Children, both being cleared from Scripture; the failings and sinnes of either, the manifold causes thereof are discovered, ap∣plied, and pressed. 8o. ☞Mr Chapman. Hallelujah, or King Davids shrill Trumpet sounding a loud summons to the whole world to praise God: being a Commentary on the 117 Psal. 4o. *Mr Case. Correction, Instruction: or a Treatise of afflictions, first con∣ceived by way of private Medita∣tions, then digested into certain Sermons now published for the help and comfort of humble suf∣fering Christians. 12o. —Sundry Sermons in one vol. Two Sermons before the House from Ezek. 20.25. Gods waiting to be gracious, from Esa. 30.18. The Quarrell of the Covenant, with the pacification of the Quarrell, from Levit. 26.25. Jer. 50.5. Gods rising, his enemies scattering. On a Fast before the House, from Psal. 61.1,2. The root of Aposta∣cy, Thanksgiving Serm. from Dan. 11.32. Jehoshaphats Caveat to the Judges, 2 Chron. 19.6,7. A model of true Spiritual thank∣fullness, from Psal. 107.30,31. Thanksgiving Sermon from Esa. 43.14. The set-backs of Refor∣mation, Exod. 5.22,23. Spiritual whoredom, a Humiliation Serm. Hosea 9.1. 4o. *—Encouragements. 12o. ☞—The vanity of glorying in the flesh. 12o. ☞—Morning Exercises, or some Notes taken out of the Morning Exercises which divers Reverend Ministers of the Gospel preached in Giles in the Fields. 12o. ☞Mr Calvert. Melcoeli, or the Prophet Isaiahs crucifix. in an Exposit. of the 53 Chap. of Isaiah. 4o. ☞A contemplation of Heaven, with an exercise of love, and a descant on the Prayer in the Garden, by a Catholick Gent. 12o. Mr Cooper. The triumph of a Christian, Containing Jacobs wrestling with God; 2o. The Conduit of Comfort; 3o. A
preparative for the Lords Supper, full of sweet consolation for all that desire the refreshing sweetness of Jesus Christ. 8o. *Mr Crofton. Against the Rabinicall Talmud of Rabbi John Rogers; wherein is examined his Doct. of the matter and form of a Church, duty of Separation, and subjects of Christs power, &c. 8o. ☞—Catechising Gods Ordinance, in a short Treatise of that antient, approved, soul-edifying, singularly-necessary exercise of Catechi∣sing. 8o. ☞—The peoples need of a living Pastor, asserted and explained, in a Sermon at the funerall of Mr Frost. 4o. ☞—The Saints Zeal. 12o. ☞Confessions of Faith of all Chri∣stian and Reformed Churches, which purely profess the Doctrine of the Gospel in all the Kingdoms, Nations and Provinces of Europe, with the order of time when they were written; with a Table of principle Articles of Faith which in every Confession is debated: freely submitted to all reformed Churches, as a means to knit and unite in one bond of love, for avoid∣ing of Heresies, discords and schis∣mes in these dangerous times. 4o. *Mr Cole Newcastle. Davids distress in the loss of Jonathan, or an explica∣tion of Davids mourning at the death of Jonathan, in a Sermon up∣on 2 Sam. 1.16. at the funerall of Mr Henry Massey Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ at Kirby-Kendell in Westmoreland. 12o. *Mr Croft. On the Mystery of Godli∣ness, or the Character of a Saint in seeming contradictions. 8o. *Mr Cartwright York. The Doctrine of Faith, or the principall heads in Divinity which a Christian is to know and beleeve: where also the Articles of the Creed are obser∣ved. 8o. *—Certamen Religiosum: A Confe∣rence between his late Majesty and the Marquess of Worster about Religion, at Ragland Castle; with a vindication of the Protestant Cause, and the aspersions cast up∣on the famous Instruments of the Protestant Cause (viz. Luther, Cal∣vin, Zuinglius, Melancthon and Be∣za) fairly wiped off. 4o. Dr Crisp. Christ alone exalted in 14 Ser∣mons: first vol. 8o. —Christ alone exalted, in 17 Ser∣mons upon Phil. 3.8,9. second vol. 8o. —Christ alone exalted in the per∣fection and encouragement of his Saints, notwithstanding sinnes and trials, in eleven Sermons: the third vol. 8o. ☞Mr Crodacot. The necessity of ma∣king heavenly Treasure our chiefest Treasure. 4o. *Mr Cordett. The Magistrates support and burden. Mr Chomley. The state of the new Ro∣man Church discussed, in vindica∣tion of Bp Hall, against the cavils of H. Burton. 8o. *Catageri. Tetragrammato nomine Je∣hovah dissertatio qua vocis Jehovah apud nostros receptae usus defendetur, & à quorundam cavillationibus ini∣quis pariter at{que} inanibus vindica∣tur. 12o. Mr Crumpton. An explanation of the Principles of Religion, expressed in the Catechisme of the Church of England, set down in the Com∣mon Prayer. 12o. —A Candle in the dark. A Treatise of the nature of Witches and Witchcraft. 8o. *Mr Crandon against Baxters Apho∣rismes of Justification. 4o.
☞Mr Carter. The Covenant of God with Abraham opened, wherein Infant-Baptisme is cleared, and somewhat about the Sabbath, with the manifestation of God to his people in the latter dayes. 4o. Mr Colvill. Refreshing streames flow∣ing from the fullness of Jesus Christ. 4o. ☞Mr Collier. The exaltation of Christ in the dayes of the Gospel. 8o. *—Marrow of Christianity, or a spi∣rituall discovery of some principall truth. 8o. *—Mysteries unveiled, or the glory of Christ and Mystery of Anti∣christ. 8o. —Three generall Epistles written to the universall Church of the first-born. 8o. —On the Sabbath against Mr Fisher. *—A discovery of the new Crea∣tion. 8o. —The Corruption of the Ministry of the Church of England. 8o. Mr Cheynell. The divine Trineunity of the Father, Son and holy Spirit; or the blessed Doctrine of the three coessentiall Subsistents in the Eternal Godhead, without any confusion or division of the di∣stinct Subsistences, or multiplica∣tion of the most single and entire Godhead, &c. 8o. —The rise and growth of Socinia∣nisme. 4o. ☞Mr Capel on Tentations, their na∣ture, danger and cure, in four Parts. 8o. *Clavis Apocalyptica, or the Revelation revealed, in which the great my∣steries in the Revelation of St John and the Prophet Daniel are open∣ed, by a German Doctor. 8o. Mr Culverwell. A Treatise of Faith, wherein is declared how a man may live by Faith, and find relief in all his necessities; applied e∣specially to the weakest Chri∣stians. 8o. ☞Mr Chewney. Antisocinianisme, or a brief explication of some places of holy Scripture, from many gross errors and Socinian Heresies lately published by W. Pinchin Gent. called the Meritorious Price, &c. with a description of the Lives and Deaths of the Authors, promoters and propagaters of this Heresie; by what means it spread, and when and by whom it was first brought into England; that so we may not be deceived. ☞Mr Clapham. A full discovery and confutation of the wicked and damnable Doctrines of the Qua∣kers. 4o. Mr Cooper. A Commentary upon the Revelation of St John. 4o. ☞—Anabaptists anatomized and si∣lenced, in a dispute with Mr Tombs, by Mr Craggs M.A. Or a Reply to Mr Tombs Plea for Anabaptisme; wherein the antiquity, universality and succession of Infant-baptisme (since the Apostles dayes untill the Anabap. sprung up in Germa∣ny) is maintained, necessity of Dip∣ping refuted. 8o. ☞—A Cabinet of spiritual Jewels, wherein mans misery, Gods mercy, Christs treasury, Truths prevalen∣cy, &c. in eight Sermons: Also the nature, equity and obligation of Tithes under the Gospel, and Mar∣riage to be solemnized only by a lawfull Minister, &c. 8o. Chrysostome. A Commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians. 4o. Mr Cartwright. An Exposition of the Revelation of St John. 4o. Mr Clapham. A brief of the Bibles Hi∣story, drawn first into English Poe∣sie and illustrated by apt Anno∣tations,
with a Synopsis of the Bibles doctrine. 12o. Crummes of Comfort: Godly Prayers with thankfull remembrances of Gods wonderfull deliverances of this Land. 24o. Comfortable Doctrine for Adams offspring, in a Conference betwixt two Christian friends. 12o. Creation and fall of Adam. 12o. Sr Lucas Carey, late Ld Vicount of Faulk∣land. A discourse of Infallibility, with an Answer to it, and his Lordships Reply, with Mr Moun∣tagues Leter concerning the change of his Religion. 4o. Mr Carltons Remembrance on the 5th of November. 4o. —Directions to know the true Church. 12o. ☞Ld Capel. Meditations Divine and Morall. 12o. Mr Sam. Clark. A sweet Poesie for Gods Saints, containing many choice and sweet flowers gather∣ed out of Gods own garden the holy Scriptures; being directions for these evil times, and how to walk comfortably in all times: or a watchword to Zions mourn∣ers, to a close walking with God. 12o. —A Sermon at the Warwick-shire-mens Feast; intituled, Christian Good-fellowship. 4o. Cui{que} suum. The Law of Tythes af∣firmed against all opposers: or an Apologie for maintenance of a Gospel-Ministry, confirmed by di∣vine and humane sanction. 4o. Mr Church. Miscellanies of the Attri∣butes of God; or God and man: A Treatise compendiously descri∣bing the nature of God in his At∣tributes; his Wisdome in ordering terrestriall and Coelestiall Bodies, described Theologically and Phi∣losophically; many secrets in Scri∣pture and Nature are unbowelled, with solid proofs and apt appli∣cations for brevity and perspi∣cuity. 4o. —The good mans Treasury. 12o. —Of Ejaculations. 12o. —A Pocket-Companion, or cheap Riches, in 500 Proverbiall Apho∣rismes; with the wise or tame Ser∣pent. 12o. Mr Chaffie. A Treatise on the Sabbath, wherein all Controversies about it are reconciled. 4o. Mr Cook. A Treatise of Baptisme, or the Font uncovered. 4o. ☞Mr Giles Collier M.A. Vindiciae The∣sium de Sabbato, in vindication of certain passages in a Sermon of the Morality of the Sabbath, from the exceptions of Mr Fisher in his Christian caveat; with an exami∣nation of this bold assertion, viz. That there is equall authority and antiquity, for observation of the 25th of Decem. as for the Lords Day. 4o. Mr Calvin York M.A. Heart-salve for a wounded soul; or Meditations of comfort for relief of a soul sick of delayed prayers and the hiding of Gods face. 8o. The Christian Directory. 12o. ☞Mr T. Cooper. The art of giving, or a guide to Charity; shewing the right nature of Liberality. 8o. ☞Celebriorum distinctionum Philoso∣phicarum Synopsis, aut L. Ca∣stanaeo. 8o. ☞Bp Chapell. The Preacher, or the art and method of Preaching; shew∣ing Rules for invention, method, expression, and Bookes, &c. 12o. ☞Mr Chishull. Two Treatises; 1o. The Young-mans Memento; shewing how, why, when, we should re∣member God, or the
seasonable∣nessand sutableness of this work to youth. 2o. Now if ever: Proving that God gives a day, that it often ends while the means of Grace continue, and when ended peace is hid from the soul. 12o. —The danger of being almost a Christian; shewing 1o. How far men may go without grace: 2o. Why some men go so far: 3o. why no farther: 4o. Their dangerous estate. 12o. *Confessio Fidei in conventu Theol au∣thoritate Parl. Angl. indicto elabo∣rata. 8o. ☞Dr Charlton. The Immortality of the Soul, demonstrated by the light of nature, in two Dialogues. 4o. ☞Dr Cossens. Devotion, Prayers and Meditations with additions and enlargements reprinted. 12o. ☞—A Scholasticall History of the Canon of the holy Scriptures, or the certain and indubitate books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England. 4o. ☞Mr Carpenter. The Deputy-Divinity, or inferiour Deity, and subordinate God in the world, Conscience. 12o. ☞A Theologicall Concordance of the Synonymous tearms in the holy Scripture; all various words and phrases, which concur in sense are common-placed, &c. 8o. Mr S. Crook. The guide unto true bles∣sedness; or, a body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, directing a man to the saving knowledg of God. 12o. D. Dr DOnn. Eighty Sermons collected into one volume. folio. —Essayes in Divinity. 12o. —Six Sermons before his Majesty. 4o. Bp Davenant. Expositio Epistolae D. Paul ad Colossienses. folio. —Determinationes Quaestionum quarun∣dam Theologicarum. folio. *—Animadversions upon a Treatise intituled, Gods love to man-kind, by Mr Hoard. 8o. *—An Exhortation to brotherly communion between the Prote∣stant Churches. 8o. D. Diodate. Annotations upon the Bible expounding the difficult places, with the Analysis folio. Mr J. Downham. A Concordance or Table to the whole Bible for the finding out any verse therein. Bp Downham. A Treatise of Justifica∣tion. folio. Mr G. Downham. A Guide to Godli∣ness, Directions to a Christian life. folio. —The Christian Warfare. folio. —An Exposition of the 25 Psalm. 4o. —An Abstract of the ten Comman∣dements. 8o. —A Treatise of Liberty. 8o. —On the Sacrament: Directing weak Christians how to celebrate the Lords Supper. 8o. *—A brief summe of Divinity, shew∣ing how a man ought to examine his waies aright in this life, to the attainment of eternity. 8o. Mr Dan. Dyke. The great Mystery of self-deceiving, or deceitfullness of the heart of man. 4o. —A Treatise of Repentance 4o. —On Michael and the Dragon: or Christ tempted, and Saan soiled. 4o. —Evangelicall Histories. 4o. —The School of Afflictions. 4o. —An Exposition of the Epistle of Philemon. 4o. —An Exposition of 124 Psalm, tend∣ing to stirre up thankfullness for our late deliverance in the Powder-plot. 4o.
Mr Jer. Dyke. The worthy Commu∣nicant, or the due order of recei∣ving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 8o. —A Treatise on Conscience: 1. Of a good Conscience: 2. The mise∣ries and mischiefs of scandals both taken and gven. 8o. —A Treatise of Covetousness. 4o. —Of Archippus. 4o. —The Righteous mans Tower; The way to be safe in time of dan∣ger. 8o. —Select Sermons. 1. Of quench∣ing and not quenching the Spirit. 2. The heart-smtiten sinners suit for pardon. 3. The right eating and digesting of the Word. 4. The purchase and possession of the Truth. 8o. —The Grounds of Religion by way of Catechism. 8o. Mr Dd. An Exposition of the ten Commandements. 4o. *Mr Day. M.A. An Exposition of the Book of the Prophet Esaiah. folio. *—A Treatise of the Resurrection, from 1 Cor. 15,16. 4o. *—A Moment of Mortality. 1. A wakening for worldlings. 2. Me∣ditations of Consolations. 3. Com∣fortable Considerations, preparing the sick for a happy change. 4. A Mirrour of Modesty, with a re∣proof of the strange attire of Wo∣men: with the sacred use of Chri∣stian Funerals 8o. Mr Downe. A Treatise of Faith 4o. Mr Dixon. On the Epistles Latin 4o —A brief explication of the Epistles of Paul to the Hebrews. 8o. —An Exposition of the Gospel of St Mathew. 8o. ☞—A brief Explication of the whole Book of Psalms 8o. ☞—The Rapeutica sacra, seu de cu∣randis Casibus Conscientiae circa re∣generationem, per faederum divinorum prudentem applicationem. Libri tres. 4o. *Mr Durant. Comfort and counsell for dejected souls, wherein is handled the nature, working, grounds, and remedies of spiritual dejecti∣on. 8o. *—Sipps of sweetness, or consola∣tion for weak Believers, discoursing of the sweetness of Christs car∣riage towards all his weak Mem∣bers. 8o. *—Salvation of Saints, by the ap∣pearances of Christ now in Hea∣ven, and hereafter from Hea∣ven. 8o. *Mr Dingley. The spiritual Tast de∣scribed, and a glimpse of Christ, discovering the sweet Incomes of Christ to a spiritual heart: or Di∣vine relishes of matchless good∣ness. 8o. *—Messiah's splendor, or the glimpsed glory of a beauteous Christ. 8o. *—The dispensation of Angels, or the Angel guardian: 1. Proved by the dimme light of nature, clear beames of Scriptures, consent of many antient and modern Wri∣ters untainted with popery. 2. Cleared from many rubbs and mistakes, the criticall queries of Antagonists examined and untied. 3. Applied and improved for in∣formation, &c. grounded on Acts 12.15. 8o. *—Divine Opticks, or a Treatise of the eye, discovering the vices and vertues thereof, as also how that Organ may be tuned, chiefly grounded on Psal. 119.37. 8o. The daily Exercise of a Christian. 12o. ☞Mr Duke. The fullness and freeness of Gods grace in Jesus Christ in two points. 1. That personall e∣lection is
no ground of the Saintsperseverance. 2. In what sense the Scripture speak the Saints per∣severance in the grace of God. 3. Against the Familists and Qua∣kers. Doctrin of the Bible, or rules of disci∣pline, briefly gathered through the whole course of Scriptures by way of Questions and Ans∣wers. 12o. Mr Davenport. On the Messiah. 4o. Drexilius. Considerations on Eter∣nity. 12o. —A right intention, the rule of all mens Actions. 12o. —Hive of Devotion, or the Saints evidence for Heaven, with a cor∣dial for afflicted minds, and tender Consciences. 12o. —The School of Patience in three Books. 12o. Dreame of the Devil and Dives. A Sermon. 8o. Mr Deerings Grounds of Religion by way of Catechising. 8o. Dives and Lazarus. A Sermon. 8o. Mr Despagn. Of the eating of the body of Christ, considered in his prin∣ciples. 8o. —A Treatise on the Creed, or new Observations being the first of the four parts of the Doctrine of Christianity, preached upon the Catechis. of the French Churches, with the use of the Lords Prayer maintained. 8o. —Popular Errors in generall points concerning the Intelligence of Re∣ligion, having relation to their causes; and reduced into divers observations. 8o. ☞—Shibboleth, or the reformation of severall places in the translati∣ons of the French and English Bible, with the correction of di∣vers common opinions, Histo∣ry, &c. 12o. —An Exposition of the ten Com∣mandements. 8o. A Sermon preached on a Fast day, for the success of the treaty betwixt King and Parliament. 4o. —A Funerall Sermon upon the death of his Wife, in French. 8o. A discourse against Mr Montagues new gagg, and just appeal, wherein he laboureth to bring n the faith of Rome and Armenius, under the name of the Doct. and Faith of the Church of England. 4o. ☞Mr Drake. A Boundary to the Holy Mount, against Mr Humphrey. 8o. *—De Sanguine. 4o. *Mr Drape. Gospel Glory, or Visible, and Invisible worship of God. 4o. *Mr Dornford. Gospel Mystery, or the great union that is betwixt Christ and the Saints, from Cant. 2.16. With a true way to discern a god∣ly from a carnall or ungodly man, with the way how the Saints re∣turn after back-sliding: also the worth of a good conscience. 8o. Mr Dawson. 18. Serm. upon the Incar∣nation of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded to the weakest capaci∣ty. 4o. Mr Darton. The true and absolute Bishop Jesus Christ. 4o. Divine Meditations on the 91 Psalm, and on the History of Agag King of Amaleck. 4o. Mr Davis. Heaven and Earth shaken, shewing how Kings, Princes, and their Governments are changed and turned. 8o. A Directory for the publick worship of God, throughout England, Scot∣land, and Ireland. 4o. Mr Duport. ΘΡΗΟΘΡΙ'ΑΜΒΟΣ, sive Liber Job Graeco Carmine reddi∣tus. 8o.
—ΣΟΛΟΜΩ'Ν 'ΕΜΜΕΤΡΟΣ: Si∣ve tres Libri Solomonis scilicet, Pro∣verbia, Ecclesiastes, Cantica. 8o. *Mr Dalley. Of the right use o the Fa∣thers in the decision of the Con∣troversies that are at this day in Religion. 4o. Mr Dent. The Ruin of Rome, or an Ex∣pos. upon the whole Revelation, wherein is plainly shewed and proved, that the popish Religion with all the power of Rome, shall ebbe and decay through all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter overthrow, even in this life, before the end of the world: written especially for the comfort of Protestants and daunting of Papists, Seminary Preists, Jesuits, and all that cursed rabble: with an Epitomy of Mr Brightmans Ex∣pos on Revelation. 8o. —The plain mans path-way to Hea∣ven, wherein every man may clearly see whether he shall be sa∣ved or damned, 8o. Mr Dayrell. A Treatise of the Church, written against them of the sepa∣ration, commonly called Brounists; proving the Church of England a true Church, &c. 4o. ☞Mr Dale. M.A. fellow Mag. C. Ox. The Analysis of all the Epistles of the New Testament; wherein the chief of each Chapter is reduced to heads, and many hard places explained for the help of memo∣ry and understanding. 8o. E. Mr ELton. A Commentary on the whole Epistle to the Colossians. folio. —On the 7, 8, and 9 Chapters to the Romanes. folio. —On the ten Commandements, with the grounds of Christian Religion: added by way of catechizing, with Christs holy mind touching Prayer, in that holy Prayer which himself taught his Disciples. 4o. An exposition on the 5th Chapter of Johns Gospel. 4o. Evans voice from Heaven to the Com∣mon-wealth of England, with an echo to the voice. 12o. Mr Eaton. The Divinity of Jesus Christ, also the Doctrine of Christs satis∣faction and reconciliation on Gods part to the creature, &c. 8o. —A discovery of a most dangerous and dead Faith. 12o. —A Honey-Comb of free Justifica∣tion. 4o. Mr Estwick. Biddles confession of Faith, touching the holy Trinity, where∣in his chief design to overthrow the Sacred Mystery, and the Deity of our blessed Saviour is examined and confuted: with seven Argu∣ments to prove the Deity of the Son of God. 4o. ☞Exhortation to Catechizing, the long neglect whereof is sadly lamented, and the speedy reviving as earnest∣ly desired; by the Provinciall As∣sembly at London. ☞The English Presbyterian and In∣dependent reconciled. 4o. The Epistle congratulatory of Lysci∣machus Nicanor of the Society of Jesus to the Covenanters in Scot∣land, parallelling their Harmony in Doctrine and Practice. 4o. *Mr Eyre. A Treatise of Justification against Mr Baxter, &c. 4o. *Mr Eliot and Mr Mayhew. A relation of the repentance and conversi∣on of the poor Indians in New-England; shewing the wonderfull work of God in their poor souls. 4o.
*Mr Eaton. A Treatise of the Oathof Allegiance and Covenant, shew∣ing that they oblige not 4o. *Mr Edes. The Doctrine of Justifica∣tion asserted and vindicated, in Answer to Mr Eyres and Mr Bax∣ter. 4o. An Expedient for composing differen∣ces in Religion. 4o. F. Dr FEatlies workes in one vol. folio. —The grand Sacriledge of the Church of Rome. 4o. —The Dippers dipt, or the Anabap∣tist duckt over-head and ears, at a disputation in Southwark, with a full discourse of their Original, sorts, errors, attempts against the State, punishments, with the Histo∣ry of their practices in Germa∣ny. 4o. —Ancilla pietatis, or the Handmaid to private devotion, containing In∣structions, Hymnes, and Prayers, fitted to the daies of the week, and Feasts, and Fasts of the Church. 12o. —Against Fisher the Jesuit. 4o. ☞Mr Finch. Animadvers. upon Sr H. Vanes Book called the retired mans Meditations, examining his Doctrine concerning Adams fall, Christs person, and sufferings, Justification, common and special grace, &c. 8o. Mr Fergusson. (A scotch Minister) A brief Exposition of the Epistles of Paul to the Philip. and Co∣lossi. 8o. Mr Flecher. A Commentary on the first Psal. 4o. —Joy in tribulation, or consola. for afflicted Consc. 12o. *Mr Fuller. The Infants Advocate, or a Treatise of Circumcision and Bapt. on Jewish and Christian Children. 8o. ☞—A Collection of Sermons, viz. 1. The best improvement from Act. 10.38. 2ly A gift from God above, from Prov. 23.26. 3ly The true penitent, from Luke 22.6. 4ly The best act of oblivion, from Psalm 25.7. with Notes upon Jonah. 8o. *—A Comment upon Ruth, with two Sermons. 1. Comfort in Cala∣mity, teaching to live well. 2ly the grand Assizes, minding to die well. 8o. *—A Triple Reconciler stating the Controversies; whether Ministers have an exclusive power of Com∣municants from the Sacrament. 2ly If any persons may lawfully preach unordained. 3ly whe∣ther the Lords Prayer ought not to be used by all Christi∣ans. 8o. *—A Treatise of Temptations: or a Comment on the 11 first verses of the 4 of Mathew, concerning Christs temptations. 8o. —Good thoughts in bad times, bet∣ter thoughts in worse times. 12o. ☞—The best name on earth; with other Sermons. 8o. The Fort-royall of the Scriptures, or vade Mecum Concordance, where∣in the weaker sort of Christians may suddainly command all the Rarities in the Book of God. 12o. *Dr Fern. A defence of the Church of England. 12o. —Episcopacy and Presbitery consi∣dered, according to the severall respects which may commend a Church Government, and oblige good Christians unto it. 4o. *—A Sermon before the King at the Isle of Wight. 4o.
*—Certain considerations of pre∣sent concernment, touching the reformed Church of England. With a particular examination of A. Campny Dr of Sorbon, his ex∣ceptions against the lawfull Cal∣ling and Ordination of the Pro∣testant Bishops and Pastors of this Church. 12o. —A Compendious discourse upon the case as it stands between the Church of England, and those Congregations that have divided from it. 12o. *Mr Ford. Of Reading. The great Interest of Kingdoms. 4o. *—Two Sermons in Latin. Anhitio Sacra. 4o. *—An Assize Sermon. 4o. ☞—The Spirit of Bondage and Adop∣tion largely and practically hand∣led, with a discourse on the Duty of Prayer in an Afflicted Con∣dition. 8o. —The practicall use of Infant Bap∣tism. 8o. *Mr Ford of Exeter. A Treatise tend∣ing to prove the lawfullness of singing Psalms. 8o. Mr Forbes. A Commentary of the Re∣velation of St John. 4o. —A Treatise of Justification. 4o. —Irenicon. 4o. ☞Mr Fenner. His Works complete in one vol. newly printed, or in sun∣dry volumes apart, viz. 1. A Treatise of the Affections, or the Souls Pulse, whereby a Christian may know whether he be living or dying, with a description of their Nature, signs, and symptoms, with directions for the right use and or∣dering of, them. 2ly The Souls Looking-glass, lively representing is estate before God; with a Trea∣tise of Conscience, wherein the Definitions and Distinctions there∣of are unfolded, and severall ca∣ses resolved. 3ly Christs Allarum to drowsie Saints, or Christs E∣pistles to his Churches. 4ly Wil∣full Impenitency the grossest self-murder, and all they that are guilty of it, tryed and condemned. 5ly The Spirituall mans Directo∣ry, guiding a Christian in the path that leads to true blessedness, teaching how to believe, obey, and pray. 6ly Hidden Manna; or the Mystery of saving Grace, where∣in the peculiarity of Gods speciall grace to the elect is asserted, and divers Objections of Pelagians and Arminians about the power of the will of man to supernatuall good, are fully answered and confuted. 7ly The Riches of Grace, shewing the value and excellency of a gra∣cious spirit, by comparing it with the nature and spirits of wicked men. 8ly The Continuation of Christs Allarum to drowsie Saints, with a Treatise of effectuall Cal∣ling, the killing power of the Law. The spiritual Watch; The New Birth; Ingrafting into Christ; On the Sabbath. 9ty Twenty Nine Sermons on sundry Texts, viz. The use and benefit of Divine Me∣ditations; Danger of deferring re∣pentance; Vain thoughts arraign∣ed at the Barre of Gods Justice; The Judgment of the world by Saints at the last day; The punish∣ment of unworthy Communi∣cants; The Duty of Communi∣cants; The Duty of Reprovers, and persons reproved; The mise∣ry of earthly thoughts; The ne∣cessity of Self-denyall; The effi∣cacy of importunate Prayer; The necessity of Gospel obedience; Caveat against
late repentance; The Sovereign Virtue of theGospell; A Funeral Sermon, signs of Gods forsaking a people; The Sacrifice of the faithfull; The mse∣ry of creatures by the fall of man; The Christians imitation of Christ; The enmity of the wicked to the light of the Gospell; Gods impar∣tiality in his Judgments; Dignity of Saints; Time of Gods grace limited; Spirituall Mortification; Sin and danger of Hypocrisie; Reformation under correction; The way to prevent desolati∣on folio. *Mr Firmin. On Separation. 4o. *—The Case stated. 4o. ☞—Against the Quakers, or the Prince of darkness like an Angel of Light. 4o. ☞Mr Fisher. The wise Virgin: or a wonderfull Narration of the vari∣ous dispensations of God towards a Child of a 11 years of age: her excellent speeches in a sad time of sickness, to the loss of sight, hear∣ing, and her recovery without a∣ny externall means, to the won∣derfull amazement of all that came farre and near to see her. 8o. *Mr Fulwood. Vindiciae mediorum & mediatoris: or the present Reign∣ing error arraigned at the Barre of Scripture and reason, discovering that falsehood and dager of that opinion that pretends to an imme∣diate enjoyment and call of the Spirit of God, both above and a∣gainst its own efficacy, cause, Word, Ministry, and Witness, in all respects, &c. 8o. Mr Fulk. On the Rhemish Testa∣ment. folio. Mr Fettiplace. The Sinners tears in Me∣ditations and Prayers. 12o. —The Celestiall Lamp, enlightning every distressed soul from the depth of everlasting darkness. D. S. Fabritio. Conciones sacrae seu de∣cem praecepta, a Deo ipso duabus ta∣bulis conscripta, & per Mosen populo Israelitico tradita. —Ecclesiae contingensis Pastore. 4o. Mr Farmer. A Treatise on the personall reign of Christ upon earth. Mr S. Fisher. A Love token for Mourn∣ers, being two Funeral Sermons, and Meditations preparatory to his own expected death, in a time and place of great Mortality. 8o. D• Fulk. Pleasant prosp. into the Gard. of Nat. Contemplation, seeing the naturall causes of all kind of Me∣teors, as well fiery as a iery, as watery and earthly: to the glory of God, and profit of his crea∣tures. 8o. G. ☞Mr GƲmbledon. Christ tempted, the Devill conquered, or an Expos. on a part of the 4th of Mat. with two Sermons before the University at Oxf. 4o. ☞Mr Gunton. M.A. Gods House, with the nature and use thereof, as it ought to be understood and re∣spected by Christians under the Gospel. 12o. ☞Mr Gery. The Fort Royal of Chri∣stianity defended; or a demon∣stration of the Divinity of Scrip∣ture by way of excellency cal∣led with the Bible: with a dis∣cussion of the great Controversies in Religion, &c. 12o. H. Grossius. A Commentary upon the Old and New Testament in three vol. Latin. folio. —De veritate religionis Christi∣anae. 12o. —De satisfactione Christi. 12o. —Poemata. 8o.
*—Of the Law of Warre and Peace, with Annotations in three parts, with the Authors life and death: Translated. 8o. The Magistrates authority in matters of religion asserted, or the right of the state in the Church English∣ed. 8o. —A Treatise upon the Providence of God, and on Christ and his Miracles. 12o. Mr Godolphin. A Holy Arbour, or a cluster of spiritual Grapes, con∣taining the whole Body of Divini∣ty. folio. —The Holy Lymbeck of a Semi-century of Spiritual extractions, wherein the Spirit is extracted from the Letter in Scripture. 12o. Mr J. Goodwin. Redemption Redeem∣ed, with a through discussion of election and reprobation. folio. —Catabaptism, or the new Bap∣tism washed old, and ready to va∣nish away, in two parts: 1. Con∣siderations pregnant for healing the common scruples touching the subject of Baptism, and manner of Baptizing. 2. In defence of In∣fant-Baptism, in answer to a dis∣course against it. 4o. —An Expos. upon the 9th Chap. of the Epistle of St Paul to the Romans, shewing that the Apostle discourseth not of any personal election or reprobation of men from eternity. 4o. Divine Authority of the Scrip∣tures. 4o. —Reply to A.S. vindicating the Congregationall way vindicat∣ed. 4o. —Antapologies, in answ. to Ed∣wards. 4o. —Fresh discovery of a high Presb. spirit. 4o. —Anticavilearism. 4o. —Queries concerning the Govern∣ment. 4o. —Hagiomastix, or scourge for Saints. 4o. —Peace protected. 4o. —Vindication of the sentence past on the late King. 4o. —Apologist condemned. 4o. —Three disputes about extent of Christs death, with Mr Powell and Mr Sympson. 4o. —Pagans debt and dowry. 4o. —Defence of the true meaning of Rom. 3.5,9. in answer to Mr Wal∣ker. 4o. —Water-dipping, no firm footing for Church-Communion. 4o. —The Return of Mercies. 12o. —Saints Interest. 12o. A Treatise upon the Sabbath. 8o. —The Christians engagement for the Gospel. 8o. —Distance and Agreement of Bre∣thren. 4o. —Of fighting against God, from the counsell of Gamaliel. 4o. Dr Gouge. A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of St Paul to the Hebrews, wherein every word and particle in the Original is explain∣ed, and the Emphasis fully shew∣ed. 2o. The sense and meaning of every Verse clearly unfolded. 3o. Each Chapter and Verse logi∣cally and exactly Analysed. 4o. Do∣ctrines raised and applyed. 5o. Types of Christ unveiled. 6o. Cases of Conscience resolved. 7o. Many Controversies discussed. 8o. Various common places per∣spicuously opened, being the sub∣stance of 30 years Lectures, with the Narrative of the Authours life and death: Two Volumes. folio. The calling of the Jews, a Present to Judah, and
the Children of Israel that joyned with him, and toJoseph (the valiant Tribe of E∣phraim) and all the House of Israel, that joyned with him; with an Epistle unto them in Hebr. translated into English. 4o. —Domesticall duties in eight Trea∣tises, from the 5th and 6th of the Ephes. part of each Chapter. 4o. —A Guide to go to God: or an ex∣planation of the Lords Prayer. 4o. —The whole Armour of God, from the 6th of Ephesians —The Saints Sacrifice, or a Com∣ment upon the 116 Psalm. 4o. —Gods Three Arrows, Plague, Fa∣mine, and Sword, in three Trea∣tises. First, A plaister for the Plague, from the 16th of Numbers, from 44. to 50 Vers. Secondly, Dearths death, on 2 Sam. 21.1. Thirdly, The Churches conquest over the Sword, from Exo. 17. from 8 Vers. to the end. 40. —The dignity of Chyvalry; A Ser∣mon on 2 Chron. 8.9. 4o. —A Treatise of the Sinne against the Holy Ghost, from Mat. 12.31,32. and Mark. 3.28,29. —Two Catech. of the Fundamental Points of Religion. —The extent of Gods Providence, from Mat. 10.29,30,31. A Sermon on 5th Novem. on occasion of the downfall of Papists in Black-Friers 10 daies before, with the relation of the said downfall. 4o. —Two Treatises: 1o. The Sabbaths Sanctification. 2o. A Treatise of Apostacy, from Luk. 15.31. 4o. —The Saints Support. A Sermon on Nehem. 5.19. 4o. —Mercies Memoriall. A Sermon on Exo. 13.3. on Q Eliz. Inaugura∣tion. —The progress of Divine Provi∣dence, on Ezek. 36.11. 4o. —A Sermon on Ezek. 24.16. at the Fu∣nerall of Mrs Duck, with a relation of her life and death. 4o. —The right way. A Sermon on Ezra 8.21. 4o. —Mr Gattaker. Sermons, viz. David's Instructer, on Psal. 34.11. Christians care, Mat. 6.33. Spiritual Watch, Mat. 13.37. Gain of Godliness, 1 Tim. 6.6. Joy of the Just, Psal. 9.10,11. Jacob's Thankfullness, Gen. 32.10. David's Remembran∣cer, Psal. 13.1. Noah's Obedience, Heb. 11.7. Engl. delivery from Span. Invasion, Psal. 48.7. A spark of sorr. for Zion, Amos 6.6. Gods parley with Princes, Psal. 82.6. Marriage-Prayer, Gen. 24.12. A Good Wife Gods gift, Prov. 19.14. A Wife indeed, Prov. 18.22. Marriage-duties, Colos. 3.18. Pauls departure, Phil. 1.23. Good Name and good end, Eccl. 7.1. Abraham's decease, Gen. 25.8. Christian Constancy crowned by Christ, Rev. 2.10. folio. Antinomianism discovered and con∣futed, and free grace as it's held forth in Gods word, as well by the Prophets in the O.T. as by the Apostles and Christ in the N.T. shewed to be other then is by the Antinomian party in these times maintained. 4o. *—A discourse Apologeticall, wherein Lillies loud lies in his Merlin are clearly laid open, his shameless slanders fully refuted, and his murtherous mind, inciting to a generall massacre of Gods Ministers from his own pen evi∣dently evidenced. 4o. —Gods eye on his Israel; or a passage of Balaam, from Numbers 23.21. expounded and cleared from An∣tinomian abuse. 4o. —Antinomianism discovered and Confuted. 4o.
—D.J. Piscat. & M. Lud. Lucij Scrip∣ta quaedam adversaria: De causâ meritoriâ nostrî coram Deo Justifica∣tionis. 8o. —Against Saltmarsh. 4o. A Commentary upon the New Testa∣ment: Latin. 4o. —Of the nature and use of Lots: A Treatise Historicall and Theo∣logicall. 4o. Mr Gross. The happiness of enjoying and making a true and speedy use of Christ setting forth: 1o. The fulness of Christ. 2o. Danger of neglecting Christ. 3o. Christ Je∣sus is the souls last refuge. 4. St Pauls last Legacy or farewell to the men of Corinth. 4o. —Sweet and Soul-perswading In∣ducements leading unto Jesus Christ. 4o. —Deaths deliverance, and Eliahs fiery Chariot: In two Serm. 8o. *—The fiery Pillar of heavenly Truth, shewing the way to a bles∣sed life, composed by way of Ca∣ech. for preserving of Gods peo∣ple from the spreading evils, and pernitious enchantments of Pa∣pism and other errors. 12o. —On Sacred things. 12o. —The Anatomy of the heart. 8o. ☞—The buddings and blossomings of old Truths, or severall practi∣call points of Divinity gathered out of that sacred Evangelist St John, Chap. 3. from Vers. 22. ad finem. 8o. *Mr Gell. A Sermon touching Gods Government of the world by Angels, preached before the A∣strologers. 4o. Mr Gallaspie. Aarons od Blossoming for Presbyteriall Govern∣ment. 4o. —Misselane Quest. Many cases of Consc. concerning the controver∣sies of the times are discussed and resolved. 4o. Mr Greenhill. An Expos. of the first 19 Chapters of Ezekiel, with use∣full observations thereupon: In three volumes. 4o. ☞—Sermons of Christ his last dis∣covery of himself, viz. 1o. Christ the root of all. 2o. his Royall descent. 3o. Christ the starre. 4o. The voice of the Spirit and Bride. 5o. Of his coming. 6o. Of spiritual thirsting and thirsters. 7o. Christs willingness to save sin∣ners. 8o. The water of life; all from the 22 Revel. 16, & 17 verses. 8o. Mr Griffieth. Form for Families, where∣in all sorts of sexes are so squared for the Word, as may best serve for usefull pieces in Gods Build∣ing. 4o. *Mr Gee. A Treatise of private and publick Prayer. 8o. *Mr Philip Goodwin. The Evangelicall Communicant in the Eucharisticall Sacrament: or a Treatise declaring who are to receive the Supper of the Lord: that it is an Ordinance peculiar to some, and not to all that live under the Word; With contrary Objections answered, necessary Directions tendred, cases cleared, care encouraged, and this duty guided for reforming times. 8o. ☞—Dies Dominicus Redivivus, or a Treatise discovering the practicall part of the Evangelicall Sabbath; so to Recover the spiritual part of that pious practice to its primitive life, lamentably lost in these sad declining times. 8o. ☞—Religio Domestica Rediviva; or a Treatise discovering the good old way of serving God in private Houses,
so to recover these piousduties to their primitive platform; lamentably laid down in these last back-sliding daies. 8o. ☞—The Mystery of Dreames Histo∣rically discoursed; or a Treatise wherein is clearly discovered the Secrets, &c. 8o. Dr Gerrard. The Souls Watch, or a Day-Book for the devout Soul, con∣sisting of Two and Fity heavenly Meditations and godly Prayers, fit∣ted for a sanctified conversation, and spiritual riches for the inward man. 12o. —Meditations and Prayers translated by R. Winterton. 12o. Garden of spiritual Flowers. 12o. Granadas Meditations containing de∣vout Exercies for the seaven daies of the Week, with an excellent Treatise of consideration and Prayer. 8o. Mr Greenwood. Works containing the day of Judgment; Lords Prayer; Race to Salvation; Torment of Tophet; Birth of Christ; Jaylors Jayl delivery. 12o. Mr Gibbons. An Exposition of the Book of Genesis. 4o. Mr Gilpin. Severall Sermons, with his life and death. 8o. Mr Tho. Goodwin. A Child of light walking in darkness, shewing the causes by which, the cases where∣in, and the ends for which God leaves his Children to distress of Consc. 4o. —A Child of darkness walking in light. 4o. —The Return of Prayers, wherein is resolved how to discern Gods answer to our Prayers. 4o. —Tydings of peace to distressed Consciences. 4o. —Folly of relapsing after peace spoken. 4o. —The tryal of a Christians growth in mortification and vivifi∣cation. 4o. —The aggravation of sin, and sin∣ning against Mercy and Know∣ledg. 4o. —The Vanity of thoughts discover∣ed, with their danger and cure. 4o. —Christ set forth in his Death, R¦surrection, Ascension, sitting a Gods right hand, Intercession; &c. 4o. —The Heart of Christ in Heaven to sinners on earth. 4o. —Encouragements to Faith, drawn from severall Engagements, both of Gods heart and Christs to re∣ceive and pardon sinners. 4o. —Christ the Universall Peace∣maker. 4o. —The great Interest of Kingdoms and States. 4o. A distinct, or in one vol. together. Dr Griffith. A Sermon preached at St Pauls. 4o. ☞Mr Guild. The sealed Book open∣ed, or an Expos. of Revela. dis∣covering the fall of Antichrist, by that blessed work begun in the se∣verall Churches and Kingdoms of Europe. 8o. *—Moses unveiled. 8o. ☞Mr Graile. A modest vindication of the Doctrine or conditions in the Covenant of grace, and the de∣fenders thereof from the aspersi∣ons of Arminianism and popery cast on them by Mr W.E. 4o. ☞Mr Gurnell. A Christian in his com∣pleat Armour, or the Saints war against the Devil, wherein is a discovery of that grand enemy of God and his people, in his policies, power, seat of his Empire, wick∣edness, and chief design he hath against the Saints. 4o.
*Grand debate concerning Presbyteryand Independency, by the assemb∣ly of Divines, containing 1o. The Assemblies propositions, with proofs from Scripture for Presby. Government. 2o. The dissenting Brethrens Reasons against the said Propositions. 3o. The Assemblies Answers to the Reasons. 4o. Grand Imposture of the Church of Rome, in this one Article of the New Roman Creed, viz. The Holy Catholick and Apostolick Romane Church, Mother and Mistriss of all other Churches, without which there is no salva∣tion; Proving it a blasphemous Article, &c. by the Bp of Coventry and Leichfield. 4o. *Dr Gawden. Hieraspistes. A defence by way of Apology of the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of England, humbly presented to the Consciences of those that excell in Virtue. 4o. —Three Sermons. 4o. —A Treatise of Marriage. *—A Case of Ministers maintenance by Tythes. 4o. The Gospel declared in Truth. 8o. Mr Gay. Rector. Fourteen Sermons on severall Texts with a Cate∣chism. 4o. Dr Gardiner. The Devotion of the Dying man, that desires to die well. 12o. *Mr Gove. The Saints Honey-Comb full of Divine Truth. 8o. ☞—The Communicants Guide, Directing the younger which have not received, and the elder and ignorant sort, to receive the Lords Supper with comfort. 12o. *Mr Geere. Touching supremacy in matters Ecclesiasticall, shewing how the powers Civil and Eccle∣siasticall may act without en∣croachment on each other. 4o. Mr Gaule. Select case of Consc. touch∣ing Witches and witchcraft. 12o. —Judicial Astrology largely confuted from Scriptue Authority, nature, reason, confession; large Obser∣vation on History, and from seve∣rall other particulars of that un∣lawfull art. 4o. Gualtheri in Prophetas duodecem, Quos vocant minores. folio. —On Zepheniah. 8o. Mr Gifford. An Exposition of the Re∣velation to St John. 4o. *Mr Gage. A Vindication of the Pa∣rish Churches, and Parochiall Mi∣nisters of England, from the un∣charitable Censure, and infamous Title of Antichristian and Baby∣lonish, 4o. An Exhortation for desparate sinners, by the Ld visc. Grandison prisoner in the Tower. 8o. Mr Gralle. The supreme power of Christian States, Vindicated from the insolent ptetences of Guil. Apollonii. 4o. Mr Gott. Novae Solymae, lib. Sex. Sive Justitùtio Christiani, de pueritia, de creatione mundi, de Juventute, de peccato, de virili Aetate, de Redem∣ptione Hominis. —Essayes upon the true happiness of man. 12o. —Parabolae Evangelicae latinè redditae Carmine paraphrastico varii Ge∣neris. Mr Gurney. Corpus Christi, together with the demonstration of Anti∣christ. 12o. Groanes of the Spirit, or the tryal of the truth of Prayer, handling 1o. what Prayer is. 2o. How a man may know wherein he Prayes in the Spirit. 3o. How the sense of the Spirit in Prayer may be attain∣ed.
4o. How a man may hold on in the duty without the sense of the Spirit. 8o. How they that want the Spirit of Prayer, should labour for it. 8o. ☞Mr Gilbert. The Libertine School'd, or a Vindication of the Magistrates power in religious matters. 4o. ☞Good thoughts for every day of the Moneth. 24o. H. Mr HIldersham. Hundred eight Lectures by way of Commen∣tary upon the 4th Chapter of St Johns Gospel. folio. —Hndred fifty two Lectures by way Commentary upon the 51 Psalm. folio. —The Doctrine of fasting and Prayer and Humiliation for sin, in sundry Sermons. 12o. Bp Hall. Contemplations upon the New Testament. folio. —A Paraphrase upon the old and New Testament. folio. —Soliloquies, or holy self-conferen∣ces of the devout soul, on sundry choice occasions, with humble ad∣dresses to the Throne of Grace; with the souls farewell to earth, and approaches to Heaven. 12o. *—The great Mystery of Godliness, laid forth by way of affectuous and feeling Meditations, also with the invisible world discovered to spi∣ritual eyes, and reduced to usefull Meditations. 12o. *—Balm of Gilead, or Comfots for the distressed, most fit for these woefull times. 12o. —The devout soul, or rules of Hea∣venly devotion. 12o. —The Free Prisoner, or the comfort of restraint, written in the Tower. 12o. —The Peace-maker, laying forth the right way of peace in matters of Religion. 12o. *—Cases of Conscience practically resolved, containing a decision of the principall cases of conscience of daily concernment, and con∣tinual use amongst men. 12o. *—Holy Raptures, or Patheticall Meditations of the Love of Christ. 12o. *—Christ Mystical, or the blessed Union of Christ and his Members, with the Christian laid forth in his disposition and carriage. 12o. *—Select thoughts in one Century, with the breathings of the devout soul. 12o. *—The Apostolick Institution of Imposition of hands for confirma∣tion revived. 12o. —The Revelation unrevealed, touch∣in the 1000 years Reign of the Saints with Christ on earth: A Treatise against the Millenaries 8o. —A Treatise against Prophane∣ness. 8o. ☞—The holy Order or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion, also in the night, or chearfulness under af∣fliction. 12o. —The Remedy of discontentment, or a Treatise of contentation in whatsoever condition. 12o. —Occasional Meditations. 12o. —Meditations and Vowes. 12o. —Satans fiery Darts. 12o. —A modest offer tendred to the As∣sembly of Divines at Westmin∣ster. 12o. —Pax terris. 12o. ☞Mr Haughton. Clavis , The Key of Ordination: or Mis∣sio potestativa , Ministe∣riall power: or Authoritative sepa∣ration of men to the work of Christ, a Ministeriall Priviledge. A Sermon preached at the
Ordi∣nationof Mr T. Petter. M.A. Mr J. Wilson, M D. Jenks, &c. 12o. —The rise, growth, and fall of Antichrist. 12o. ☞Mr Hollingsworth. The Holy Ghost on the Bench, other spirits at the Barre, or the Judgment of the Holy Spirit of God upon the spi∣rits of the times, recorded in his Holy Word. 12o. Dr Henshaw. Horae succisivae, or spare houres of Meditation upon our duty to God and our selves. 12o. Mr Huit of N. Engl. The prophesie of Daniel expounded. 4o. —The Anatomy of Conscience. 4o. Mr Higginson. A brief Relation of the No. thern Quakers, wherein their horrid principles and practices, Doctrines and manners, as farre as their mystery of iniquity hath yet discovered it sel, are plainly ex∣posed to the view of every Intelli∣gent Reader. 4o. Help to Devotion. 12o. Mr Hooke. N. Englands tears, and Old Englands sense. 4o. ☞Dr Hammond. Annotations and Pa∣raphase on the New Testa∣ment folio. —Practicall Catechism. 4o. —A Vndication of some passages therein from the Censures of the London Ministers. 4o. —Severall Tracts: 1o. Of Consci∣ence. 2o. Scandall. 3o. Wilwor∣ship. 4o. Superstition. 5o. Ido∣latry. 6o. Sins of weakness and wilfullness. 7o. Of a late, or death-bed Repentance. 4o. —Of Fraternall admonition, or cor∣ruption. 4o. —Of the power of the Keys; of binding and loosing. 4o. —A view of the new directory, and vindication of the Antiet Litur∣gy of the Church of England. 4o. —Considerations conerning the danger of changing our Church-Government. 4o. —Of resisting the lawfull Magi∣strate under colour of Reli∣gion. 4o. —A view of some exceptions made by a Romanist to the Lord Vicount Fauklands discourse of the infal∣libility of the Church of Rome. 4o. —A Copy of some Papers past at Oxford betwixt the Authour and Mr Cheynell. 4o. —The Christians obligation to peace and charity, delivered in an Ad∣vent Sermon at Carisbrooke Castle, with Nineteen Sermons ad∣ded. 4o. —An address to the Ld Fairfax, with a Vindication thereof. 4o. —A Vindication of the dissertations concerning Episcopacy against the London Ministers in their Jus Divi∣num Ministerii Evangelii. 4o. *—Six Queries resolved. 1o. The way of resolving Controversies, which are not clearly stated and resolved in the Scriptures. 2o. Of Marrying the Wifes Sister. 3o. Of Poligamy and Divorce. 4o. Of Infant Baptism. 5o. Of Impositi∣on of hands for Ordination. 6o. Of Observation of Christmass, and other festivals of the Church. 12. ☞—Of Fundamentals in a Notion referring to practice. 8o. ☞—Of Schism: a defence of the Church of England against the Exceptions of the Roma∣nists. 12o. ☞—A Reply to the Catholick Gen∣tlemens answer to the most ma∣teriall parts of the Book of Schism. 3o. ☞—A second defence of the Book of Schism. 4o. ☞—An Answer to the Animad∣versions
of the dissertations con∣cerning Ignatus Epistles, and the Episcopacy in them asserted. 4o. ☞—A second defence of the Lear∣ned Hug Grotius. 4o. ☞—An account of Mr Cawdry's Triplex diatribe, concerning super∣stition, wil-worship, and Christ∣mass Festivals. 4o. ☞—The baptising of Infants re∣vived and defended against the exceptions of Mr Tombs. 4o. ☞—Dissertationes quatuor quibus E∣piscopatus Jura ex. S. Stripturis, & primaeva antiquitate abstruuntur con∣tra sententiam Blundelli & alio∣rum. 4o. —A Paraenesis, or seasonable exhor∣tatory to all true sons of the Church of England: wherein is Inserted a Discourse of Heresie in defence of our Church against the Romanist. 12o. ☞—A review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on the N. Test. with some Additions and Altera∣tions. 8o. ☞—Against Mr Jeans. 4o. ☞—Mr Huchison. A brief exposition of all the small Prophets. 8o. ☞—An exposition of the Gospel of Jesus Christ according to John. folio. *Mr Harwood. The Lords Prayer un∣clasped, with a Vindication of it against Schismaticks and Here∣ticks. 8o. J. Hayward. The strong helper, offering to bear every mans bur∣den, shewing how in all troubles, to cast our burdens on God, with infallible grounds of comfort for troubled consciences. 8o. —David's teares, or Meditations on the 6, 32, and 130 Psalm. 12o. —The Sanctuary of a troubled soul. 12o. —Meditations of Christs Prayer upon the Cross. 8o. —Of Supremacy in affairs of Reli∣gion. 12o. *Mr Humphrey. A Treatise of the Sa∣crament, or a Vindication of free Admission to the Lords Sup∣per. 12o. —A Reply to Mr Drakes Boundary to the Holy Mount. 8o. ☞—A second Vindication of a free Admission to the Lords Sup∣per. 12o. Mr Harris. Works compleat, con∣taining the Beatitudes, The Cove∣nant of Grace; The threefold state of man; A suplement with sundry Sermons. folio. *Mr Harvey. Sabbato Dominica: Four Propos. tending to reconcile the seeming differences between the Letter of the Law, and Christian Liberty in the Doctrine of the Sabbath or Lords Day. 12o. *The hearts Happiness, A Treatise discovering the difference between true and feigned happiness. 12o. Mr Hackwell. An Apology for the power and Providence of God. folio. ☞Hermes Theolgous, or the Divine Mercury, new descants on old Records. By a sequestred Di∣vine. 12o. Mr Hall. The Pulpit guarded against Schismaticks. 4o. ☞—The beauty of Holiness, de∣scribing the excellency, amiable∣ness, comfort and content which is to be found in the waies of pu∣rity and holiness, wherein is set forth the glorious Attribute of Gods holiness, &c. 8o. ☞—The loathsomeness of long Hair, or a Treatise wherein you have the Question stated, many Arguments against
it produced,and the most materiall Arguments for it refelled, with the concur∣rent judgment of Divines both old and new against it, with an Appendix against painting, naked breasts, &c. 12o. *Mr Horn. ΘΥΡΑ ΑΝΕΩΤΜΕΝΗ: The open door for mans approach to God, or a vindication of the record of God concerning the extent of the death of Christ in its Object; in answer to a Trea∣tise of Mr J. Owen. 4o. *—An Expos. of the 91 Psalm, with Doct. and Uses. 4o. *—Three Sermons of the Learned Dr Eades Dean of Worcester, upon Ephes. 2,19,20,21,22. and Eph. 5.15,16. Psal. 37.35,36,37. Pub. by Mr Horn. 4o. Mr How. A Treatise of universall Re∣demption. 4o. ☞Mr. Hatton. The Psalter of David with Titles and Collects accor∣ding to the matter of each Psalm, with Devotions for aid of all Chri∣stian people in all occasions and necessities. 8o. Commentarii D. An. Hyperii. Doct. ac claris. Theologi. in Epistolam D. Pauli ad Romanos & utramque ad Co∣rinthios. folio. —In Epist. D. Pauli ad Timo. Titum, Philem. & D. Judae. folio. *Mr Hausteed. Ten Sermons on several Sundayes and Festivall daies of the Church. 4o. Mr Heywood. The Hierarchy of the bles∣sed Angels, their Names, Orders, and Offices: The fall of Lucifer, with his Angels. folio. Mr Hynd. A Remonstrance of the holy life and happy death of John Bruen Esq. 8o. Mr. Higgen. The deaf man cured, a Treatise on Mark. 7.32. for the comfort of the deaf. 8o. The House of mourning. folio. Mr Hieron. His Works compleat two Volumes. folio. —An Expos. of the 51 Psalm. 4o. Mr Hooker. A Survey of Church Dis∣cipline. 4o. —The souls exaltation, in a Treatise: First, Of the Souls Union with Christ: Secondly, The Souls Be∣nefit from that Union: Thirdly, The Souls Justification. 4o. —The Christians two chief Lessons, self-denyall and self-tryall. 4o. —The Unbelievers preparation for Christ. 4o. —The Saints Dignity and Duty, with the danger of ignorance and hard∣ness. 4o. —The Souls Humiliation. 4o. —Heavenly Treasury opened in a fruitfull Epos. of the Lords Prayer, with the principles and grounds of Religion briefly unfolded. 12o. —The Souls preparation for Jesus Christ. 4o. —The Souls Vocation or effectuall Calling. 4o. —The Souls Implantation. 4o. —A farewell Sermon. 4o. —Gods Image, or man and his Co∣venant made with him in his state of Innocency. 12o. —Four Treatises. 12o. —The Souls possession. 12o. —The Pattern of Perfection. 12o. —The Souls Invitation to Jesus Christ. 12o. —The Saints Guide. 12o. ☞—The Application of Redem∣ption by the effectual work of the Word and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God. The first eight Books. 8o. ☞—The Application of Redem∣ption, &c. The 9th & 10th Books. 4o.
—The poor doubting Christiandrawn unto Jesus Christ, wherein the main letts and hinderances which keep back men from coming to Christ are discovered, with special helps to recover Gods fa∣vour. 12o. ☞—A Comment upon Christs last Prayer in the 17 of John, wherein is opened the Union Believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious Priviledges thereof. 4o. Mr Hudson. A Visible Church: A vindication of Presbyterial Govern∣ment. 4o. Mr Hersnet. A Cordiall for the afflicted, the necessity and utility of afflicti∣ons, the happiness of those that thankfully receive them, with the misery of those that want them. 12o. —Gods Summons to a general Re∣pentance. 12o. ☞Mr Hopkins. M.A. Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ, or the Doctrine of Sanctification (which is the great∣er part of our Salvation) founded on Christ, who is both the meri∣torious and efficient cause of san∣ctifying grace, purchasing it for, working and perfecting it for his people. 8o. Mr Hoard. The Souls misery and re∣covery, or the grievings of the Spirit. —The Churches Authority asser∣ted. —Gods Love to mankind, manifested by disproving his absolute Decree of their damnation. *Mr Hardy. Eleven Sermons preach∣ed on solemn occasions, collected into one vol. 4o. —The first Epistle general of John unfolded and applied, in 22 Ser∣mons. 4o. *Dr Hill. Six Sermons. 1o. The beauty and sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and brotherly Accommadation budding. 2o. Truth and Love happily married in the Saints, and in the Churches of Christ. 3o. The Spring of strengthening grace in the Rock of Ages Jesus Christ. 4o. The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5o. The best and worst of Paul. 6o. Gods eternal preparations for his dying Saints. 4o. *Dr Holdsworth. The valley of Vision, or a clear sight of sundry sacred Truths, in 21 Sermons: one on Psal. 144.15. Six on Hosea 14.2. Four on Jam. 1.12. One on Psal. 119.111. One on 119.48. Two on 123.2. Two on 84.7. Two on Luk. 23.11,12. Two on 1 Pet. 1.12. 4o. *Mr Herle. A Treatise against Inde∣pendency. 4o. ☞—Wisdome Tripos, or rather its in∣scription, Detur Sapienti in Three Treatises. 1o. Worldly Policy. 2o. Moral Prudence. 3o. Christi∣an Wisdom. The Vanity of the first, Uusefulness of the second, and excellency of the third. 12o. Mr Hudson. The life of Faith in dead times. 12o. ☞Dr Hide. A Christian Legacy: preparation for death, and conso∣lation against it. 12o. ☞Mr Harrison. A Vindication of the holy Scriptures, or manifestation of Jesus Christ the true Messiah already come, being the Christian Antidote against the poisons of Judaism and Atheism of this Age, proved from Sacred Scripture, Antient Historians and Jewish Rabbins. 12o. ☞Mr Hinckley. M.A. Four Sermons: 1o. At Reading Assize, Cant. 7.4. 2o. At Abington,
Psal. 82.1. withtwo at Oxford, from 1 Cor 15.10. & Psal. 58.11. with Matrimonial Instructions to persons of Ho∣nour. 12o. ☞Dr Holladay. Motives to a good life, in Ten Sermons. Of search∣ing the Consc. and last judgment, 1 Cor. 11.31,32. Of spiritual sor∣row, Jer. 9.1. Christians strife, 1 Cor. 9.25. Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. Misery of uncleanness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Racha, Mat. 5.22. The Serp. and Dove, Mat. 10.16. Of Bapt. Gal. 3.27. Bread of Life, Joh. 6.34. Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. All in one vol. 4o. ☞Dr Hylin. Ecclesia Vindicata, or the Church of Engl. justified, in her Reformation, Liturgy, &c. 4o. J. ☞Mr JEnkyn. An Exposition on the Epistle of Jude, with many large and usefull Deductions, with two Tables added. folio. —Four Serm. on sundry Sub∣jects. 4o. —An Answer to J. Goodwin. 4o. ☞—A Serm. at Dr Gouge Fune∣rall. 4o. —A Sermon preached before the Parliament. 4o. Dr Jermin. The exemplary life, and holy death of Mr Jordan. 4o. —A Commentary on the Prov. of Solomon, wherein the litterall sense is considered, and Original He∣brew Texts explained. folio. —A Commentary on Ecclesiastes, wherein the litterall sense is con∣sidered, and Original Hebrew Texts explained. folîo. Dr Jenison of Newcastle. Of Com∣punction or pricking of heart, the time, means, nature, necessity and order of it, and of conversion. 4o. —A Treatise of Gods Promises touching the Elect, and concern∣ing the extent of Christs death. 12o. —Apparelling of Christ. 8o. ☞Mr Jacomb. A Sermon at the Fu∣nerall of Reverend Mr Vines. 4o. ☞—Gods Mercy for mans mer∣cy. A Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4o. The Immortality of the soul. 4o. *Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici: or the Divine right of the Gospel Ministry in general: The necessity of Ordination, the unlawfulness of private mens assuming that Office, with a Justification of the Mini∣sters from the aspersion of Anti∣christianism. 4o. *Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, or the Divine Right of Church-Government, asserted and eviden∣ced by the holy Scriptures, &c. in all which is discovered that Pres∣byteriall Government, by preach∣ing and ruling Presbyters, in Con∣gregational, Classicall, and Synodi∣call Assemblies may lay the truest claim to a Divine right according to the Scriptures. 4o. Jacob's Ladder, consisting of fifteen degrees, or assents to the know∣ledg of God, by the consideration of his creatures and Attri∣butes. 12o. Mr Jones. An Exposition of the Ca∣techism of the Church of Eng∣land. 8o. Mr Jackson. The Key of Knowledg intended for the good of all Chri∣stians, especially for religious Fa∣milies and Schooles. 12o. Bp John. A Survey of man, a Sermon at his Fathers Funerall. 4o. *Mr Jemmat. An Abridgment of all the Workes of the
ReverendDr Preston, reduced into order and contracted for the comfort and benefit of meaner Christi∣ans. 12o. *—The chief Rock, or a setled heart in unsetled times. A short discourse helping Gods people to use their faith to moderate their fears in these sad times of the sor∣rows of Zion. 12o. D. Iuelli Apologia. gr. & lat. 8o. —The same in English. folio. ☞Mr Jeans. A mixture of Scho∣lasticall Divinity with Practicall, in severall Tractates, wherein some of the most difficult knots in Divi∣nity are untied, many dark places of Scripture cleared, sundry errors and heresies refuted. 4o. ☞—Dr Hammond his 'ΕΚΤΕΝΕ'¦ΣΤΕΡΟΝ: Or a greater Ardency in Christs love of God at one time then another, proved to be utterly irreconcileable, with his fulness of habituall grace, the perpetuall happiness, and Impeccability of his soul. 4o. *—The want of Church-Govern∣ment no warrant for a totall omis∣sion of the Lords Supper, with a reply to Mr Fulwood. *Mr Jessey. The exceeding riches of Grace advanced in the conversion of Mrs Sa. Weight. 8o. *Mr T. Jackson. The true Evangelicall Temper, wherein Divinity and Ec∣clesiasticall History are interwoven and mixed. In three Serm. 12o. A Collection of the Works of that holy and profound Divine Dr Jack∣son, President of Corp. Chr. Coll. Oxon. containing the eternal Truth of the Scriptures, and Christian belief thereon wholly depending, manifested by its own light, in two Books of Commentaries up∣on the Apostles Creed; The first containing the positive Grounds of Christian Religion in generall, cleared from all the exceptions of Atheists or Infidels. The second, the Grounds of reformed Religion so firm that the Romanists cannot oppugne them, but the utter over∣throw of the Romish Church, Religion, and Faith. The first vol. with the life of the Au∣thour. folio. *—A second part of Collections, containing Christs exaltation in his Priesthood, mans servitude to sin effected by Christs sitting at the right hand of God, and there of∣ficiating as a most compassionate high Priest in behalf of sinners; or a Treatise of that knowledg of Christ, which consists in the true estimate or experimentall valuation of his death, resurrection, and exercise of his everlasting sacer∣dotall unction in the heavenly Sanctuary, where he now sits at the right hand of God the Fa∣ther. folio. ☞ΜΑΡΑΝΑΘΑ: or Dominus ve∣niet. Commentary upon these Ar∣ticles of the Creed, never before printed, viz. of Christs session at the right hand of God, being made Lord and Christ: coming to judge the quick and dead: Re∣surrection of the body, and life e∣verlasting: with divers Serm. pro∣per attendants to the Tracts, as well as befitting the present times. folio. *The Judgment of the University of Oxford, concerning the solemn League and Covenant, and negative Oathes. 12o. Or in Latin. 8o. Mr Arth. Jackson. An help for under∣standing
the holy Scriptures, the first part being an Exposition uponthe five Books of Moses, viz. Gen. Exod. Levit. Numb. and Deut. wherein many places that at first seem to contradict one another, are reconciled. 4o. —Annotations upon the remaining Historicall part of the Old Testa∣ment, viz. Joshua, Judges, Sam. Kings, Chron. Ezra, Nehem. Ester. The second part. 4o. T. Vet. Biblia Sacra sive lib. Canonici priscae judaeorum Ecclesiae a Deo Tra∣diti; Catini recens ex Hebraeo facti, breviusque scholiis illustrati ab Im. Tremelio, & Fr. Junio; Acces∣serunt libri qui vulgo dicuntur Apocr. lat. redditi, & notis quibusdam aucti à Fr. Junio, Multi omnes quàm ante emend. Ed. & aucti locis innumeris: quibus etiam adjunximus N.T. lib. ex sermone Syro ab eodem Tremel. & ex Graeco à T. Beza in lat. vers. notisque itidem illustra∣tos. folio. Mr Jelinger. The usefulness and excel∣leny of Christ. 8o. ☞Justification Justified, or a Trea∣tise of Justification by faith, where∣in that glorious Doctrine is practi∣cally handled, cleared, and Vin∣dicated from all cavils. By a Learned Divine in the West of England. 4o. K. ☞Mr KEndall against Goodwins Re∣demption redeemed. folio. ☞—Sancti Sanciti, or the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; vindicated a∣gainst J. Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed: with an Appendix to Mr Horne goreing all Universi∣ty-Learning. folio. ☞—Fur pro Tribunali, examen Dia∣logism cui inscribitur fur predestina∣tus, &c. 8o. Dr Kellets Tricenium. folio. —Misselanies. folio. —A return from Algier; In Two Sermons. 4o. Mr Knight. A Concordance of the Bible, containing a survey of The∣ologicall Propositions, with their Reasons and Uses in Holy Scrip∣ture. folio. Mr Knewstub. 4o. King James. Works containing a Pa∣raphrase upon the Revella. Medi∣tations on Rev. 20.6,7,8, & 10. Meditations on 1 Chron. 15.25,26,27,28,29. Demonologie. Instruct. to H. the Prince. The duties of a free King, and his natural subjects. A discourse of the Powder-plot. Apolog. for the Oath of Allegiance against the Pope and Bellarm. A premonition to all Kings and Princes; Proceedings about Con∣tradus Vorstius; The Independen∣cy of the Crowns of Kings against an Oration of Card. Perron. Five severall speeches made in Parlia∣ment, &c. All in one vol. folio. —Royal Aphorismes Divine and Mo∣ral. 12o. —Meditations on Mathew 27.27,28. & 29 verses, or a Pattern for a Kings Inauguration. 12o. —Bazilicon Doron. or his Majesties In∣structions to his dearest Son Henry the Prince. 8o. Kings Charls Mannuall of Meditati∣ons and Prayers. 12o. T. Akenipis. The Imitation of Christ, which are for Wisdom and Godli∣ness most excellent. 12o. Bp King. A Commentary on the Pro∣phet Jonah. 4o. —The Psalms of David in Me∣ter. 12o.
Mr Knox On Predestination. 8o. Mr King. The Marriage of the Lamb. 12o. ☞Psalterium Carolinum, the Devoti∣ons of his Sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings rendered in verse, set for Three Voices, and an Organ, or Theorb by Dr Wilson, Musick Professor of Oxford. folio. L. *Mr LEigh. Critica Sacra, being Ob∣servations on the Radices, or primitive Hebr. words of the Old Testament, with Philologicall and Theologicall Observations on the Greek words of the New Testa∣ment. folio. *—Annotations on the New Testa∣ment, Philosophicall and Theolo∣gicall, wherein the Emphasis and elegancy of the Greek is observed, &c. folio. ☞—A System or Body of Divinity, consisting of ten Books; wherein the fundamentall and main grounds of Religion are opened, the contrary errors refuted, most of the controversies between us, the Papists, Arminians, and So∣cinians discussed and handled, se∣verall Scriptures explained and vindicated from corrupt Glos∣ses. folio. ☞—A Treatise of Religion and Learning, and of Religious and Learned men, a Work seasonable for these times, wherein Religion and Learning have so many ene∣mies. folio. *—A Treatise of Divinity: First, Of the Scripture. Secondly, Of God, that there is a God, &c. Thirdly, Of Decree, Creation, and Providence. 4o. *—The Saints Encouragement in evil times, or observations concerning the Martyrs in general, with some memorable Collections about them, out of Mr Fox his three vol. Mr Luther, the Covenant and Pro∣mises, Afflictions, living and dy∣ing by Faith, &c. 12o. *—A Treatise of Divine Promises, their nature, kinds, excellency, use, properties, and to whom they belong; A declaration of the Co∣venant it self, the bundle of all the Promises, and speciall Promises likewise that concern a mans self, or others, spiritual, temporal, and eternal. 8o. ☞—A notations on Five Poeticall Books of the Old Testament, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. folio. *Mr Lee. Defensive Doubts, Hopes, and Reasons for refusall of the Oath imposed for establishing Epis∣copacy; with a case of Conscience about the Sacrament. 4o. *—Sunday a Sabbath, or a prepara∣tive Discourse for discussion of Sabbatary doubts; being the first part of a greater Work. 4o. *—Against Saltmarsh. 4o. *M. Luthers Mensalia, or Divine Dis∣courses at his Table, which he held with divers Learned men, as Melancton, Casparus, Forsterius, &c. Also concerning Religion, with notable History and other Learn∣ing, with Comforts, Advices, Pro∣phesies, Admonitions, &c. folio. —A Commentary upon the Fifteen Psalms, called Psalmi Graduum, very fruitfull and comfortable for Christian afflicted Consciences to read. 4o. —A Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galations, wherein is shew∣ed the glorious Riches of Gods
grace, and the power of the Go∣spel, and the strength of faith de∣clared to the joyfull comfort of Christian Belivers. 4o. —Christian Liberty. 4o. —Severall excellent Sermons. 8o. —Loci Communes, &c. cum tergemino elencho Capitum videlicet, locorum Sacrae Scripturae, & rerum memo∣rabilium. 4o. Bp Latimer. Sundry fruitfull and learn∣ed Sermons preached on publick occasions, much tending to the edification of all good Christi∣ans. 4o. Bp Lawde. A Conference with Fisher the Jesuit by command of King James. folio. ☞—Seven Sermons on severall oc∣casions; some preached before his late Majesty, on Psal. 121.6,7, the 21.6,7, &c. 12o. Dr Lightfoot. The Harmony, Chronicle, and order of the New Testament, the Text of the four Evangelists Methodized, the story of the Acts of the Apostles Analysed, order of the Epistles manifested, and times of the Revelation observed; all illustrated with variety of Obser∣vations upon the chiefest difficul∣ties, Textuall and Talmadicall, for clearing their sense and language; with a discourse of the fall of Je∣rusalem, and the condition of the Jews in that land afterward. folio. *—A handfull of gleanings out of the Book of Exodus, probable Soluti∣ons of some of the manifest scru∣ples, and explanation of the hard∣est places. 4o. *—The Temple-Service as it stood in the daies of our Saviour. 4o. *—A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles, Chronicall and Cri∣ticall: the difficulties of the Text explained, and the times of the story cast into Annals, &c. 4o. *—The Chistian, Jewish and Ro∣man History of the Year of Christ, 34. 4o. *—The Christian History, Jewish and Roman for the Year of Christ, 37. 4o. *—The Christian History Jewish and Roman for the Year of Christ, 41. 4o. *—Elias Redivivus; In a Sermon on Luke 1.17. 4o. *—A Sermon on Rev. 20.1,2. 4o *—A Sermon on Psal. 4.4. 4o. *—The Harmony, Chronicle, and Order of the Old Testament. 4o. *—The Harmony of the four Evan∣gelists among themselves, and with the Old Testament, first and second part. 4o. *Mr Love. Two Treatises; First, Heavenly Glory. Secondly, Hells Terrour; the one as a spurre to duty, the other as a preservative against security. 4o. *—The Combate between the flesh and the spirit, in 27 Sermons preached a little before his death. 4o. *—A Christian directory to guide him in those severall conditions which Gods Providence may cast him into. 4o. *—Degrees and growth of grace in 15 Sermons, with a Funeral Ser∣mon, the last he preached. 4o. *—Effectuall Calling and Election, wherein a Christian may discern whether he be effectually called and elected, and what course he ought to take that he may attain the Assurance thereof. 4o. *—The Natural mans case. 8o. *—The Zealous Christian taking Heaven by violence. 8o. *—A Christians duty and safety in evil times. 8o.
*—The true Doctrine of mortifica∣tion and sincerity, in opposition to hypocrisie. 8o. *—The Souls Cordiall. 8o. *—The Summe of practicall Divi∣nity of Grounds of Religion. 12o. *Mr Lawrence. An History of Angels, being a Theologicall Treatise of our Communion and Warre with them. 4o. *—On Baptism. 8o. *—On Ordinances. 4o. *Mr Loves Case, containing his Petiti∣ons, Narratives and speech. 4o. ☞Mr Lyford. A discovery of the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, with the tolera∣tion of them, as they are collected and testified by the Ministers of London, in their Testimony to the truth of Jesus. —Of the Ministry. 4o. —The Grounds of Christian Re∣ligion. 8o. *—The Marching the Magistrates Authority, and the Christians true Liberty in matters of Religi∣on. 4o. ☞—An interpretation of the Names of the Hebrew, Caldee, Syriack, Greek or Latin. 12o. Mr Langley. The persecuted Minister in defence of the Ministry, the great Ordinance of Jesus Christ. 4o. *Mr Lockier. England faithfully watcht within her wounds, or Christ as a Father sitting up with his Chil∣dren in their swouning state. 4o. *—Christs Communion with his Church Militant. 8o. *—A Divine discovery of sincerity according to its proper and parti∣cular nature. 8o. *—Balm for bleeding England and Ireland, or seasonable Instructions for persecuted Christians. 8o. *—A Stone cut out of the Moun∣tain; A Lecture Sermon preached at Edenburgh, concerning the mat∣ter of a visible Church. 12o. *—An Olive-leaf, or a bud of the Spring, viz. Christs Resurrection, and its end, viz. The conversion of sinners, and a Christians complete relief. 8o. *—Spiritual Inspection, or a review of the heart; needfull for this loose and lascivious season. 8o. *Letters between the Ld Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby concerning Re∣ligion. 8o. ☞Mr Larkham. The Attributes of God unfolded and applied, where∣in are handled the life, perfection, holiness, benignity, mercy, truth, wisdom, power, justice, love, hatred, anger, Independency, simplicity, eternity, Infinitness, Immutability, Immensity of God. 4o. *—The Parable of the Wedding-Supper explained, wherein the offer of Salvation both to Jews and Gentiles, is pithily and plainly ap∣plied; With a discourse for pay∣ment of Tythes. Sr H. Lind. Via tuta. 12o. —Via de via. 12o. Bp Lake. Of Bath and Wells. His Ser∣mons compleat one vol. folio. Mr Lawson. On the Sabbath. *Holy life and blessed death of the late Vicountess Faukland. 12o. Dr Lushington. The expiation of a sinner, in a Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews. folio. —The Justification of a sinner, be∣ing the main Argment of Paul to the Galatians. folio. Mr Lewis. The right use of Promi∣ses. 12o. Mr Lewthwat. Vindiciae Christi, & obex errori Arminiano, a Plea for Christ.
In three Sermons. 4o. ☞Mr Longland. Quatuor Novissima; Or Meditations upon the four last Things, in four common place dis∣courses. 12o. M. MArlorat. Prophetica Esaiae cum Ca∣tholica expositione Ecclesiastica, &c fo. Martinis. Loci Communes. folio. Mollerus. An exposition on the whole Book of Psalms, Latin. folio. Bp Mourton. Of the Institution of the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of Christ, by some called the Mass of Christ: Eight Books dis∣covering the superstitious, sacrile∣gious, and idolatrous abominations of the Romish Mass, with the con∣sequent obstinacies, overtures of perjuries, and the Heresies discern∣able in the defenders there∣of. folio. —Antidotum adversus Ecclesiae Ro∣manae de merito propriè dicto ex con∣digno venenum: ex Antiquae Ecclesiae Catholi. Testimoniis, locupletissimis confectum: Juxta Eccles. Anglica. & protestantium omnium vnanimem sententiam, in gloriam gratiae divinae meritorum Christi, & ad verae pietatis profectum salutarem. 4o. —The grand Imposture of the Church of Rome. 4o. —Apologia Catholica ex meris Jesuita∣rum contradictionibus conflata, in qua paradoxa. haereses, blasphemiae, Sce∣lera, quae a pontificiis, obiici protestan∣tibus solent, ex ipsorum pontificiorum testimoniis diluuntur omnia. 4o. —Apol. Cathol. pars secunda Judicem Ecclesiae demonstras, (de qua con∣troversia pendent caeterae omnes) in lib. quinque digesta. 4o. *—Ezekiels Wheeles, a Treatise of Divine Providence. 8o. —Causa regia, sive de authoritate & dignitate principium Christianorum dissertatio adversus Bellarmi∣num. 4o. Montacutii Episcopi. de Originibus Ec∣clesiastici Comentationem. folio. —Apparatus ad Origent. Ecclesiastic. collector. folio. *—Mr Milton. Of Reformation. 4o. *—Of Episcopacy against Bp Ʋsher and Bp Hall. 4o. *—Reasons of Church Govern∣ment. 4o. *—An Apology for Smectymnuus. 4o. *—Against Salmatius: Latin. 4o. And the same in folio. ΕΙΚΟΝΟΚΛΑ'ΣΤΗΣ in answer to Ε'ΙΚΩ'Ν ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗ; The por∣traiture of his sacred Majesty in his solitudes and sufferings. 4o. *—The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, restored to the good of both sexes, from the bondage of the Canon Law, to the true mean∣ing of the Scripture in the Law and Gospel compared. 4o. *Mr Matton. Israels redemption re∣deemed, or the Jews generall and miraculous conversion to the faith of the Gospel, and return into their own Land; With our Sa∣viours personall reign on earth. 4o. *Mr Manton. A practicall Commen∣tary, or an Exposition with Notes on the Epistle of James. 4o. *—A Funeral Sermon, or the blessed estate of such as die in the Lord. 4o. ☜—A Sermon preached before the Lord Protector and Parliament, on a publick day of Humilia∣tion. 4o. *Mr Marbury. An Exposition on the prophesie of Habbakuck, with ma∣ny usefull Observations. 4o.
*—An Exposition of the Prophesie of Obadiah. 4o. Mr Meede. Diatribae pars, quat. Discourses on sundry Texts of Scripture, with his Epistles in answer of di∣vers Letters of Learned men, with a view of his life and death. 4o. —A Paraphrase on Peter 2 Epist. and 3 first Chapters. 4o. —The Key of the Revelation, search∣ed and demonstrated out of the natural, proper Characters of the Visions, with a Comment there∣on. 4o. —Triga. 4o. —The Name, Altar, or ΘΥΣΙΑΣ∣ΤΗΡΙΟΝ 4o. —Churches appropriate places to Gods worship. 4o. —The Holiness of Churches in seve∣rall Discourses. 4o. —The Reverence of Gods House. A Sermon. 4o. —Daniel's Weekes. 4o. —Remaines on some passages in the Revelations. 4o. *—Clavis Apocalyptica innatis & insi∣tis visionum, characteribus eruta & demonstrata una cum comment. in a∣pocalypsin. & conjectura de Gogo & Magogo. 4o. —The same Translated. 4o. *—The Apostacy of the latter times, which, according to Divine pre∣diction, the world should wander after the beast, the Mystery of in∣iquity should prevail, &c. Or the Gentiles Toologie of Daemons, i. e. Inferior Divine powers, supposed to be Mediatours between God and man, revived in the latter times amongst Christians in wor∣shiping Angels, Saints, Crosses, &c. all which with the Nature, Original, Progress, of the great fa∣tall and solem Apostacy are cleared. 4o. Mr Mosely. Natural and Divine Con∣templations of the passions and faculties of the soul of man. In three Books. 8o. L. de Moulin. Histo. Reader in Oxon. The Power of the Christian Ma∣gistrate in Sacred Things. 8o. ☞—Paraenesis ad Aedificatores Imperii in Imperio; in qua defenduntur jura Magistratus adversus Mosem Amy∣raldum, & caeteros vindices potesta∣tis Ecclesiasticae Presbyteria∣nae. 4o. ☞—L. Molinaei. Corolarium ad Pa∣raenesim Juam ad Aedificatores Im∣perii in Imperio, in quo Se purgat de consilio & argumento operis suscepti, & insuper disserit. De optima rati∣one disciplinae constituendae in Anglia. De ratione proposita ab H. Vaneo e∣quite aurato. De tolerandis & pu∣niendis haereticis. De natura schisma∣tis. De jure quo disciplina Ecclesi∣arum reformatarum in Gallia ni∣titur. 8o. *Marrow of Modern Divinity, touching the Covenant of Works and Grace, their use and end, both in time of the Old and New Testa∣ment: shewing the middle path between a Legalist and an Antino∣mian, which by Jesus Christ lead∣eth to eternal life: With Mr Bur∣roughs and Mr Strongs Epistle. 8o. The first and second part. Mothers blessing, or the godly and holy counsell of a Gentlewoman to her Children. 12o. Mr Mason. Hearing and doing, the rea∣dy way to blessedness; with Rules for right hearing of Gods Word. 12o. —The Epicures Fast. —The Tribunal of Conscience. —The Cure of Cares. —Contentment in Gods Gifts.
—The new Art of lying covered bythe Jesuits under the veil of Equi∣vocation. Mr Mayer. A Comment on the first five Books of Moses, viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deu∣ternomy. folio. —A Comment, on the Historicall part of the Old Testament, from Joshua to Hester. folio. —A Comment on Job, Psalms, Pro∣verbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. folio. —A Comment on the small and great Prophets. folio. —A Comment on the New Testa∣ment. folio. In all which Volumes are divers trans∣lations and expositions, literall and mysticall, of all the most fa∣mous Commentators propounded and judged of. —On hard places. 4o. —A Catechism. 4o. —Antidote. 4o. —Praxis Theologica, or the Epistle of St James resolved, expounded, and preached upon by way of Doctrine and Use, for the help of young practitioners in Theolo∣gy. 4o. *Mr Sam. Moore. The yearnings of Christs bowels to his languishing friends, wherein the sincerity, ardency, constancy, and superemi∣nent excellency of Jesus Christ, as it works from him towards his friends, is delineated, discussed, and fitly applied. 8o. *—An heavenly wonder, or a Chri∣stian cloathed with Christ, penned to comfort Christs Spouse. Mr Moore. The grounds of Christian Religion by way of Catechi∣sing. 8o. *Mr H. Moore. An Antidote against Atheism, or an appeal to the natu∣rall faculties of the mind of man, whether there be not a God. 8o. ☞—Conjectura Caballistica, or a con∣jecturall Essay of Interpreting the mind of Moses, according to a three-fold Caballa, litterall, philo∣sophicall, mysticall, or divinely Moral. 8o. ☞—Enthusiamus Triumphanus, or a discourse of the nature, causes, kinds, and cure of Enthusiasm; by P. Parresiastes, and prefixed to Alazonomastix his Observations and reply. 8o. *—Philosophicall Poems; The life of the soul: her immortallity, her sleep, unity of souls, memory after death, infinity of worlds, &c. 8o. Mr Morton. The Touchstone of Con∣version, or markes of true Faith, wherein the impenitent sinner is rouzed, the true Believer discover∣ed, and doubting Saint resol∣ved. 12o. —The state of the Church. —The three-fold state of man. Mr Mather. of N.E. A Catechism con∣taining the grounds of Religi∣on. 8o. Dr Maden. Christs tears, with his love and affection to Jerusalem. In se∣verall Sermons on the 19 of Luke 41,42. 4o. Peter de Moulin. D.D. The Christian Combate. —A preparation to fasting and re∣pentance. —An Antidote against popery, being a full discovery of the ridiculous∣ness of the Mass, and other vain ceremonies of the Church of Rome. 8o. ☞—Of Peace and contentment of mind. 8o. ☞Dr Main. Sermons and Letters of defence and Resolutions to some of the late Controversies of the times. *Mr Mossum. Zions prospect in its first
view, presented in a Summary of Divine Truths, consenting with the Faith professed by the Church of England, confirmed from Scrip∣ture and reason, illustrated by in∣stance and Allusion, published for prevention of Apostacy, conviction of Heresie, confutation of Error, and establishment in the Truth. 4o. ☞—The Preachers Tripartite, in Three Books: First, To raise de∣votion in Meditation, upon Psal. 25. Secondly, To administer com∣fort, by conference with the soul in particular cases of Conscience. Thirdly, To establish truth and peace against Heresies and Schisms. folio. *Mr Steph. Marshalls Works all col∣lected into one volume. 4o. ☞—The Power of the Civil Magi∣strate in Matters of Religion, pub. by Mr Firmin. *Mr Montague. Misselanea spiritualia, or devout Essay; The first and se∣cond part. 4o. ☜Manchester Almondo, contemplatio mortis & immortalitatis: The sixth Edition. 12o. Mr Merlin. A Comment on Hester. 8o. Dr Morgan. The Christian Diurnall, or daily duties to be practised to∣wards God, our neighbours, and our selves. 12o. Mr Tho. Moore. An undiscovering of mysterious deceits, by which ma∣ny are kept from repentance, and entering the door of life. 4o. ☞Medici Catholicon, or a Catholick Medicin for the diseases of cha∣rity. 8o. Mr Mico. Spiritual food and physick, in a large Catechism of the prin∣cipall grounds of Christian Reli∣gion. 8o. ☜Mr Morrice. The new inclosures broken down, and the Lords Sup∣per laid sorth in common for all Church-members, having a dog∣maticall faith, and not being scan∣dalous; in a Diatribe and defence thereof, against such as administer the Lords Supper in a select Com∣pany. 4o. ☞Mr Murcott. His Works containing circumspect walking, on Ephes. 5.15,16. Parable of ten Virgins, Mat. 25. from vers. 1.10,14. The Son of Righteousness, Mat. 4.8. Christ willing to receive sinners, John 6.37. All published by Mr Caryl, Mr Manton, Mr Eaten, &c. 4o. N. *Mr NEwman. A Compleat Con∣cordance of the whole Bible. folio. ☞New-Engl. Platform of Church discipline, gathered out of the Word of God, and agreed upon by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches assembled in the Sy∣nod at Cambridge, to be presented to the Churches and general Court for their consideration had accep∣tance in the Lord. 4o. ☞Mr Needler. Expository Notes, with practicall observations towards the opening of the first five Chapters of Genesis. By way of Expos. in severall Lords daies Exe∣cises. 8o. ☞Mr Nicholson. A full and plain ex∣position of the Church Cate∣chism. 4o. Mr Napier. An Exposition of the whole Revelation of St John, with certain Oracles of Sibilla agreeing therewith. 4o. ☞Mr Norton. N.E. The Orthodox Evangelist,
wherein many greatEvangelicall Truths (not a few whereof are much opposed and ecclipsed in this perillous houre of the passion of the Gospel) are briefly discussed and cleared, as a further help for the begetting and establishing of the faith which is in Jesus; also the state of the bles∣sed in their dissolution and resur∣rection. 4o. —Responsio ad totam Quest. sylogen à clariss. viro D. Guil. Apolonio ad componendas controversias, quasdam circa politiam Eccles. in Anglia nunc temporis agitas Spectan∣tem. 8o. *—A discussion of that great point of Divinity, the sufferings of Christ, and the Questions about his righteousness, active and pas∣sive; in answer to Pinchins meri∣torious price. 8o. *—His Apollogea. 8o. *—A Treatise of the Doctrine of Godliness, or a living unto God, being a Body of Divinity by way of Quest. and Answ. 8o. Mr Nowell. The grounds and princi∣ples of Religion by way of Cate∣chism. 8o. ☞Mr Negus. A Treatise of Faith; wherein methodically is handled the nature of true, saving, justifying faith, inopposition unto counterfeit: Also divers helps unto saith are prescribed, hinderances thereun∣to removed, and many other Go∣spel truths clearly discussed. 4o. *Mr Newcomen. Sermons on sundry Subjects. 4o. ☞Mr Noy. The Temple Measured, or a brief survey of the Temple Mysticall, which is the Instituted Church of Christ, wherein is so∣lidly and modestly discussed most of the material Quest. touching the constitution and Government of the visible Church Militant. 4o. *Newcastle Ministers, viz. Mr Weld, Mr Hammond, Mr Prideaux, Mr Cole, and Mr Durant. A false Jew, or a wonderfull discovery of a Scot, baptized at London for a Christian, circumcised at Rome to act a Jew, rebaptized at Hexham for a Belie∣ver by Tillanbat, found out at New∣castle to be a cheat. 4o. ☞—The perfect pharasie under Monkish holiness, opposing the Fundamentall Principles of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Scrip∣ture practises of Gospel-worship, manifesting himself in the gene∣ration of men, called Quakers, or a Preservative against their gross Blasphemies and horrid delusi∣ons. 4o. ☞—A further discovery of that ge∣neration of men, called Quakers, by way of reply to an Answer of Ja. Nayler to the perfect pharasie, wherein is more fully laid open their Blasphemies, notorious Equi∣vocations, Lyings, Wrestings of the Scripture, Raylings, and other detestable Principles and Practi∣ces. 4o. Mr Nichols. Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, proving that the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England is the only true Catholick and unchangeable Faith of Gods Elect. 4o. —A Catechism of the Principles of Religion. 8o. *Mr Nichols. Life and death of M. Igna. Jurdain. A Sermon in Exce∣ter. 120. O. Mr OTes. An explanation of the Epistle of St
Jude, delivered in One andForty Sermons in sundry Le∣ctures. folio. ☞Dr Owen. The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, explained and con∣firmed, or the certain permanen∣cy of their acceptation with God, and sanctification from God mani∣fested, and proved, from the eter∣nal Principles, effectual causes, external means thereof, &c. a∣gainst Jo. Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed. *—A Vision of unchangeable free mercy in sending the means of grace to undeserving sinners. 4o. *—A Sermon on Jeremiah 15.19,20. With a discourse about toleration, and the duty of Magistrates in mat∣ters of Religion. 4o. *—Eben-ezer. An exposition of the first ten verses of the 3d of Ha∣bakkuk. 5o. *—The shaking and translating of Heaven and Earth. 4o. *—The Branch of the Lord, the beauty of Zion, or the glory of the Church in its relation unto Christ. 4o. *—The Advancement of the King∣doms of Christ, shaking the King∣doms of the world. *—A Sermon on Daniel 7.15,16. *—The labouring Saints dismission to rest, a Sermon on the Lord Deputy Iretons Funeral. 4o. *—The stedfastness of the Promises, and sinfulness of staggering. 4o. *—Of the death of Christ, the price he paid, and the purchase he made, also against Mr Baxter. 4o. *—A display of the errors of Armi∣nianism, concerning the old pela∣gian free will: the new goddess contingency, &c. *—Salus Electorum sanguis Jesu. A Treatise of the Redemption and reconciliation that is in the blood of Christ, with the merit thereof, and the satisfaction wrought thereby. 4o. *—The duty of Pastors and people distinguished. 4o. ☞—Vindiciae Evangelicae, or the Mystery of the Gospel vindicated, and socinianism examined, in the consideration and confutation of Biddles Catechism, and the Raco∣vian Catechism, with a vindicati∣on of the Testimonies of Scrip∣ture, concerning the Deity and sa∣tisfaction of Jesus Christ, from the perverse expositions and Interpre∣tations of them by Hugo Grotius in his Annotations on the Bible, also somewhat about the death of Christ against Mr Baxter. 4o. ☞—Of the mortification of sin in Believers, the necessity, nature, and means of it, with a resolution of sundry cases of conscience there∣unto belonging. 8o. *—Escol. 12o. *—Diatriba, de Justitia Divina. 8o. *—A Review of the Annotations of H. Grotius, on the Deity and sa∣tisfaction of Christ, in answer to Dr Hammond. 4o. ☞—Of schism, the true nature of it dicovered and considered, with reference to the present differences in Religion. 8o. ☞—Of Communion with God. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each person distinctly; in Love, Grace, and Consola∣tion. 4o. ☞—A review of the nature of schism, with a Vindication of the Congregationall Churches in Engl. from the imputation thereof, a∣gainst Mr Cawdry's Indep. a great schism. 8o. ☞—Gods Work in founding Zion, and his
peoples duty thereupon.A Sermon before the Parliament, Sep. 17. 1656. from Esa. 14.32. 4o. ☞—Gods presence with a people, the Spring of their prosperity; with their special Interest in abi∣ding with him. A Sermon before the Lord Protector and Parliam. from 2 Chron. 15.2. 4o. Osiander. A Manuall of Controver∣sies. 8o. P. B PRideaux. Nine Sermons: Ephe∣sus backsliding. First fruits of the resurrection; Hezekiah's sick∣ness; The breach of Ʋzzah; A consecration Sermon of Exeter Coll. New Chappell; Wisdomes Justification; Heresies Progress; A plot for preferrment; The pa∣tronage of Angels. 4o. *—Viginti-duae Lectiones de totidem Religionis capitibus praecipuae hoc tem∣pore controversis, prout publice habe∣bantur Oxoniae in vesperiis quibus ac∣cesserunt tredecim orationes in augu∣rales, de totidem Theologiae Apicibus scitu non Indignis, prout in promotione Doctorum in comitiis habebantur. Subnectuntur sex conciones pro more habitae adartium Baccalaureos in die inerum. folio. *—Fasciculus controversarum, ad Ju∣niorum, aut occupatorum captum sic colligatus, ut in praecipuis fidei api∣cibus compendiosè informentur, aut sparsim aliàs lecta vel audita fa∣cilius recolnt & expendant: Ed Sec. emend. & auctior inis libellis posthu. ejusdem Reverend. praesulis; 1o. Theolog. Scholast. Syntag mati. 2o. Conciliorum Synopsi. 4o. ☞—Euchologia; or the Doctrine of practicall praying; being a Lega∣cy left to his Daughters in private, directing them to such manifold uses of our Common Prayer-Book, as may satisfie upon all occasions, without looking after new Lights from extemporall flashes. 12o. ☞—The Doctrine of conscience framed according to the form in the Common Prayer, left as a Le∣gacy to his Wife. 12o. *—Theologiae Scholasticae Syntagma Mnemonicum & conciliorum Synop∣sis. 4o. ☞—Manuductio ad Theologiam Pole∣micam. 8o. ☞Mr Pennington. Expositions on the first Epistle of John, and other places of Scripture. ☞Pattern of female perfection, pre∣sented to all Women who desire to live under the government of vertue, and are obedient to her Laws, illustrated with divers Fi∣gures: by a person of honour. ☞Piscatoris. Commentarii in omnes Li∣bros veteris & Nov. Testam. quibus continentur. 1o. Analysis logica singulorum librorum & capitum. 2o. Scholia in singula capita. 3o. Ob∣serva. locorum Doctrinae è singulis Capit. Three vol. folio. —His Aphorisms Englished —Of Justification. Mr Parr. An Exposition of the Epistle of St Paul to the Romans. folio. —Grounds of Divinity, discovering the Mysteries of Christian Religi∣on: with an Exhortation to the Scriptures. 12o. Mr Pilkintons Parrabella, or the grounds of the new Roman Catholick, and the Antient Christian Religion compared together. 4o. The penitent Pilgrim. 8o. D. Dav. Parei. Operum Theologicorum partes quatuor: in quibus commen∣tarii & Adversaria Biblica, in om∣nes se Scripturae tuam
cánonicos quàmApocryphos Libros. In Three vol. folio. —Irenicum sive de unione & sinodo Evangelicorum concilanda Liber ve∣tivus paci Ecclesiae & desideriis pa∣cificorum dictatus. 4o. —Corpus doctrinae Christianae Ecclesia∣rum à papatu reformatarum con∣tinens, Catecheticas, Explicationes D.Z. Ʋrsini. 8o. —Ad. Corinth. Priorem St P. Episto. Coment. 4o. —A Comentary upon the Divine Revelation of St John, Transla. by Arnold. folio. —De universa Theologia Orthodoxa & omnes prope theologorum hujus tempo∣ris controversiae perspicuae & variae ex∣plicantur. 8o. Dr Preston. The new Covenant, or the Saints Portion, unfolding the All-sufficiency of God: Mans up∣rightness, and the Covenant of Grace. 4o. —Life Eternal, or a Treatise of the Knowledg of the Divine essence and Attributes. In Eighteen Ser∣mons. 4o. —The Breastplate of Faith and Love, wherein is the ground and exer∣cise of Faith and Love, as they are set upon Christ their Object, and expressed, in Gods Word ex∣plained. 4o. —The Saints Qualification. 4o. —The Saints Mortification. 4o. —The golden Scepter. 4o. —On Prayer. 4o. —The Divine Love of Christ. 4o. —Lively Faith. 4o. —Four godly Treatises. 4o. —Court Sermons. 4o. —A Position delivered in Cambridge, concerning the Irresistableness of coverting Grace. 4o. —The only Love of the chiefest of ten thousand, shewing the Motives, Means, Marks, and Kinds of our love to Christ. 12o. —The Doctrine of the Saints In∣firmities, delivered in sundry Ser∣mons. 12o. —A preparation to the Lords Sup∣per. In three Sermons. 12o. *Mr Palmer. Memorials of Godliness and Christianity: with the way of making Religion ones bu∣siness, &c. 12o. *—The Christians freedom by Christ, or Gods deed of gift to the Saints. 12o. *—The Tempestious Soul calmed by Jesus Christ. 12o. *—Against free Admission to the Sacrament. 12o. The famous Mr Perkins Works com∣pleat. In three vol. folio. —A golden Chain, or description of Theology; the order of the causes of mans salvation and dam∣nation, according to the Word of God. 12o. —The whole Treatise of the cases of Conscience in sundry Le∣ctures. 4o. ☞—The Abridgment of the Body of Divinity. 12o. —The grounds of Religion, or the six Principles by way of Cate∣chism. 8o. Mr Prinn. The perpetuity of a Regene∣rate mans estate; That such as are truly regenerated and engrafted into Christ by a lively faith, can never finally nor totally fall from grace. 4o. *—Against Lovel-ocks. 4o. *—Against Stage-Playes. 4o. *—Against drinking Healths. 4o. *—On the beginning of the Sab∣bath. 4o. ☞—On the Sacrament. Pope proved Antichrist. 4o.
—Apollo Evangelium; for the trueDoctrine of the Divine predestina∣tion concorded with the Ortho∣dox Doctrine of Gods free grace, and mans free will. 4o. *Mr Powell. Christ and Moses excel∣lency, or Sion and Synais glory, being a Triplex Treatise of the two Covenants of the Gospel and the Law, directing to the right understanding of both. 12o. *—Saving saith set forth in three Di∣alogues, betwixt Christ and a Publican, Pharasie, and Unbeli∣ver. 12o. *Purnell. The way to Heaven dis∣covered, and the stumbleing blocks cast in by the world, flesh, and the Devil, removed. 12o. *—Shuttle. 12o. *—A word to those of the world, and two to those that are chosen out of the world, or good tydings for sinners, great joy for Saints. 12o. ☞Mr Peacock. His grievous Visitation, and dreadfull desertation in his Sickness, with the sweet and gra∣cious issue in his comfortable and blessed end. 12o. Mr Pagit. The History of the Bible briefly collected by way of Questi∣ons and Answers. 12o. *—Heresiography, or a description of all the Heresies and Sectaries of the latter times. 4o. Posy of godly Prayers, fitted for every Christian to use. 12o. Poor mans rest, founded upon Mo∣tives, Meditations, and Prayer, ex∣pressing to the inward man true consolation in all kinds and times of affliction. 12o. Practice of Piety, directing a Christi∣an how to walk, that he may please God. 12o. Posy of flowered Prayers, containing sundry Meditations and Prayers, gathered out of Sacred Writ. 12o. Pensive mans Practice, fitted with Prayers for all occasions. 12o. ☞Mr Poole. The Blasphemer slain with the Sword of the Spirit, or a plea for the godhead of the holy Ghost, wherein the Deity of the Spirit is proved against the Cavils of John Biddle. 12o. Mr Peters. A good work for a good Magistrate, or a short ut to a great quiet, by honest, homely, plain English, hints given from Scripture, reason and experience, for regulateing most cases in the Common-wealth, concerning Re∣ligion, Mercy, and Justice. 12o. *Mr Parker. of N.E. The Visions and Prophesies of Daniel expoun∣ded, wherein the mistakes of for∣mer Interpreters are modestly discovered, also touching the two Witnesses, the new Jerusalem, the thousand years, &c. 4o. Mr Peck. The great danger of little sinnes. 12o. Pathway to Patience. 12o. Paraphrase on Job, written in French by J. E. Sennault. Father of the Oratory, dedicated to the Card. of Richliu. 12o. *Publick Sermons preached before the Parliament on sundry occasi∣ons, bound up in severall vol. 4o. *Pacification between the Lutheran and reformed Churches. 8o. *Mr Philips. A Christian Alphabet of the grounds of knowledg unto salvation, shewing the most select places of Scripture, whereon our Christian faith is grounded. 12o. —A Treatise of Hell. 12o. —Of the Genealogy of Christ. 12o. *Dr Potter. An Interpretation of the Number 666. shewing that this Number doth exactly discribe that
state of Government, to which all other notes of Antichrist do a∣gree: added also Mr Medes Judg∣ment thereupon. 4o. Dr Playfere. That eloquent Divine, his Works collected into one vol. viz. The Mean in mourning, &c. 8o. Mr Pemble. An Introduction to the right receiving of the Sacra∣ment. 12o. *Mr Pawson. A Vindication of free grace; proving, first, That we are not elected as holy, but that we should be holy, and that election is not of kinds, but persons. Se∣condly, That Christ did not by his death intend to save all men, and for those he intended, he did not die for them only, if they would believe. 4o. ☞Protestants practice, or a compleat Christian, being the true and perfect way to the caelestiall Canaan, fit for all Families: by a reverend Father of the Church of England. 12o. *Pulpit Sparks, being set Formes of Prayers used before Sermon, by Dr Taylor, Dr Gillingham, Dr Heuit, and other Eminent Divines. ☞Pelecanicidium, or the Christian Advisor against self-murder. 2o. A Guide to the Land of the living, for the discontented that are in the dangerous path to self-mur∣der. 3o. The Pilgrims pass to the Land of the living. 8o. Mr Pilkinton on Nehemiah. 4o. Mr Playferman on Romans. 4o. *St Pauls. Progress upon earth, about a divorce betwixt Christ and the Church of Rome, by reason of her desoluteness and excess, recomen∣ded to all tender consciences, ren∣dered into english from Itallian. 8o. Mr Peirson. Excellent encouragements against afflictions, or Expos. of four select Psalms, viz. 27, 84, 85. & 87. Containing Davids Triumph over distress: his hearts desire: the Churches exercise under a∣ffliction, and the great Charter of the Church. 4o. *Mr Pinchin. Of the Sabbath. 1o. The time when the first Sabbath was ordained, negatively not in the time of Adam's Innocency: Af∣firmatively, after Adam's fall and Re-creation. 2o. The Manner how the first Sabbath was ordain∣ed. The second part is a Treatise of holy time, concerning the limits of the Lords day, when it begins and ends. 4o. *—The meretorious price of our re∣demption, reconciliation and Justi∣fication. 4o. Mr J. Paget. A defence of Church-government exercised in Presbyte∣riall and Synodall Assemblies; ac∣cording to the practice of the re∣formed Churches, touching 1. The power of a particular Eldership a∣gainst those that plead for a meer popular government, especially Mr Aysworth, &c. 2o. the Autho∣rity of Classis and Synods against the Patrons of Independency, &c. 4o. —Meditations on Death. 12o. —Family Duties. 12o. *Mr Peirce. A Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation. 4o. ☞—The Divine Philanthropis de∣fended against the declamatory attempts of certain late printed Papers, intituled a correptory cor∣rection in Vindication of some Notes concerning Gods De∣crees, &c. ☞—The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represen∣ted the great discouragements from sinning which the
sinner re∣ceivethfrom sin it self. 8o. ☞Mr Porter. God incarnate, shewing that Jesus Christ is the only and most high God; in Four Books: Containing Animadversions on Dr Lushingtons Commentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. ☞—Tri Ʋnus Deus, or the Trinity and Unity of God, &c. 8o. Q. *QƲestio qoud libetica; A Discourse enquiring the lawfulness of taking interest for Money. 12o. R. A. RIveti Pictavi S. Theo. Doct. & Prof. in Achad. Batava. Cathol. Orthodox. oppositus Catholico Pa∣pistae in quatuor par. in quibus con∣tinentur summa controvers. de religi∣one, quae inter Orthod. & pontificios agitantur. instituiturque examen accuratum, & refutatio omnium & singulorum, quae ad causae pontificiae subsidium adduxit, Guil. Bailius Je∣suita, in Epit. seu Catech. Contro∣vers. folio. —Libertatis Ecclesiasticae defen∣sio. 8o. —An Exposition of the whole Bible in Latin. folio. Mr Randall. Twenty Nine Lectures of the Church, the necessity of separation from the Church of Rome. 4o. Mr Rodgers. An Exposition on the first Epistle of Peter. folio. —Seven Treatises; containing such Directions as is gathered out of the holy Scriptures, leading and gui∣ding to true happiness, both in this life, and that which is to come. 4o. —Practicall Catech. or a view of those principall Truths of Word, which most directly tend to life and Godliness. 4o. —A Treatise of the two Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. 4o. —Practice of Christianity or Epito∣my of his seven Treatises. 12o. —On Love in all tha Branches of it. 12o. —On Faith. 12o. Mr Tym. Rodgers. Righteous mans E∣vidence for Heaven. 12o. —A faithfull friend true to the soul, or the souls self-examination, pre∣paring it self for the great tryal of life or death, eternal in the other world. 12o. —The Christians Jewel of Faith or the ready way to believe and be saved. 12o. —News from Heaven. 12o. —On the Parable, lost Son, lost sheep, lost groat penitent Citi∣zen. 4o. —Vinyard of Palestina. 4o. Mr Rodgers. A Commentary on the whole Book of Judges. folio. Dr Reynolds. Three Treatises: 1o. Va∣nity of the Creature. 2o. Sinful∣ness of Sin. 3o. Life of Christ. 4o. —Animalis Homo conscio Latine habita Academicos Oxoniense. 4o. —Shields of the earth. A Sermon on Psal. 47.9. 4o. —Peace of the Church. A Sermon on Rom. 14.19. 4o. —Self-denyal opened and applied, In a Sermon on Mathew 16.24. 4o. —Israel's Prayer in time of trouble, with Gods gracious▪ Answer, in an Exposition of the 14 of Ho∣sea. 4o.
—An Explication on the 110 Psal. touching the exaltation of Christ, the Scepter of his Kingdom, Cha∣racter of his Subjects, his Priest∣hood, Victories, Sufferings, &c. 4o. —A Treatise of the passions and facul∣ties of the soul of man, with the severall dignities and corruptions thereunto belonging. 4o. —An Expos. of Haggie. In 15 Ser∣mons. 4o. —Meditations of the holy Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper. 4o. ☞—Joy in the Lord. A Sermon on Phil. 4.4. 4o. Mr Rutherford. A survey of the spiri∣tual Antichrist; Opening the se∣crets of Familism, Antinomianism, against Dell, Saltmarsh, Chrisp, Denn. In which is revealed, the rise and spring of those errors, and Luther vindicated. 4o. —The Divine right of Church-Go∣vernment and excommunication, or a peaceable dispute for the per∣fection of the holy Scriptures in point of Ceremonies and Church-Government; to which is added a Treatise of Scandall. 4o. —Disputatio scholastica de Divina pro∣videntia adversus Jesuitas, Armini∣anos, Socinianos, de Domino Dei, &c. 4o. —Christs dying and drawing sin∣ners to himself: or a survey of our Saviour in his Soul-sufferings, his loveliness in his death, and efficacy thereof: wherein the flowings and heightnings of free grace are open∣ed, in sundry Sermons upon the 12 of John, from 27 to 33. Where also are interjected some necessary digressions touching Antinomian Errors, with a short Vindication of the Doctrine of Protestants, from the Arminian pretended uni∣versality of Christs dying for all, the moral and feigned way of re∣sistable conversion of Sin∣ners, &c. 4o. *—The due right of Presbyters, or a peaceable plea for the Govern∣ment of the Church of Scot∣land, &c. 4o. *—The tryal and Triumph of Faith, or an exposition of the History of Christs dispossessing of the Daugh∣ter of the woman of Canaan, opening the Victory of Faith, the condition of those that are tempt∣ed, the excellency of Jesus Christ and free grace. 8o. ☞—The Covenant of life opened, or a Treatise of the Covenant of Grace, especially of the Covenant of sureteship or redemption, be∣tween the Lord and the Sonne Jesus Christ, and the Seal of Bap∣tism. 4o. *—A free disputation against pre∣tended Liberty of conscience, re∣solving doubts moved by Mt John Goodwin, Dr Tayler, the Belgick Arminians and Socinians, with o∣thers contending for licentious to∣leration of Sects. 4o. ☞A Rationale on the Common-Prayer. 8o. *Mr Row. C.C.C. Oxon. Tragicome∣dia. A Relation of the wonder∣full hand of God at Winty, in a Comedy acted, where was some slain, many hurt, with sundry re∣markeable passages: With Three Sermons preached on that occasi∣on, from Rom. 1.18. which may serve as a check to the growing A∣theism of this present age. 4o. Mr Neh. Rogers. A Mirrour of Mercy, and that on Gods part and mans, set out in two Parrables. 1o. The penitent Citizen, or
Mary Magde∣lens conversion, on Luke 7.40,41, &c. 2o. The good Samari∣tan, on Luke 10.30,—38. 4o. ☞Mr J. Robinson. M.A. The birth of a day: being a Treatise Theo∣logicall, Morall, and Historicall, representing, as in a Scene, the vicissitudes of humane things, with their severall causes, and Sacred uses. 8o. ☞Mr Rouse. His Works, viz. Treati∣ses and Meditations dedicated to the Saints, and to the excellent throughout the three Nations. —Diseases of the time, attended by their Remedies. —The Oyl of Scorpions; The Mi∣series of these time turned into Medicins, and curing them∣selves. —The only remedy that can cure a people when all other remedies fail. —Catholick Charity, complaining and maintaining, that Rome is un∣charitable, against a Book called Charity mistaken. —Meditations, endeavouring the E∣dification and repairation of the House of God. —The Heavenly Achademy. —The great Oracle, even the main Fram and Body of the Scriptures, resolving the Question, whether in mans free-will and common grace, or in Gods speciall and ef∣fectuall grace, stands the safety of man, and the glory of God by mans safety. —The Mysticall Marriage, or expe∣rimentall discoveries of the Hea∣venly Marriage between a Soul and her Saviour. —The Art of happiness. 1o. Search∣ing the happiness of man out. 2o. Discovering and approving it. 3o. Means to attain and increase it. All in one vol. folio. —David's Psalms in Merer. In 8o. And 24o. —Mella Patrum per prima nascentis & patientis Ecclesiae tria secula. 8o. *Mr Roberts. Clavis Bibliorum. The Key of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasury of the holy Scrip∣tures, whereby the order, names, times, Pen-men, occasion, scope, and principal parts containg the subject matter of the Books of Old and New Testament, are o∣pened for the help of the weakest capasity in the understanding the whole Bible. Two vol. 8o. *—Believers evidences for eternal life, whereby persons truly rege∣nerate may divers waies discover their present state of grace, and title unto Glory. 8o. —On Sacrament. 8o. —The broken heart. 4o. *Mr Richardson. The Saints desire, or a Cordiall for a fainting soul, de∣claring that in Christs Righteous∣ness only, and in nothing else there is life, happiness, peace, strength, comfort, joy, and all fulness of per∣fection; also the happy state of a man in Christ, the life he lives, wherein he is exercised, his expe∣riences and desires to enjoy God. 12o. *—Divine Consolations, or the teach∣ings of God. In three parts. 12o. ☞Mr Rayner. Precepts for Christian practice, or the rule of the new Creature modl'd, containing du∣ties to be daily observed by every Believer, with directions to govern the thoughts and the affections: with an Epistle of Mr Mantons. 8o. ☞—Rules for Government of the tongue, with directions in six par∣ticular weighty cases, confessing our faults to
men, confession of Christ before men, reprehensionof others. 8o. Christian Communication, Urbanity and Eloquence, self-condemn∣ing, &c. 8o. Reformed Presbytry opposing tyran∣icall Presbytry and prelaticall E∣piscopacy. 12o. Mr Resbury. The lightless Starre, or Mr John Goodwin discovered a Pe∣lagion, Socinian, with Athesis of Dr Preston concerning the Irristi∣bility of converting grace. 8o. ☞Bp Richardson. Choice Observati∣ons and explanations upon the Old Testament, containing many remarkeable matters, as Additions to the Assemblies Annotations: al∣so Observations on the whole Book of Genesis. folio. ☞Mr Robinson. The Christian com∣pleatly armed; a Treatise of Christian Armour, cleary opening every thereof; pressing to the put∣ting of it on, and instructing us so to use it, as we may not be foil∣ed in times of temptation. 8o. ☞—The Saints longing after their heavenly Countrey. A Sermon at the meeting of the Cheshier Gentle∣men. ☞—Christ all in all, or severall sig∣nificant similitudes by which the Lord Jesus Christ is discribed in the holy Scriptures. Published by Mr Ash, Mr Calamy, and Mr Tay∣lor. 8o. ☞—The Triumph and Unity of Truth intended, as a preservative against the many Errors and un∣happy Divisions of these times in point of Religion. 8o. ☞Mr Raworth. Jacob's Ladder, or the Protectorship of Sion, laid on the shoulders of the Almighty, in a discription of the sufficiency of Providence, suitable in the times of temptation. 8o. ☞—Work and reward of a Believer for his entrance into Glory. 2o. Bles∣sedness, or God and the world weighed in the Ballance. 8o. Mr Robotham. An exposition on the whole Book of Canticles, wherein the Text is explained, and usefull Observations raised thereon. 4o. ☞—The Mystery of the two Wit∣nesses unvailed, being a discription of their Persons, Office, time, manner of Prophesie, acts, and sufferings, death and resurrection: with the Consequences that follow, with the Kingdom of Christ explain∣ed. 8o. *—The preciousness of Christ to Belivers. 8o. *Mr Roborough against Goodwin, about Justification. 4o. *Mr Reeve. Christian Divinity con∣tained in the Divine Service of the Church of England. 4o. *—The Communion Book Cate∣chism expounded. 4o. *—Lazarus rest. A Sermon at the Funerall of Mr Ʋdall Mini∣ster. 4o. *Mr Reading. A grain of Incense, or Supplication for the peace of Je∣rusalem. *—An Evening Sacrifice, or Prayer for a Family in these times of ca∣lamity. 8o. *Mr Ross. The Picture of Consci∣ence consisting in the Truths to be believed and practised, with the vices and heresies to be reject∣ed. 12o. —An Exposition on the first four∣teen Chapters of Genesis. —Meditations on Predestination. —Medicus Medicatus, against Dr Brown's Religio Medici. 8o. —Reliquae Sacrae Carolinae: or the Work of
that great Monarch, and glorious Martyr K. Charles thefirst, collected together, and di∣gested in order to their severall subjects Civil and Sacred. 8o. ☞The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000, seeming con∣tradictions in the Old and New Testament are fully reconciled, ne∣cessary for all that desire to study the Sacred Scriptures aright unto salvation. 8o. ☞A Relation of a Disputation be∣tween Dr Griffeth, and Vavassor Powell, wherein the Orthodox Ministry is Vindicated. Mr Rodgers. Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England. 4o. *Mr Rogers. A Tabernacle for the Son, or an Idea of Church dis∣cipline. 4o. Mr J. Reading. A Guide to the holy City, lor Directions and helps to an holy ife, 4o. Mr Ricraft. A Nosegay of rank smel∣ling Flowers, such as grow in J. Goodw. Garden. 4o. *Pet. Ravanelli. Ʋticensis Occitani Bib∣liotheca Sacra, seu, Thesaurus Scrip∣ture Canonicae Amplissimus: in quo ea, quae in utroquae foedere extant, non Theologica modo, sed etiam Phi∣sica, Ethica, Oeconomica, Politica, &c. Accurata logicaque metbodo, pertractantur, ratioque dextre colli∣gend; locos communes, atque adeo, utilit er legendi Sacras, & ad earum usum referendi aliorum authorum lectionem indicatur: In duas partes divisum. folio. ☞Mr Row. Westminster. Mans duty in magnifying Gods Work. In a Sermon on a publick Day of Thanksgiving before the Parlia∣ment, for the great Victory ob∣tained against the Spanish West-Id a Fleet. Upon Job 36.24,25. 4o. ☞Mr Rc. Late Meron C. Oxf. The Spirits Touchstone, or the teach∣ings of Christs Spirit on the hearts of Believers, by way of con∣tradistinction to the spirit of Anti∣christ, or of this world in the heart of Unbelievers, which a man may know whether he have the reall Teachings of Gods Spirit or not. 8o. Mr A. Ross. The picture of Consc. consisting in the Truths to be belie∣ved and practised, with the voices to be avoided, with heresies to be rejected. 12o. S. *Mr SHute. Sarah and Hagar, or the Sixteen Chapters of Genesis opened, in Nineteen Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labours of that Orthodox Divine: J.S. B.D. Rector of N.W. folio. —An Exposition on the Eighth Chapter of Exodus, in Nine Serm. Or the Plague of Frogs infflicted and removed: With a Serm. at Mr Ʋdalls Funerall. 4o. Dr Sibbs. A Fountain opened, or the Mystery of godliness reveal∣ed. 4o. —Angels Acclamations, or the Na∣tivity of Christ celebrated by the heavenly Host. 4o. —Churches Riches by Christs Po∣verty. 4o. —Rich Poverty of the poor mans Riches. 4o. —An Exposition on the 3d of the Philip. 4o. —Two Sermons. One on Luke 12.37. the other on Revelations 16.15. 4o. —An Exposition on para of the 2d of the Philip. 4o
—A Sermon on Mal. 4.2,3. 4o. —The glorious Feast of the Gospel, or Christs Invitation and Royal entertainment of Believers. 4o. —The returning backslider, or a Commentary of the 14 Chapter of Hosea: wherein is shewed the large extent of Gods free mercy, even unto the most miserable, for∣lorn and wreched sinners, upon their humiliation and Repen∣tance. 4o. —Saints priviledg, or a Christians constant Advocate, being sweet Directions for every Christian to walk comfortably through this val∣ley of teares. 4o. —The Beasts dominion over earthly Kings. 4o. —The Ruin of mysticall Jericho. 4o. —The unprosperous Builder. 4o. —The successfull Seeker. In two Sermons on Psal. 27.8. 4o. —Faith Triumphant. In five Ser∣mons on Heb. 11.13. —Hidden life. Two Funerall Ser∣mons on Colos. 3.3,4. 4o. —Baalams Wish. A Funerall Sermon on Numb. 23.10. 4o. —The faithfull Covenanter. Two Ser. on Gen. 17.7. 4o. —The demand of a good Consc. A Sermon on 1 Pet. 3.21. 4o. —The Sword of the wicked. 4o. —Bowels opened, or a discovery of the near and dear Union and Com∣munion betwixt Christ and his Church: being an Exposition up∣on Canticles 4, 5, & 6, Chap∣ters. 4o. —The spiritual Jubile. Two Ser∣mons on Rom. 8.2. 4o. —St Pauls Challenge. A Sermon on Rom. 8.10. 4o. —The Churches Eccho. A Sermon on Revel. 22.17. 4o. —David's Conclusion on the Saints Resolution. A Sermon on Psal. 73.28. 4o. —King David's Epitaph, or his life and death. Three Sermons on Acts 13.36. 4o. —A description of Christ in his near∣ness to God, his Calling, Qualifi∣cation, and execution of his Cal∣ling. 4o. —Gods Inquisition. Two Sermons on Jer. 8.6,7. 4o. —The dead man, or the state of e∣very man by nature. A Sermon on Ephes. 2.1. 4o. —The souls Cordiall. folio. —The fruitfull Labourer for eternal food. Two Sermons on John 6.27. 4o. —Violence victorious. Two Serm. on Math. 11.12. 4o. —The Churches complaint and con∣fidence. Three Sermons on Isa. 64.6,7,8, verses. 4o. —A glance of Heaven, or hidden se∣crets revealed by the Gospel. 8o. —Yea and Amen, or precious Pro∣mises. 8o. —The Christians Portion, or a Chri∣stians Charter. 12o. —A Fountain Sealed, or the duty of the Sealed to the Spirit, and the work of the Spirit in seal∣ing. 12o. —Two Sermons on John 14.1. 12o. —Riches of grace in two Treatises. 1o. Lydia's Conversion. 2o. The Rescue from death. 12o. —The Brides longing for her Bride∣groomes second coming 12o. —The Spiritual mans aim, guiding Christians in affections and acti∣ons. 12o. —The bruised Reed, and smoaking Flax. 12o. —The Saints Comforts. Divers Ser∣mons on the 30 Psa. 12o.
—The Saints happiness. OnPsal. 73.28. 12o. —The rich Pearl. On Mathew 13.45. 12o. —Maries Choice. On Luke 10.38,39. 12o. —Christs exaltation purchased by humiliation. 12o. —Souls Conflict with it self, and Victory over it self by Faith. 8o. —An exposition upon the 2 Cor. and the first Chapter. —Beames of Light. Published by Mr Manton. folio. ☞—Antidotum contra naufragium fidei, & bonae conscientiae. 12o. Mr Sympson. An exposition upon the 2d of Peter. 4o. Mr Squire. An Exposition upon the 2 Thes. the 2d Chapter; wherein is proved that the Pope is Anti∣christ. 4o. Mr Sutton. An Exposition on the 11 of the Rom. 4o. —On the Sacrament: Or godly Me∣ditations on the Lords Supper, with the duty of a due receiving of so great a Mystery. 12o. Mr Sarson. Analysis on Timothy, with an Appendix called Chronologia, vapulans. 4o. Mr Stock. On the Attributes, and the Divine essence; the one shewing what God is, the other what we ought to be. 4o. —On Mallachy, with an exercitation thereupon. By Mr Torshell. folio. ☞Mr Streat. The dividing of the hoof, or seeming contradictions throughout Sacred Scriptures, di∣stinguished, resolved, and applied for the strengthening of the faith of the feeble, doubtfull and weak, in these wavering times. 4o. Dr Stoughton. The Preachers dignity and duty. In five Sermons on 2 Cor. 5.20. —Christ crucified, the Tree of Life, Six Sermons on 2 Cor. 2.2. 4o. —Form of wholesome words, or an Introduction to the Body of Divi∣nity. Three Serm. on 2 Tim. 1.13. Also the righteous mans plea to true happiness. Ten Serm. on Psal. 4.6. with a learned discourse con∣cerning the definition and distri∣bution of Divinity. 4o. Two Serm. in 12o. *Mr Sheffeild. A good Conscience the strongest hold, or a Treatise of Conscience in all the parts of it. 8o. *—The rising Sunne, or the Sunne of Righteousness shining upon the sons of unrighteousness. 8o. Story of Stories, or the life of Christ, according to the four holy Evan∣gelists. 8o. Mr. Ob. Sedgwick, Christs Counsell to his languishing Church or Sardys, or the dying or decaying Christian, with helps and means for recove∣ry and strength. 8o. —The doubting Christian resol∣ved. 12o. ☞—On Faith. The humbled sin∣ner resolved what he should do to be saved, or faith in the Lord Je∣sus the only way of salvation for sensible sinners, discovering the quality, object, acts, seat, subject, inseparable concomitants and de∣grees of justifying Faith. 4o. *—The best and worst Magi∣strate. 4o. *—Against Antinomianism. 4o. ☞—A Sermon at the Funerall of Mr Strong. 4o. ☞—The Riches of grace displaied in the offer of salvation to poor sinners; Christs standing at the door, the sinners opening: with the comfortable event of both. 8o. ☞—The Fountain opened, and Wa∣ter of life flowing
forth for the re∣freshing of thirsty sinners; shew∣ing Christs gracious Invitation, ex∣postulation, and renewed solicita∣tion. In sundry Sermons. 4o. ☞Dr Stuart. Catholick Divinity: or, most solid and sententious expres∣sions of the Primitive Doctors of the Church, with other Ecclesi∣astical and Civil Authors. 8o. Mr Spark. Scintillula altaris, or a pious reflection on primative devotion, as to the Feasts and Fasts of the Christian Church Orthodoxally revived. 8o. Mr Sheepeard. The sound Beliver, a Treatise of Evangelicall conversion, discovering the work of Christs Spirit, in reconciling a sinner unto God. 8o. —The sincere convert, discovering the paucity of Believers, and the great difficulty of saving conver∣sion. 8o. —The Saints Jewel, shewing how to apply the Promises. 8o. —Souls Invitation unto Jesus Christ. On Cant. 5.2. 8o. —A Tryal of regeneration, or a dis∣covery of the new birth. 8o. —Of Liturgies, power of the Keyes, and of the Catholick Visible Church: In answer to Mr Ball. 4o. —On Subjection to the Ordinances of God, or a wholesome Caveat for a time of Liberty. 8o. —Theses Sabbaticae, or the Doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein the morality, change, beginning, and sanctification of the Sabbath, is clearly discussed. 8o. —Certain select cases resolved, espe∣cially tending to the right order∣ing of the heart, that we may walk comfortably with God in our generall and particular calling. 12o. ☞Mr Sherman. White salt, or a sober correction of a mad world in some well-wishes to good∣ness. 8o. Mr Symond. The case and cure of a deserted soul, the nature, kinds, degrees, Symptoms, causes, cure of, and mistakes about spiritual desertion. 12o. *—Sight and Faith; Meditations on 2 Cor. 5.7. 8o. *—Three Treatises. 1o. The fixed eye, or mindfull heart, on Psal. 25.15. 2o. The principall interest, or propriety of Gods Saints, on Micha 7.7. 3o. Gods interest in man natural and acquired, on Psal. 119.4. 8o. *Mr Symond. Saints like Christ. 12o. —Darkness fading, light appear∣ing. 12o. *Mr Sidenham. A Christian sober and plain exercitation on the two grand practicall controversies of these times, Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms. 8o. *—The great Mystery of Godliness opened, on the 1 Tim. 3.16. 8o. ☞—Hypocrisie discovered in its na∣ture and workings. From Luke 12.1. 8o. Mr Simpson. The perfection of Justi∣fication, maintained against the Pharasie, the purity of sanctifica∣tion against the stayners of it; the unquestionableness of a future glorification against the Sad∣duce. 8o. Saints Legacies concerning grace, or a collection of certain Promises out of the Word of God: Also the Saints Support in time of trouble. 12o. Mr Sandder. The Christians daily walk in holy security and peace. 12o. ☞Mr Strang. Thirty One select Ser∣mons on special occasions, viz. Spiritual Barrenness: Holiness the way
to happiness: Babylons utterruin: The Saints Triumph: Go∣spel order: A Churches beauty: Church Officers according to In∣stitution: Communion with God, good in bad times: Saints Inhe∣ritance: The great Day: Grace abused: The just mans end: God with us whilest we are with him: Doctrine of the Jews Vo∣cation: Heedless service unac∣ceptable: Gospel Exaltation: The two Covenants; with fifteen Sermons more. All published by Mr Manton, Mr Row, and Mr Grif∣fith. 4o. ☞—Communion with God in Or∣dinances: The Saints priviledg and duty: The way to attain it, and preserve it; with Notes of Tryal. Published by Mr Row, Mr Manton, and Mr Venning. 12o. ☞—Heavenly Treasure, mans chief∣est good; wherein the severall workings of the heart, about and in persuance of its chiefest good, are solidly and judiciously dis∣covered. Published by Mr Man∣ton, Mr Row, and Mr Grif∣fith. 12o. ☞—A Treatise, shewing the subor∣dination of the will of man unto the will of God. 8o. *Horae subsecinae seu Prophetiae Iona, & Histo. Susannae Paraphrasis Graeca Versionis Heroisis. H. Stubbs. ex Aedē Christi Oxoniae. 8o. Silver Watchbell, the sound whereof is able, by Gods grace, to win the most prophane worlding and careless liver, (if but one spark of grace:) With a Treatise of the Sacrament. 8o. Sick mans Salve, wherein all faithfull Christians may learn how to be∣have themselves christianly and thankfully under Gods hand. 8o. Dr Sclator. An Exposition of St Paul to the Thessalonians. 4o. *—A Key to the Scripture, or an ex∣position with Notes, on the 1, 2, 3, and 4, of the Romanes. 4o. *—A brief and plain Commentary with Notes, not more usefull than seasonable, upon the whole Pro∣phesie of Malachy. *—The two Covenants from Sinai and Sion, drawn up Catechisti∣cally. 8o. —The Psalms of David in four Languages, and four Parts, set to the Tunes of our Church. 8o. Mr Sym. Lises Preservative against self-killing, or a Treatise of life and self-murder; with resolutions of many cases, usefull Observati∣ons, and practicall Directions. ☞Mr Smith. Sundry Sermons in one vol. viz. Preparative to marriage: Examination of Usury: Christi∣ans Sacrafice: Tryal of Spirits: Wedding Garment: The way to walk in: Nebuchadnezzar's pride, his fall, his restitution, honour of humility: Young mans Task: Tryal of the Righteous: Christi∣ans Practice: Pilgrims wish: Glass for Drunkards: Heavenly Thrist: Tryal of Vanities: Peti∣tion of Moses: Humility of Paul: Banquet of Jobs Children: Cave∣at for Christians: Poor mans tears: Memento for Magistrates: Law∣yers Question: Christs Answer: Benefit of contentation: Lost Sheep found: Gods Arrow against Atheists. In 4o. newly re∣printed. —David's Repentance, an Expos. of the 51 Psal. exhorting all men to repentance ere death come, for after it cannot be had or ex∣pected. 12o. —David's blessed man: or an Expo∣sition
of the first Psal. whereinthe estate of all men is laid down, both for this life, and that which is to come. 12o. —The great Assize, or day of Jubile, in which we must make a general account of all our actions before Almighty God. 12o. ☞—Moses Prayer, an Expos. on the 19 Psalm. 12o. *Synopsis Purioris Theologiae disputati∣onibus quinquaginta duabus compre∣hensa, ac conscripta per I. Polyan∣drum. A. Rivetum. A. Wallaeum. A. Thysium. S.S. Theolog. Doct. & Professores, in Achad. Ly∣densi. 12o. Mr Struther a Scoth Minister. Christian Observations and Resolutions, or the daily practice of the renewed man, turning all occurents to spiri∣tuall uses, and those uses to his Union with God. In two Cen∣turies. 12o. Major Skippon. On the Promises 24o. —Observations and Christian Resolu∣tions. 24o. —The true Treasury, or thirty holy Vowes, containing the brief summe that concerns the Christian Centu∣rians conscionable walking with God. 24o. Mr Spelman. Concilia decreta, leges, con∣stitutiones de re Ecclesiastium Orbis Brittanici ab initio Christianae ibi∣dem Religionis cum annotationibus non minus piis. folio. —Glossiarum eruditissimum, in quo prisci ritus plurimi ennarantur. folio. —De non timerandis Ecclesiis, Of the right and respect due unto Churches not to be violated. 4o. —Tythes too hot to be touched: certain learned Treatises, proving Tythes to be due by the Laws of nature, reason, and Scripture, and not Jewish, Popish, or Inconve∣nient. 4o. —Psalterium David is latino saxonicum à I.S.H.F. è Patris Bibliotheca in lucem, editum ubi ad finem uniuscu∣iusque Psalmi preces optimae in ani∣mum Psalmi reperiuntur. 4o. ☞Dr Spurstow. The Wells of salva∣tion opened, discovering the na∣ture, preciousness, usefulness of Gospel-Promises, and rules for right application of them. 8o. *—Three Sermons. 4o. *The Christian man, or the repai∣ration of nature by grace: Writ in French by that ellegant and pi∣ous Author J. F. Sennault. Eng∣lished by H.G. of C.C. Oxon. 4o. *A Discourse of holy Love: Writ in Spanish by C. de Fonseca; Eng∣lished by Sr Geo. Strode Knight. 12o. ☞Mr Scortrech. A warning piece for the slumbering Virgins, or an Al∣larum to the Friends of the Bride∣groom, in some awakening Me∣ditations upon Christs own watch∣word, Math. 26.41. ☞A sincere Beliver comforted and encouraged; or a practicall dis∣course of the goodness of God to a sinfull soul in enjoyment of Christ. Smectymnus Redivivus, being an Ans∣wer to a Book entitled an Humble Remonstrance: In which the Ori∣ginal of Liturgy and Episcopacy is discussed; with Queries concern∣ing both. 1o. The parity of Bishops and Presb. in Scripture de∣monstrated. 2o. The occasion of their imparity in antiquity discover∣ed. 3o. The disparity of the An∣tients and modern Bishops mani∣fested. 4o. The Antiquity of rule∣ing Elders in the Church vindica∣ted. 5o. The prelaticall Church bounded. 4o.
☞De juramenti Obligatione, of the Obligation of promissary Oathes: Seven Lectures read in the Divinity Schooles at Oxford, and transla∣ted by his Majesties appoint∣ment. 8o. ☞Twenty Sermons formerly preached. 16 Ad aulam. 3 Ad Magistratum. 1 Ad po∣pulum. Both by Dr R. Saynderson, Professor Regius in Oxon, and Chaplin in or∣dinary to the late King. folio. *Mr Saltmarsh. Dawnings of light, wherein the true interest of refor∣mation is opened in generall, and in particular for the establishing of weaker Judgments: with some Maxims of reformation 12o. —Free grace, or the flowings of Christs blood freely to sinners; be∣ing an experiment of Jesus Christ, upon one who hath been in the bondage of a troubled spirit, at times for 12 years till now, upon a clearer discovery of Jesus Christ and the Gospel. 12o. —Sparcles of Glory, or some Beames of the morning Star: wherein are many discoveries, as to peace and truth. 12o. —Sundry pieces of Controversies in one vol. 4o. ☞Mr Sherlock. A discourse of the holy Spirit of God, his impressi∣ons and workings on the souls of men. 2o. Of Divine Revelations, mediate and immediate; of error, heresie, and schism, their natures, kinds, causes, &c. With Directi∣ons for avoiding them. 4o. ☞—The Principles of holy Christi∣an Religion, or the Catechism of the Church of England paraphra∣sed. 8o. Adagialia Sacra Novi Testam. selecta & exposita. ab And. Scotto. 8o. Dr Seaman. The ΔΙΑΤΡΙΒΗ proved to be ΠΑΡΑΔΙΑΤΡΙΒΗ: or a Vindication of the judgment of the reformed Churches, and Prote∣stant Divines, from mis-interpreta∣tions concerning Ordination, and laying on of hands; with an Ans∣wer to the pretences of E. Chil∣lenden, for the lawfulness of preaching without Ordinati∣on. 4o. —Solomon's Choice. 4o. —Head of the Church. 4o. —Glass for the times. 4o. Mr Sands, on Lamentations. 8o. —A Parraphrase of the Psalms of David. 8o. Mr Sedgwick. The Synopsis of Christi∣anity, in a clear Exposition of the Creed, ten Commandements, and Lords Prayer. 8o. Mr Stalham. Vinditiae Redemptionis, in the fanning and sifting of Sam. Oates: With a faithfull search after our Lords meaning, in his two Par∣rables of the Treasure and the Pearl; in sundry Sermons on Mat. 13.44,45. In the first part Uni∣versall Redemption is discovered to be a peculiar error, and Christ the peculiar Treasury and Pearl of Gods Elect, is laid as the sole foundation, and the Christians Faith and Joy in him, and self-denyall for him, is raised as a sweet and sure superstructure. 4o. —A Conference with Anabaptists, by which the strength of truth, and weakness of error is discover∣ed. 4o. Reverend Pat. Fr. Stella. In sacro sanctum Jes. Christi. D. Nostri Evang. secundum lucan eneratio∣num. 4o. Mr Symonds. An Expos. on the Reve∣lation of St John, 4o. *Sacra-sancta: Regia Majestas; by the Arch Bp of Tuum. 4o.
*Mr Stone. A Congregationall Churchis a Catholick Visible Church, or an examination of Mr Hudsons Vindication: also satisfaction to Mr Cawdrey in his review of Mr Hookers Survey. 4o. *Mr Strode. The Anatomy of mor∣tality in Eight Heads, tending to help to a happy death. 8o. Dr Suarez. Varia Opuscula Theologica. 1. De concursu motione & auxillio Dei lib. 4. De scientia Dei futurorum contingentium lib. 2. De Justitia Dei disputatio, &c. 4o. Dr Szegedini. Analysis, in Psalmos, pro∣phetas Majores, 4 Evangelia, Act a Apostolorum, Omnes Epistolas & A∣pocalypsin. 4o. *Mr Samwayes. Devotion digested, Discourses and Meditations on the Lords most holy Prayer. 12o. *Synopsis, or a Compendium of the Fathers. 8o. Mr Stint. The young mans Tutor. 8o. —An Exposition of the Psalms of Degrees. Mr Stiles. Contemplations, Sighes, and Groanes of a Christian. 12o. *Mr Sambrook. Three Sermons on Ephes. 1.22,23. Shewing the Church to be the proper Subject of the New Covenant, &c. 12o. *Mr Stephen. A Precept for Infant Baptism, proved from Scripture that there is a command for it. 4o. ☞A plain and easie Calculation of the Name, Mark, and Number of the Name of the Beast, humbly presented to the studious obser∣vers of Scripture Prophesies, Gods Works, and the Times: with an Epistle by Mr Calamy. 4o. Mr Sangar. The word of Faith im∣proved, by a Providentiall con∣currence of many Eminent and Pious Ministers in and about Lon∣don, in their morning Lectures: Digested and repeated on the day of Humiliation, at the close of those Exercises: with Mt Cases Epistle. 12o. A. Scottus Photii. Myriobiblon, sive Bib∣liotheca lib. quos Photius Patriarcha Constantinop. legit & censuit. Gr. edidit. D. Hoeschelius August. & no∣tis illustr. Opus insigne, è quo Theolo∣gi, Medici, Philosophi, Historici, O∣ratores, & Philologi, Ʋberrimum fructum & jucundissimum capere pos∣sunt. Dr Swadlins Devotions. 24o. —Divinity no enemy to Astrology. In a Sermon before that So∣ciety. 4o. Of self-denyal. A Treatise by a con∣cealed Authour. 4o. Mr R. Smith. Munition against mans misery. 8o. ☞Mr Swift. Sion in the house of Mourning, because of sinne and suffering; being an Expos. of the 5. of Lamentations: With practi∣call Observations thereupon. 8o. Fr. Sales. An Introduction to a devout life. 8o. *I. Fr. Senault. The Christian man, or the repairation of nature by grace. Translated from the French. 4o. *—Man become guilty, or the cor∣ruption of nature by sinne, ac∣cording to St Augustines sense. Translated from the French. 4o. *Nobilliss Virginis Annae Mariae A. shurman Opuscula. Haebraea, Graeca, Lattina, Gallica. 8o. T. *Mr TOmbs. Antipaedobaptism, or a Treatise against Infant Bap∣tism. 4o.
*—Christs Commination againstScandalizers. 12o. *Mr Town. Vndiciae Evangelii, or a Vindication of the Gospel Truths, from the uniust censure, and un∣due assertions of Antinomians, in a modest reply to Mr Ant. Burgess in his Vindiciae legis; and to Mr Rutherford, &c. 4o. *Mr Trelenie. The undeceiving the people in point of Tythes; shewing that never any Clergy is less charge∣able than now. 2o. That no Subject contributes any thing of his own, &c. 4o. Mr Topsell. A Commentary of Joel. 4o. —On Ruth. 4o. ☞Mr Thore. The New Birth, or the Birth from above. In four Ser∣mons. 4o. *Dr Tho. Taylor. His Works in folio, Containing Catechisticall Ex∣ercises: Jaylors conversion: Famine of the word: Peters re∣pentance: The Oracle of the Go∣spel: The Stranger at home: Green and dry Tree: Pattern of Peace: A Caveat against offences: The Nicholaitan Doctrine hatefull: Moderation in things of this life: A President for Preachers: Ex∣cuse of a good Christian: Two contrary Masters: The House of God: Jephthas Vow: New Map of Rome: Labour in vain: Against following the Multitude: Principles of practice: Kings Bath. —On Contentment, leading a Christian with much patience through all afflicted conditions, by sundry rules of heavenly wisdom: with a Treatise of improvement of time. 12o. —On the 32d Psal. 4o. —On Tytus. 4o. —On the Acts. 4o. —On the 12 of Revela. 4o. —Moses and Aaron, or the Types and Shadows of our Saviour in the Old Testament, opened and ex∣plained. 4o. —On the Prrrables, declaring how farre hypocrisie may go; Signes of a good heart, the constant fruit of the good ground. 4o. —The Saints progress. 4o. —Kings Bath. 8o. —On Repentance, and the Medita∣tion of the creatures, with a New Creature. 12o. —A Case of flying in time of the Plague. —Pearl of the Gospel. 12o. —Looking-glass for Gentlewo∣men. 12o. —Circumspect walking. 12o. —Regula vitae, against the Antinomi∣ans. 12o. *Dr Jer. Taylor. The great Exem∣plar of sanctity and holy life, in the life and death of the ever Bles∣sed Jesus; with Cuts. folio. *—A course of Sermons for all the Sundayes of the year, containing Fifty Three Sermons: Dooms-daies Book, or Christs advent to Judgment. From 2 Cor. 5.10. The return of Prayers; the con∣ditions of a prevailing Prayer, Joh. 9.31. Of godly fear, Heb. 12.28,29. The flesh and the spirit, Mat. 26.41. Of lukewarmness and zeal, Jer. 48.10. House of Feast∣ing, or Epicures measures, 1 Cor. 15.32. Marriage-Ring, Eph. 5.32,33. Apples of Sodom, Rom. 6.21. The good and evil of the Tongue; of slander and flattery, Eph. 4.25. Of the Spirit of Grace, Rom. 8.9,10. The descending and entail∣ing Curse cut off, Exo. 20.5. In∣validity of a late or deathbed Re∣pentance, Jer. 13.16. Deceitful∣ness of heart, Jer. 17.9. Faith and Patience of the Saints, 1 Pet.
4.17. The mercy of the Divine Judgments, Rom. 2.4. Of growth in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. Of growth in sin, Jude 22.23. The foolish ex∣change, Mat. 16.26. The Serpent and Dove: Of Christian prudence and simplicity, Mat. 10.16. Mi∣racles of Divine mercy, Psal. 86.5. To which is added a Discourse of Divine Institution, necessity, sacredness, and separation of the Office Ministeriall. All in one vol. folio. *—On the reall presence, and spiri∣tual of Christ in the blessed Sa∣crament, proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiati∣on. 8o. —The rule and exercise of holy dy∣ing, in which are discribed the means and Instruments of prepa∣ring our selves and others re∣spectively for a blessed death. 12o. —The Rules and Exercises of holy living; in which are described the means and instruments of obtain∣ing every Virtue, with the reme∣dies against every Vice. 12o. ☞—The golden Grove, or a Man∣nual of daily Prayers and Lattinies fitted to the day of the Week, containing a short summary of what is to be believed, practised and desired, with Festivall Hymmes, &c. 12o. ☞—Ʋnum necessarium, or the Doctrine and practice of repen∣tance, describing the necessities and measures of a strict, holy, and Christian life. 8o. ☞—Deus Justificatus, or a Vindica∣tion of the glory of the Divine Attributes, in the Question of Ori∣ginal sinne, against the Presbyteri∣an way of understanding it: With an answer to the Bp of Rochesters Letter. 12o. ☞—A Discourse of the nature, offi∣ces, and measures of friendship: with rules of conducting it. 12o. ☞—A Collection of Polemical and Moral Discourses. folio. *—Episcopacy asserted and vindica∣ted. 4o. —The liberty of prophesie∣ing 4o. —An Apology for authorized and set Formes of Liturgy against the pretence of the spirit, for extem∣pore Prayer, and forms of private composition. 4o. ☞—A Discourse of Baptism, its in∣stitution and efficacy upon all Be∣lievers. 4o. ☞A further explication of the Doctrine of Original sinne. 8o. ☞—A short Catechism for Instructi∣on of young persons in the grounds of Religion, with the ex∣plication of the Apostles Creed. 12o. ☞Dr Twiss. The riches of Gods Love unto the vessels of mercy, con∣sistent with his absolute hatred or reprobation of the vessels of wrath against Hord. With two Tracts concerning Gods Decrees, definite and indefinite, and about the object of predestination: Also against Redemption Redeemed, by Mr Goodwin. All in folio. —Vindiciae gratia. Lat. folio. *—The Synod of Dort and Ales. *—The Scriptures sufficiency to de∣termine all matters of Faith made good against the Papist. 12o. *—The Christian Sabbath defended against the crying evil, in these times of the Antisabitarians of our age; shewing that the morality of the fourth Commandement is still in force, to bind Christians unto the sanctification of the Sabbath day. 4o.
—Against Cotton. —On the Commandements. —Scientia Media. Lat. folio. —In Corvini. Lat. folio. *Mr Tychbourne. A Cluster of Canaan Grapes; being severall experiment∣ed Truths, grounded on Scrip∣ture, &c. 4o. ☞Mr Trapp. A Commentary on all the twelve minor Prophets, the Texts explained, Controversies discus∣sed, Cases of conscience clear∣ed, &c. folio. ☞—A Commentary on the New Testament: the Text explained, Controversies discussed, common places handled, and other. Texts that occasionally occur; with a decad of common places upon Ab∣stinence, Admonition, Alms, Am∣bition, Angels, Anger, Apostacy, Arrogancy, Arts, Atheism. folio. —A Commentary upon the Pro∣verbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles; wherein the Text is explained, and some Controversies discus∣sed. 4o. —A Clavis to the Bble, or a Com∣ment on the Pentatuch. 4o. —The afflicted mans lesson, on the excellency and Divinity of holy Scriptures. 12o. —Theologia, Theologiae, the true Trea∣sury, or a Treasury of holy Truths; touching Gods Word, and God in the Word. 12o. *Mr Towers. Against Atheism, ratio∣nally confuting the Atheists of these times. 8o. ☞—A Sermon against Murther, oc∣casioed by the bloody Massacre of the Protestants in the Duke∣dom of Savoy. 4o. ☞Mr Fra. Taylor. Gods glory in mans happiness, with the freeness of his grace in electing us: with many Arminian objections answered. 8o. ☞—An Epos. with practicall ob∣servations upon the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Chap. of the Prov. Grammati∣call, Rhetoricall, Logicall, and Theologicall. Two vol. 4o. *Mr Tillinghast. Generation Work, or a brief and seasonable word to the Saints and people of God in this Generation. First part. 8o. *—The second part, wherein is shewed what the designes of God abroad in the world, may in all likelihood be at this present day, and in the daies approaching; be∣ing an Exposition of the seven Vi∣als. 8o. *—The third part, or an Exposition of the Prophesies of the two Witnesses, with a Key to unlock the mysticall Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations. 8o. ☞—Eight Sermons. 1o. The fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ 2o. Signes of the times. 3o. Christ the only Foundation. 4o. The Promise of the Father. 5o. The evil of the times. 6o. Look to your aimes and ends: Also added the Idols abolished. 8o. ☞Mr Teat. A Scripture Map of the Wilderness of sinne, and way to Canaan, or the sinners way to the Saints Rest: Shewing the be∣wild rings of lost sinners and Saints before, in, and after conversion, and necessity of leaning on Christ alone for salvation. 4o. *Sir Richard Tempest. An entertain∣ment of solitariness, or the melting of the soul by Meditations and pouring of it out by Prayers. 12o. Mr Turnball. An Expos. on James, with the Tables Analysis, and re∣solutions both of the whole Epistle and every Chap. &c. 8o. ☞Dr Tuckney of Camb. Balm of
Gillead, for the wounds of Eng∣land:At a Fast. 12o. ☞—Death disarmed, and the Grave swallowed up in Victory: A Ser∣mon at Dr Hils Funerall; with an account of his life; with two Ser∣mons more on the same Text of 1 Cor. 15.55. 12o. ☞—None but Christ: A Sermon on Acts 4.12. Preached at Camb. on the Commencement Sabbath; to which is added, an enquiry after what hope may be had of the salvation of Heathens, of those of the old world, the Jews, and other before Christ, and such as die Infants and ideots, &c. under the Gospel. 12o. ☞—A good day well improved, or day of the Churches peace and rest, as an Argument to all Christi∣ans to walk in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost. Five Sermons on the 9th of the Acts; with a Serm. on Commence∣ment Sabbath at Camb. 12o. ☞—A Treatise of Prayer: two Que∣ries resolved touching forms of Prayer, six Queries relating to the Lords Prayer, with Dr Owens judg∣ment about Prayer. 4o. ☞Tymson. To receive the Lords Sup∣per, the actuall right and duty of all Church-members of years not excommunicate, made good a∣gainst Mr Collings. 8o. *Mr Torshell. A discovery of hypocrisie, it's discovery and cure; the defi∣nition, kinds, subjects, symptoms, prognosticks, causes, and cure; a discourse furnished with experi∣mentall and historicall Observati∣ons, seasonable for these times, of happy design for Reformation, two Books. 4o. —The Saints Humiliation. 4o. *—The Womans glory, asserting the due honour of that Sex: that they are capable of the highest im∣provements, in examples of their eminencies in wisdom, policy, de∣liberation, secresie, learning, &c. directing also wherein that honour consists, viz. in soul-glory, modesty in carriage, language, and attire; hmility, silence, wisdom, pie∣ty. 12o. ☞Mr Tuke. The Souls Turn-key, or a spiritual file for any Prisoner lockt up in the Dungeon and Chain of sin and Satan: Prepared for Mr Hannam the night before he suf∣fered, now fitted for publick use. 8o. Tertullians Apology, or defence of the Christians against the accusations of the Gentiles: Englished. 4o. ☞Mr Twisden. An Historicall, Vindi∣cation of the Church of England, in point of Schism, as it stands se∣parated from the Roman, and was reformed in Q. Eliz. Reign. 4o. ☞Mr Teat. Nathaniel, or an Israelite indeed, for our imitation; his Characteas and Priviledges: A discovery of the sinfulness of Hy∣pocrites and strangers from the Common-wealth of Israel. 8o. V. Z. ƲRsinus. The Summe of Christi∣an Religion by way of Care∣chism, with a sound and judici∣ous exposition and application, de∣bating the Questions of Divinity now controverted; in which the orthodoxall Tenets are briefly and solidly confirmed, and the con∣trary errors of Papists, Ubiquira∣ries, Antitrinitaries, Eutychians, Socinians, and Arminians fully re∣futed; with Theologicall Misce∣lanies of D.
Paraeus. All in Eng∣lish.folio. —Comment. in Aesaiam. & refutatione Catechismi Anabaptistici, &c. folio. *Bp Ʋsher. A Body of Divinity, the summe and substance of Christian Religion, catechistically propound∣ed and explained; Also added Immanuel, or the mystery of the Incarnation of the Sonne of God. folio. —De Ecclesiarum Christianarum suc∣cessione & statu. 4o. *—Annales veteris Testamenti, a pri∣ma mundi Origine deducti, ura cum rerum assaticarum, & egiptiacarum eronico, a temporis Historici principio usque ad Maccabaicorum initia pro∣ducto. folio. *—Annalium, pars posterior, in qua pre∣ter Maccabaicum, N. Test. Historiam Imperii Romanarum Caesarum, sub C. Julio & Octaviano Ortus, rerum∣que in Asia, & Aegypto gestarum continetur Chronicon, &c. folio. —De primordiis Ecclesiarum Brittani∣carum. 4o. —An Answer to Malon the Je∣suit. 4o. —Gottescalci. 4o. *—De textus Hebraici veteris Testa∣menti variantibus lecitonibus ad Lodo∣vicum Capellum Epistola. 4o. *—De LXX. Interpretum versione syn∣tagma quo Hebraici textus veritas contra LXX. interpretum versionis assertores declaratur una cum libro Estherae, &c. ad pristinam antiqui∣tatem cum obeliscis, Asteriscis, & le∣vscis reducto. 4o. —Epistolarum Hibernicarum Syl∣loge. 4o. —Ignatii Epistolae cum Annotationi∣bus. 4o. —De anno solari Macedonum. 8o. —A Sermon before the Commons, 1618. 4o. —The Visibility of the Church: A Serm. before K. Ja. 4o. —A Speech at Dublin, delivered in the Castle-Chamber. 4o. —The Religion professed by the an∣tient Irish and Brittish. 4o. —Immanuel, or the Incarnation of the Son of God. 4o. —A Geographicall description of the lesser Asia. 4o. —Confessions and Proofs of Dr Rey∣nolds, and other Protestant Divines, concerning the right of Episco∣pacy. 4o. —The Original of Eps and Arch∣Bps. —A small Cat. revived. 12o. —Methode for Meditation, or Di∣rections for hearing the Word. 4o. —Annals of the old and new Testa∣ment, with the Sychronismes to Heathen story to the distruction of Jerusalem. folio. —A Geographicall and Historicall Disquisition touching the Asia so called, the Lydian Asia, the Pro∣consule Asia, and the Asian Dio∣cess. 4o. Mr Ʋdall. A Commentary upon the Lamentations of Jeremy; contain∣ing, 1o. Method. 2o. Literall in∣terpretation of the Text out of the Hebrew, with a paraphrasti∣call Exposition of the sense there∣of. 3o. A Collection of divers Doctrines and Uses. 4o. ☞Mr Vines. A Treatise of the right Institution, Administration and receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. In Twenty Ser∣mons. 4o. ☞Sermons preached on publick and eminent occasions: 1o. Caleb's in∣tegrity in following the Lord ful∣ly: From Numb. 14.24. 2o. The imposture of seducing Teachers discovered: From Eph. 4.14,15. 3o. Magnalia Dei ab Aquilone:
From Isa. 6.8. 4o. The posture of Davia's spirit in a doubtfull condition: From 2 Sam. 15.25,26. 5o. The happiness of Israel: From Deut. 23.29. 6o. The purifying unclean hearts and hands: From Jam. 4.6. 7o. Earl of Essex Fu∣nerall: From 2 Sam. 3.28. 8o. Na∣ture and danger of Heresies: From 2 Pet. 2.1. 9o. Subject on to Magistrates, both supream and subordinate: In three Sermons on 1. Pet. 2.13,14,15,16. 12o. Cor∣ruption of the mind described: From 2 Cor. 2.17. 4o. ☞Sr Henry Vane. The retired mans Meditations, or the Mystery and Power of Godliness, stning forth in the living Word, to the un∣masking the mystery of iniquity, in the most refined and purest Forms. 4o. ☞—A healing Question propound∣ed. 4o. *Mr Venning. Orthodox Paradoxes Theologicall and Experimentall. or a Believer clearing up truths by seeming Contradictions. 8o. *—Triumph of Assurance over the law, sin, the world, waves, and present enjoyments. 8o. *—The New Commandement re∣newed, or love one another; be∣ing an endeavour after the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, by severall uniting Principles. 8o. *—Mysteries and Revelations, or the explication of severall extra essen∣tiall and borrowed Names, allusi∣ons, and Metaphors in the Scrip∣ture 8o. *—A warning to backsliders, or a discovery for the recovery of fallen ones. 8o. *—Milk and Honey, or a Misselani∣ous Colation of many Christian Experiences, Sayings, Sentences, and severall places of Scrip∣ture. 8o. *—Orthodox Paradoxes: Second part. 8o. *—Dives and Lazarus, or not now, but hereafter. 8o. *—Canaans flowing, or the second part of Milk and Honey. *—The Heathen improved, or the Gibeonites hewing of wood, and drawing of water for the Sanctu∣ary. 8o. Mr Ʋrells excellent Treatise concerning all the Principall Grounds of Chri∣stian Religion. 12o. Mr Vallentine. Private Devotions, in six Latinies, with Directions and Prayers for each day in the week. Dr Vane. Wisdom and Innocency, or Prudence and Simplicity, in the examples of the Serpent and Dove propounded to our imita∣tion. 12o. *A view of some Exceptions which have been made by a Romanist, to the Ld Vic. Falkland's Discourse of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, submitted to censure; with a Discourse of Infallibili∣ty. 4o. *A Vindication of the Answer to Mr Brabourn concerning the civil Magistrates Power, as to changing Church-Government; wherein the Reverend Mr Perkins, and some Truths of God are vindicated, from the lies and scurrilous ex∣pressions cast upon them. *Decapala in Psalmos, sive Commenta∣rius ex decem linguis, antiqui Pa∣tribus, Rab. Historicis & poetis à J. Vicarb. folio. *—The Schismatick sifed. Valdesso. Divine Considerations, treating of
those things which are most profitable, most necessary,and most perfect in our Christian Profession. 8o. W. Dr Fra. WHite. A Reply to Jesuit Fishers answer to certain Questions propounded to King James, with a conference of R.B. of St David's, with the same Je∣suit. folio. Dr John White. The Orthodox Faith, and way to the Church, explain∣ed and justified; in answer to a popish Treatise intituled, White dyed Black, wherein the present Controversies between us and the Romanists are fully cleared. 4o. Dr Williams. The right way to the best Religion, wherein is at large ex∣plained the principall heads of the Gospel. folio. —The true Church shewed to all men that desire to be Members of the same; in six Books, contain∣ing the whole Body of Divini∣ty. folio. Mr Whately. Prototypes, or the pri∣mary precedent Presidents out of the Book of Genesis, shewing the good and bad things they did and had, practically applied to our In∣formation and Reformation. folio. —Bride-bush. 4o. —New Birth. 4o. —Husbandry. 4o. —Carecloth. 4o. Dr Willett. Synopsis Papismi. A ge∣generall view of Papistry, where∣in the whole mystery of iniquity, and summe of Antichristian Do∣ctrine is set down, which is main∣tained this day by the Synagogue of Rome, against the Church of Christ; with the Antithesis of the true Christian Faith, and an An∣tidotum or Counterpoison out of Scripture, against the Whore of Babylon's filthy Cup of Abo∣minations: confuted by Scrip∣tures, Fathers, Counsels, Imperiall Constitutions, Pontificall Decrees, their own Writers, and our Mar∣tyrs, and consent of all Christian Churches in the world. Pub∣lished by his Majesties Authori∣ty. folio. —A Commentary on the whole Book of Liviticus. folio. —Hexapla in Genesin, a six-fold Commentary on Genesis: where∣in six severall Translations, viz. The Septuagint; the Chaldee. Two Latin, viz. Hierome and Tremelius. Two English, the great Bible, and Geneva Edition are compared where they differ, with the Origi∣nal Hebrew; and Pagnine, and Montanus, Interlinearie Interpre∣tation; with a six-fold Use: A Thousand Theologicall Questions are discussed. folio. —Hexepla in Exodum, &c. wherein is observed the Argument, the divers Readings, Controversies handled, &c. These following Transla∣tions compared, viz. Chaldee, Septuagint, Vulgar Latin, Pagnine, Montanus, Junius, Vatablus, English Bible, Geneva Eddition, and Hebrew Original; two Thousand Theologicall Que∣stions handled, and forty Au∣thours writing on this Book abridged. folio. —A Commentary of the two Books of Samuel. folio. —A Commentary upon Da∣niel. folio. —A Commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to the Ro∣mans. folio.
*Mr Wilson. A Comentary on the most Divine Epistle of Paul to the Ro∣mans, Containing the degenerati∣on of our nature by Adams fall, and restauration thereof, by the grace of Christ; with the per∣fection of saith, and the imbecilli∣ty of works, in the cause of Justi∣fication of elect sinners before Almighty God: Also the confe∣rence and method, summe and scope, Interpretations and Do∣ctrines, Reasons and Uses of each Text. Last Edition. folio. ☞—A compleat Christian Dictionary, wherein the significations and severall acceptions of all the words in the Scripture are fully o∣pened, expressed, and explained. Very many ambiguous speeches, hard and difficult phrases, are plain∣ly interpreted, cleared and ex∣pounded; with a particular dictio. for the Canticles, Hebrews, and Reve∣lations, tending to the increase of Christian Knowledg, now enlarg∣ed, with above foure thousand words, interpretation of proper Names of Men, Woman, Coun∣tries, Cities, and Nature and Pro∣perties of Beasts, Fouls, Trees, Plants, &c. Extracted from the most approved Authors, especially P. Ravanelli Bibliotheca Sacra; by the diligent care of Mr Sypmson. folio. —Saints by calling, or called to be Saints: A Godly Treatise of our holy calling to Christ by the Gos∣pel, with the severall gifts proper to the called, and their Counter∣feits in the Hypocrites, which are not partakers of this effectuall cal∣ling. 4o. Mr Ward. Theologicall Questions, Dogmaticall Observations, and E∣vangelicall essayes on the whole Gospel of Matthew; wherein is 2650. necessary questions discus∣sed, 580. speciall Doctrines no∣ted, 550. Errors Confuted, with divers arguments whereby many truths and true tenets are confirm∣ed. folio. Sermons on Colloss. 3.11. Christ all in all. The Life of Faith, The Life of Faith in Death. A cole from the Altar to kindle the holy fire of Zeal, from Rev. 3.19. Balme from Gilead to recover conscience, Heb. 13.18. Jethro's justice, of a peace offering to God. Woe to drunkards, happinesse of practice. 8o. *Wallaeus. Novi Testamenti Lib. Histor. Gr. & Latt. perpetuo comenta∣rio ex antiquitate Histor. Philologia illustrata. folio. Wottoni. De reconciliatione peccatoris, in quibus doctrina ecclesiae anglicana, de justificatione impii explicatur & defenditur, &c. 4o. Mr Wemes Works. 4. Volumes. 4o. ☞Mr Wicken. A compleat and perfect Concordance of the English Bible, Composed after a new and most compendious Method. 8o. *Mr Whitfield. The light appear∣ing more and more towards per∣fect day, or a further discovery of the present state of the Indians in New England, concerning the pro∣gresse of the Gospel among them. 4o. ☞Mr Wall. None but Christ, or a plain and familliar treatise of the knowledg of Christ, exciting all men to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified; with a particular appli∣cation and saving knowledg, on 1 Cor. 2.2. 8o. *Mr Wilkins Ecclesiastes, or a discourse of the gift of preaching as it falls under the rules of art. 8o.
*—A discourse of the beauty of pro∣vidence in all the passages of it. 12o. *—On Prayer, shewing what it is, wherein it consists, and how far attainable, by industry. 8o. *—Mathematicall Magick. *Mr Watson. The Christians char∣ter, shewing the priviledges of true beleevers in this life, and that which is to come. 8o. *—The art of Divine content∣ment. 8o. *—The untaught bridegroom, see∣ing they are one, that they should be meet helps to one another. 12o. *—The Anatomy of the heart. 8o. ☞—The one thing necessary in a Sermon from Phil. 2.12. 8o. *Mr Woolfall. The doctrine and pra∣ctice of renovation, discovering what the new Nature, and the new Creature is, its parts, causes, manner and meanes to get it. 8o. *—The doctrine and practice of mortification, the matter, manner, and meanes thereof, with the bles∣sed event of it. 8o. ☞Mr Wells. A prospect of eternity, or mans everlasting condition o∣pened and applied. 8o. Mr Warwick. Spare minutes, resol∣ved meditations. 12o. Mr Wills. Mount Tabor, or private exercises for a penitent sinner, serv∣ing for a daily practice of the life of faith, written in time of a volun∣tary retreat from secular affaires. 12o. Mr Tho. White. A way to the tree of life, discovered in sundry di∣rections, for the profitable reading of the Scripture; occasionally de∣scribing the nature of a spirituall man: and in a digression, the mo∣rallity and perpetuity of the 4th. Command. 8o. ☞—A method and instructions for the art of divine meditations, with instances of the severall kinds of solemn meditation. 12o. *—ΠΑΝΘΕΟΛΟΓΙΑ. Or the sum of practicall Divinity practised in the wildernesse, and delivered by our Saviour in his Sermon on the mount; in observation on the 4, 5, 6, 7, chap. of Matthew: where∣in the perfection and perspicuity of the Scripture, is vindicated from the calumnies of the Anabaptists, and Papists. 8o. ☞—The practice of Christian per∣fection, wherein severall conside∣rations, cautions and advices, are set down for the perfecting of the Saints, and compleating them in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. 12o. *Mr Winstanly. The misteries of God, concerning the whole creati∣on of mankind. 8o. *—The breathing of the day of God, or prophesies fulfilled. 8o. *—The Saints paradise, or the fa∣thers teaching the only satisfaction to waiting souls. 8o. *—The new Law of righteousnesse, budding forth, in restoring the whole creation from the bondage of the curse. 8o. Dr Wimbleton. A Sermon preached before, K. Henry. 4. 8o. Mr Whitaker. Against Champion the Jesuite, in defence of the faith of the Church of England. 4o. —Sermons on sundry subiects. 4o. *Mr Walwin. A plea for the mini∣stry, or one good word for the Godly Ministers of England, that have so many hard speeches spo∣ken against them.
*Sr Fran. Wortley. Truth asserted by the doctrine and practise of the Apostles, seconded by the testimo∣ny of Synods, fathers, and doctors, from the Apostles to this day, viz. That Episcopacy is jure divino. 4o. Bp Webb. The practice of quietnesse, teaching how to order our steps, to a peaceable living in this present evill world. 12o. *Mr Wallis. A plea for congregationall Churches. *—An explaination of the assemblies Catechisme. *—Translation of Appolonius. *—A Philosophical and Theological answer to the Ld Brooks. ☞—Mens sobria, Expos. Epist. Tytum. Thesis Theolog, &c. 12o. *Mr Workman. Private men, no Pulpit∣men. ☞Mr J White. A commentary on the three first chap. of Gen. folio. ☞Mr Woodbridg. The method of grace in the justification of sinners, against Mr Eyres vindiciae justificatio∣nis gratuitae; also the apostolick pro∣testant doctrine of justification, by faith is asserted. 4o. ☞—Justification by faith, or a con∣futation of that antinomian error, that justification is before faith; in a Sermon preached at Saram. 4o. *—Church members set in joynt, or a discovery of the unwarrantable and disorderly practice of private Christians, in usurping the peculiar office and work of Christs own Pastors, viz. publique preaching. 4o. *Mr Wilkinson. Conciones tres apud Achad. Oxon. & tract. de jure divi∣no diei dominici. 8o. Dr Wollebius. The abridgment of Chri∣stian Divinity, tending to the right reading of the Scriptures, ordering common places, understanding controversies, clearing common cases of conscience, with an anato∣my of a body of divinity in 14. ta∣bles for help of weak memories, in english. 12o. —The same in Latine. 12o. *Mr Wood. A scotch man. A little stone pretended to be cut out of the mountain, tried and sound to be counterfeit: or an examinati∣on, and refutation of Mr Lockier, concerning the matter of a visible Church, preached at Edenburg; and after printed with an appendix, for the popular government of sin∣gle congregations. 4o. ☞Mr Wright. of Oxon. Five Sermons in five wayes of preaching, 1. Bp Andrew's, 2. Bp Hall's, Dr Main's, and Mr Cratwright's; 4. Presbite∣rian way, 5. Independant way, never preached with an account of the Authors design therein. 8o. *Mr Warren. Unbeleevers, no subjects of justification, nor misticall uni∣on, vindicated against Mr Eyre's objections, in his vindiciae justifica∣tionis gratuitae, with a refutation of that antisidian and antievangelicall error, asserted therein, viz. The justification of a sinner before, or without faith. 4o. *—A Fast Sermon preached before the Parliament. 4o. *—An assize Sermon. 4o. *Mr Webster. The judgement seat, and books opened, religion tried, whe∣ther of God or men, tending to discover the blasphemy of those that say they are Apostles, Teach∣ers, &c. but are found liars, de∣ceivers, &c. in sundry Sermons delivered at Alhallows London. 4o. Christianae Theologiae, lib. 2. me
thodicé dispositi, perpetua praeceptorum suc∣cinctorum& perspicuarum omnium controversarium, quae in ecclesiis & scholas, theologicis hodiè agitantur, compendiosâ & logicâ, tractatione, ità illustrati & temperati, ut & adul∣toribus, S.S. Theologiae studiosis, & novellis tironibus commode inservianè. Studio & opera, Mr Friderici Wen∣delini. 16o. Mr Hez. Wooodward. A just account in truth and peace by brethren, lovers of, and fellow helpers to both, why they must open them∣selves to view of the world, speak∣ing to them as on the house top, &c. 4o. —An appeal to the Churches of Christ, for their righteous judg∣ment in matters of Christ, the con∣cernments of all his glory, over whom there is a defence, whether Christs way be not paved forth in Scripture to be traced by the foot∣steps of his neare ones. 4o. —A conference of some Christians in Church fellowship about the way of Christ with his people, and the result there from, &c. 4o. —Infant Baptisme, and the first que∣re thereupon, whether all parents how notorious soever for wicked∣ness, are priviledged upon account of their own baptisme, to present their Infants thereunto, the nega∣tive maintained. o4. ☞—The Lords Table. whether it is to be spread like a table for all commers, the negative affirmed. 4o. —A treatise of Prayer, two queries resolved, touching forms of prayer, and six queries relating especially to the Lords Prayer. 4o. —The Ministers duty to reprove sin in the pulpit, as God himself doth in his Word. 4o. —Four grand enquieries, 1. whe∣ther this Nation be a Church as the Jewish was, 2. whether by privi∣ledge of Infant Baptisme, all are to be admitted to Church Com∣munions, e omnine, without mak∣ing a profession of their faith, &c. 4o. —Law, Power, or the law of rela∣tion, written in the heart of Mi∣nisters and people, by the hand of God, is mighty through him, to prevail with both, to live as a peo∣ple separated to their God, especi∣ally at the Lords Table. 4o. —A Church Covenant, lawfull and needfull to be entered into, by all that intend to walk in Church∣fellowship, according to Gospell order, in on vol. 4o. —Good education of youth, or a childs patrimony, 2. The childs portion, respecting a child grown vp, 3. The Churches thanksgiv∣ing to God, her king, and the Par∣liament, for rich mercies, years of captivity, for her deliverance, from 88. to the 9. of Sep. 1640. 4. The Case of all Crucifixes, Images, &c. made with hands, and for a religious use discussed, 5. The Kings Chronicle, declaring the acts of the wicked, and good Kings of Judah, with the order of the Mi∣litia, &c. 6. The cause, use, and cure of feare, or strong consolati∣ons in God, to establish the heart to see the salvation of God, all re∣commended by Dr Gouge, Mr Ca∣lamy, Mr Carryl, Mr Burrouges, &c. in one vol. 4o. Mr Waterhouse. A discourse of the pi∣ety and charity of elder Churches, and Christians: together with those their virtues, paralleled by Christian members of the Church of England. 8o. Mr Willam. Vicar of Hexn. Six excel∣lent
Sermons on sundry occasions, &c. 4o. ☞Mr Woodcock. The two witnesses discovered in severall Sermons, up∣on the 11. of Rev. with the great question discussed, whether the two witnesses are slain or no. 4o. ☞Mr Winnell. Suspension discussed or church-members, divine right to Christs Table: throne of grace ex∣amined and cleared. ☞Mr Whitfoot. M.A. Deaths allarm, or the presage of approaching death, in a funerall Sermon, upon the death of the reverend Bp Hall. 8o. Mr Sam. Ward. The wonders of the loadstone, or the loadstone newly reducted into a divine and morall use. 8o. Y Mr YArrow. Soveraign comforts, for a troubled conscience, discovering the subtleties of Satan, with objections answered, and further manifested to the great consolation of distressed minds. 12o. Mr Young Sin stigmatized, or the art to know savingly, beleeve rightly, and live righteously; taught both by si∣militude and contrariety from a serious scruting or survey of the profound humanist, cunning politi∣an, cauterized drunkard, and ex∣perimentall Christian; the beauties of all Christian graces are illustrat∣ed by the blacknesse of their oppo∣site vices. 8o. —The drunkards character; with the compleat armour against evill society, with the skill, will, and industry to lewd ones, in tempting to sin, and leading to perdition. 8o. —The cure of Misprision, or selected notes upon sundry questions in con∣troversie, and of main concern∣ment, between the word and the world, tending to reconcile mens judgments, and unite their affecti∣ons, as being a probable means to cure prejudice, and Misprision in such as are not past cure, with Mr Tho. Goodwin's, Mr Arrowsmith's, and Mr Ʋine's Epistle. 8o. Mr Rob. Young. of Roxwell. A so∣veraign antidote against all grief, as also the benefit of affliction, how to husband it, and be supported under his most miserable exigents with the victory of patience. 8o. —The cause and cure of ignorance, errour and prophanesse, or a more hopefull way to grace and salvation. 8o. —The prevention of poverty, and cure of discontent. 8o. ☞—The peoples impertial and com∣passionate Monitour, about hear∣ing of Sermons upon occation of two famous Divines, whose famous transcendent wit, oratory and ele∣gance, made many at their wits end with admiration. 8o.
HISTORY With other Pieces of Humane Learning Intermixed, Alphabetically digested.
A *THe Anatomy of Play∣ing and Gameing; writ by a Gentleman, and dedicated to his Father, to shew his detestation there∣of. 8o. Bp Abbott. A brief description of the whole World, describing all the Monarchies, Empires, and King∣doms of the same, with Achade∣mies, severall Titles, and Situati∣ons. 12o. Ars Memoriae, or the Art of Memo∣ry made plain, so farre as it de∣pends in places and Ideas. 12o. Albions England; a continued Histo∣ry of the same Kingdom, from the originals of the first Inhabi∣tants, with the chief accidents and alterations in the Reign of King James. 4o. ☞Arcana Aulica, or Walsinghams Mannuel of prudentiall Maxims for the Statesman and Cour∣teir. 12o. Antiquity of Thieves. The son of a Rogue, or the politick Thief; translated from Spanish. Antipathy between the French and Spaniard; or the two great Lights of the world displaied in lively Characters, in the Antipathy of their humours and dispositi∣ons. 12o. Arreignment of Sr Walter Rai∣leigh. 12o. Admirable Events, in choice and de∣lightfull History. 12o. ☞America, or an exact description of the West-Indies, more especi∣ally those Provinces which are un∣der the Dominion of the King of Spain. *Anthologia, or the speech of Birds and Flowers; partly moral, partly mystical. 8o. Alcharon of Mahomet, from Arabick into French, by Sieur de Ryer Lord of Maleziar, and Resident for the King of France, and Alexandria; now Englished for publick bene∣fit. 4o. Anatomy, of the English Nunnery at Lysbone, wherein the lewd practi∣ses of those Nunns and Fryers are discovered, by one that was sedu∣ced to their waies. 4o. Augustus, or an Essay on those Means and Counsels whereby the Com∣mon-wealth of Rome was altered and reduced to a Monarchy. 12o. ☞Auxilliary Beauty, or Artificiall handsomeness in a point of consci∣ence between two Ladies. 8o. ☞Art of Memory, a cure for a weak Memory, usefull to all persons, from the Crown to the Clown. 12o. *The Achademy of Eloquence, con∣taining a compleat English Rheto∣rique exemplified, with common places and formes, digested into an easie and Methodicall way to speak and write fluently according to the mode of the present times; with Letters both Amorous, and Moral, upon emergent occasions. 12o.
The Achademy of Complements,wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers, may ac∣comodate their courtly practice with gentle Ceremonies; com∣plementall, amorous high expres∣sions, and forms of speaking and writing of Letters most in fashion, with excellent similitudes, com∣parisons, fancies, and devicess; with a Table resolving the most delightfull fictions of Heathen Poets. 8o. *I. H. Alstedii. Thesaurus Chronologiae, in quo universa temporum & Histori∣arum series in omni vitae genere ita po∣nitur ab oculos, &c. 8o. M. Amiraldi. De successione ab Ecclesiâ Romanâ. 8o. B. S. R. BAker. A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the time of the Roman Government till the Reign of King Charles, containing all passages of Church and State. folio. R. Barron Esq Mirza. A Tragedy really acted in Persia. 8o. —An Apollogy for Paris. 8o. T. Buck Esq The History of Rich. the Third: His reign, life and death folio. Sr N. Breut. The History of the Coun∣cill of Trent; in which (besides the ordinary acts of the Councill) are declared many notable occur∣rances which hapned in Cristen∣dome, for fourty years and more; and particularly the practises of the Court of Rome, to hinder the reformation of their errors, and maintain their own greatness: Writ in Italian by Polano, now Englished. folio. M. Barolay. Icon Annimorum. 12o. Mr Beard. The Theatre of Gods Judgments; wherein is represent∣ed the admirable Justice of God against all notorious sinners, great and small, especially against the most eminent Persons in the world: Collected out of Sacred, Ecclesiasticall, and Pagan Histori∣ans, Incomperably fit for all Scho∣lars, Ministers, and studious Chri∣stians. folio. Card. Bentivoglio. Historicall relations of the united Provinces of Flan∣ders; Englished from Italian, by H. Earl of Monmouth. folio. ☞—The compleat History of the Warres of Flanders; Englished by H. Earl of Monmouth: the whole Work illustrated, with ma∣ny Figures of the chief personages mentioned in the History folio. Ld Bacon, of the Advancement and proficience of Learning, or the partitions of Sciences. folio, —Silva Silvarum, or a Naturall History; in ten Centuries. folio. —Considerations touching a Warre with Spain. 4o. —The Hist. of the Reign of King Hen∣ry the Seventh; with a Table. folio. —The Wisdom of the Anti∣ents. 4o. —Apothegms. 8o. —Essays or Counsels Civil and Mo∣ral; with a Table of the colours or appearances of good and evil; their degrees, places of perswasi∣on, and disswasion, their severall falaces, and elenchies of them. 4o. —A History Naturall and Experi∣mentall of life and death, or of prolongation of life. 12o. *—The Natural and Experimentall History of Winds, for making up of Philosophy; Of the form of heat; Of severall kinds of motion
or active virtue, to find out the eb∣bing and flowing of the Sea, &c. 12o. ☞—Resucitatio, or bringing into publick light, severall Pieces of the Works, Civil, Historicall, Philoso∣phicall, and Theologicall; hither∣to sleeping, of the Ld Bacon, with his Lordships life: By Dr Rawley, Chaplain to his late Majesty, and his Lordship. folio. ☞Mr Beck. M.A. The Universall Character, by which all the Nati∣ons of the world, may understand one anothers conceptions, reading one common writing, their Mother Tongue: an Invention of the gene∣ral use, and soon attained. 8o. *M. Z. Boxhornii. Historia Ʋniversa∣lis Sacra & profana, a Christo Nato ad annum us{que} 1650. in quâ illustri∣um Gentium ad principum origines Res gestae, variae mutationes. In' ecclesiá & Republica, aliaque ex va∣riis, etiam hactenus in editis monu∣mentis traduntur. 4o. Mr Brathwayt Esq The English Gen∣tleman and Gentlewoman, in one modell poraited to the living glo∣ry of their Sex, the lasting Story of their worth; Containing, 1o. Sundry Rules, or exquisite Ob∣servations, for direction of every Gentleman of selecter rank and quality, how to demean himself in the mannage of publick and private affairs. 2o. Containing what habillaments best attire her, what Ornaments best adorn her, what Complements best accom∣plish her. folio. —Essayes on the five Sences, revived by a new supplement, with a pi∣thy one upon detraction. 12o. —Achademy for the Gentry, for their accomplishment in Argu∣ments of discourse, habit, fashion, summ'd up in a Character of ho∣nour. 4o. —A Survey of History, or a Nursery for the Gentry, contrived and comprized n an Intermixt dis∣course upon Historicall and Poeti∣call relations; a work meriting the approbation of the Judicious. 4o. ☞Bellum Tartaricum, or the con∣quest of the great and most re∣nowned Empire of China, by the invasion of the Tartars, who in seven years past, hath subdued that vast Empire. 8o. Mr Bacon. A Historicall discourse of the Government of England, un∣till Queen Eliz. With a Vindication of the antient way of Parlia∣ments. 4o. Mr Blunt. A Voyage into the Levant, or a Relation of a Journey from England, by way of Venice into Dalmatia, Solavonia, Bosna, Hun∣gary, Macedon, Thessaly, Thrace, Rhodes, Aegypt, and so to grand Cairo; with the modern conditi∣ons of the Turks, and others un∣der that Empire. 12o. ☞Brittan's Triumph, or a History of the Warres, and other State affairs of England, from the death of the King, to the 3d year of the present Government under the Lord Protector. 8o. A Breviate of the Prelates intollerable usurpation over the Kings loyal Subjects. 4o. *Banquet of Jeasts new and old, be∣ing a Collection of modern Jeasts, witty Jeers, pleasant Taunts, &c. by Arche the Kings Jeaster. 12o. A Book of all the Names of all the Hundreds in the Shires of the Kingdom of England, with the Num∣ber of Towns, Parishes, Villages, and places in every Hundred. 12o.
Boetius in English. 8o. Mr. Breerwood. An inquiry touching diversity of Languages and Reli∣gions, through the chief parts of the World. 4o. ☞The life and death of Freeman Sonds Esq by R. Boreman. B.D. The Relation also of Sr Geo. Sonds Narrative of the Passages on the death of his two Sons. 4o. ☞Mouns. de Balzack. Letters in four parts, now newly printed in one vol. 8o. —The Conversion of the Romans and Maeceuas; in three excellent discourses. 12o. —The Prince: Englished from the French by H.G. of C.C. Oxon. 12o. *Dr Brown. Pseudoxia Epidemica; or inquiries into very many Received Tenents, and commonly presumed Truths; with many enlargements, with marginal Observations, with a Table. folio. ☞L. Blank. Roma Triumphans, seu actus inaugurationum & coronationum Pon∣tificum Romanorum, & in specie Innoc. 10. Pont. Max. brevis descriptio cum omnib. Trimphis & ceremonis, &c. 12o. C. Mr CAmbden. Brittain. or a Choro∣graphicall description of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Islands adjoyn∣ing; out of the depth of Antiqui∣ty, beautified with the Mapps of severall Shires in England. folio. —The History of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. folio. —Remains concerning Brittain; the Languages, Names, Sirnames, Al∣lusions, Annagrams, Armories, Monies, Empresses, Artilleries, Apparell, wise Speeches, Proverbs, Poesies, Epitaphs, &c. 4o. *Mr Clark. A generall Martyrology; being a Collection of all the great∣est Persecutions which have be∣fallen the Church of Christ, from the creation till now; with the Lives of sundry Modern Divines, famous in their Generation for Learning and Piety, and most of them great sufferers in the cause of Jesus Christ. folio. *—A generall Martyrologie, being the Persecutions of the Church of England, since the first plantation of the Gospel; down to Q. Maries Reign, with the lives of Coligni Admirall of France, who was mur∣thered; and Jone Q. of Naarz, who was poisoned: with the lives of ten English Divines, famous for Learning, Piety, Parts, and Suf∣ferings in the cause of Christ. folio. ☞—The Marrow of Ecclesiasticall History, being the lives of 148 Fathers, Schoolmen, first refor∣mers, and modern Divines, who have flourished in the Church since Christs time to this age; with the Effigies of many cut in Cop∣per. 4o. *—The second part of the Marrow of Ecclesisticall History, contain∣ing the lives of many eminent Christians which lived since the primative times to this age, con∣taining the lives of Christian Em∣perours, Kings, and sovereign Prin∣ces, and other Christians of infe∣riour rank. 4o. ☞—A Mirrour, or Looking-glass for Saints and sinners, wherein is re∣corded, as Gods great goodness to one, so his
severe Judgment a∣gainst the other; with the won∣derousworks of God in Nature, with the costly and stupendious works of man, and Curiosities of Antient and Modern times: In 2000 Examples. 8o. *—The life of Tamerlin the great, his Warres against the great Duke of Moso. King of China, Bajazet, the great Turk, the Sultan of Ae∣gypt, the King of Persia, &c. wherein are rare examples of Hea∣thenish Piety, Mercy, Justice, Hu∣mility, Temperance, &c. 8o. ☞The History of that great and re∣nowned Monarchy of China; the Provinces described;, their disposi∣tions, Learning, Laws, Religion, &c. their Traffique and Commodi∣ties: also the Histories of the late invasion and conquest of that flourishing Kingdom by the Tar∣tars: translated from Italian. folio. Campanella, his discourse concerning the Spanish Monarchy, each Par∣ticular County, Province, King∣dom, and Empire of the world; with waies of Government by which they may keep in obedi∣ence; also the causes, rise, and fall of each Kingdom and Empire. 4o. Charoon. Three Books of Wisdom, written in French, now in Eng∣lish. 4o. ☞Caballa. Mysteries of State in Letters of the great Ministers of King James and King Charles, wherein much of the publick ma∣nage of affairs is related. 4o. —Scrinia Sacra; Secrets of Empire in Letters of illustrious persons. A supplement of Caballa, in which business of the quality and gran∣dure is contained, with many fa∣mous passages of the late Reigns of King Henry 8. Queen Eliz: King James, and King Charles. 4o. *The Court and Character of King James, with the Court of King Charles; with Observations con∣tinued unto the beginning of the unhappy times. 8o. ☞Civil Warres of France, during the bloody Reign of Charles the 9th, wherein is shewed the sad and bloody Murthers of many thou∣sand Protestants, dying the Rivers and Streets with blood for 30 daies together, whose innocent blood cries to God for vengeance. By the Author of this Catalogue. 12o. ☞Mr Coddrington. The History of Justin, taken out of the 44 Books of Trogus Pompeius, containing the affairs of all Ages, and Countries, both in peace and wre, from the beginning of the world unto the time of the Roman Emperours; with the Epitomy of their lives and manners, from Octavius Au∣gustus Caesar, to Theodosius. 8o. ☞A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, that have com∣pounded for their Estates. 8o. *P. Cumus. Of the Common-wealth of the Hebrews. 12o. ☞Clamor Sanguinis Martyrum, or the bloody Inquisition of Spain; wherein is unfolded the prodigious and unparalell'd cruelties of the bloody minded Spaniard against the Protestant. By the Authour of this Catalogue. 12o. *King Charles Case, or an appeal to all rational men concerning his Tryal: with his Tryal and Speech on the Scaffold; with the Bp of Canterburies Speech on the Scaf∣fold. 8o. —Catholick History, collected from Scriptures, Counsels, and Anti∣ent Fathers, in answer to Dr Vanes
lost Sheep returned. The familiar Epistles of M. T. Cicero, englished and conferred with the French Italian, and other transla∣tions. 12o. The Civil Warres of Spain in the reign of Charles the 5. Emperor of Ger∣many, and King of that Nation, written in Spanish by P. D. Sandon∣vall, Historiographer Royal to King Philip the third. Now Eng∣lished. folio. *History of the Rites, Customes, and Manners of the present Jews throughout the present world, written in Italian by Leo Modena, a Rabbin in Venice; now englished by Mr Chilmead, M.A. 8o. ☞Moral Discourses and Essays on seve∣rall Subjects; by T.C. Esq 12o. *I. A. Commenius. Naturall Philosophy reformed by Divine Light; or a Synopsis of Physicks; being a view of the world in generall, and the particular creatures therein, groun∣ded on Scripture Principles; with an Apendix of the Diseases of the body and the soul. 8o. The Antiquities of Canterbury, or a survey of that Antient City, with the Subburbs and Cathedrall. 4o. ☞The Royal Game of Chess, the rules of the play, once the great Recre∣ation of his late Majesty. 12o. I. Cluverii Historiam Totius mundi Epi∣tome. A primâ rerum origine usque ad annum Christi 1630. 4o. D Mr. DAvilla. The History of the civill warrs of France, translat∣ed from Italian; by Sr Charles Cot∣trell Knight, and W. Alsbury Esqfolio. ☞A Dialogue of Polygamy, tran∣slated from Italian, and Dedicated to the Authour of Advice to a Son. 8o. Mr Daniell. The Collection of the History of England. folio. ☞Mr Dougdale. The History of War∣wickshire. *Diodorus siculus, containing all that is memorable and of greatest An∣tiquity in the first ages of the world untill the Warre of Troy. Englished by H. Cogan. folio. *Dr Donn. Paradoxes, Problems, Essayes, Characters, Epigrams; translated by Dr Maine, with Ig∣natius his Conclave. 12o. ☞Sr Dudley Diggs. The compleat Ambassador, or two Treatises of the intended marriage of Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, com∣prized prized in Letters of Negotiation of Sr Fran. Walsingham, her Resi∣dent in France; with the Answers of the Lord Burleigh Earl of Lei∣cester, Sir Tho. Smith, and others; wherein, as in a clear Mirrour, may may be seen the faces of the two Courts of England and France, as they then stood; with many re∣markeable passages of State, not touched in History. folio. ☞Mr Drummond. The History of Scotland from the year 1423 till 1542. containing the lives and reigns of James the 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5. with severall Memorials of State, during the reigns, of James the . and Charles the 1. folio. Draytons Pollibion. The History of great Brittain. folio. *Drake revived, being a Summary and true relation of four severall Voy∣ages of St Fra. Drake to the West-Indies: The taking number de dios. 2. In compassing the world. 3. Ta∣king St Jago, Sancto Domingo,
Car∣thagena,and St Augustine. 4. Last Voyage wherein he died, with the manner of his Buriall. 4o. Ld Digby. The nature of Bodies, and the nature of mens souls, looked into by way of discovery of the immortality of reasonable souls. 4o. The destruction of Troy, the first foun∣dation, with the sacking thereof: their rebuilding and destruction the second and third time. 4o. The daily Proceedings of both Houses, in the great and happy Parliament, from Novem 1640. to 1641. Descartes, The Passions of the soul, in three Books: 1o. Passions in generall. 2o. Number and order. 3o. Particular. 12o. A Description of ten Shires about Lon∣don. 12o. *Digitus Dei. New discourses to prove that the jews, a Nation or people lost in the world for the space of 200 years, that they ina∣bit now in America; how they came thither, their manners, customes, rites, and ceremonies, the unparalleld cruelties of the Spaniard, and that the Americans are of that race: by Mr Thorowgood. B.D. 4o. A Merry Discourse of Meum and Tu∣um. Two cross Brothers that make debate and strife whereever they come. 4o. A Dissection of the significative mus∣cles of the affections of the mind. 8o. D. Diggs fellow of Ox. The unlaw∣fulness of Subjects taking up of Arms against their Sovereign in what case soever, with answers to all Objections. Sr Ed. Deering, A Collection of Speeches in Parliament. 4o. —A Discourse of common Sacri∣fice. 4o. A Discourse of the state Ecclesiasticall. 4o. An English Dictionary, or an Interpre∣ter of hard english words, enable∣ing as well Ladies and Gentlewo∣men, young Scholars, Merchants, and others to understand the most hard words, for the more speedy attaining an ellegancy in speaking and writing. 8o. ☞Mr Davies. The History of Magick by way of Apology, for all the wise men who have unjustly been reputed Magicians for the Creation to this age. Englished from Gas∣sendus. 8o. E. THe Antient Ecclesiasticall History of the first six hundred years ater Christ; writen by three Learned Historiographers, Eusebius Bp of Caesaria, Socrates of Constantinople, and Evagrius of Antioch; with the lives and ends of the Prophets, Apostles, and seventy Disciples. folio. ☞Mr Edmond. Most excellent and judicious Observations on the Com∣mentaries of Julius Caesar, of his Warres in Galla, and the Civil Warres betwixt him and Pompey; whereunto is added the eighth Commentary of the warres of Gallia, with Observations there∣upon; with the life of Caesar, and an account of his Meddals, revised, corrected, and enlarged with sun∣dry Cuts, folio. England, with the principall of Wales exactly described, with every Shire, and Towns in each Shire; in six Maps: bound together. 8o.
Examen de ingeniis, the examination or tryal of mens wits, the variety of Natures, what profession each one is apt, and how he shall profit therein: Translated from the Spanish. 4o. *Ephemeris Parlimentarii, or a faith∣full Register of the Transactions in Parliament, in the third and fourth year of our Sovereign Lord King Charles; containing the se∣verall Speeches, Cases, and Argu∣ments of Law, transacted betwixt his Majesty and both Houses; with the grand Mysteries of the Kingdom then in Agitation. folio. *Mr Earle. Microcosmography, or a piece of the world characterized in Essays and Characters. 12o. English Expositer, unfolding the most difficult words in use. 8o. ☞Epicurus's Morals. Collected partly out of his own Greek Text in Diogenes, Laertius, and Rhapsodies, of M. Anto. Plutarch, Cicero, and Seneca. Englished. 4o. ☞Two Essaies of Love and Marriage in answer to a Letter disswading from Love; with a another ans∣wer to the same: with other pas∣sages of wit. 12o. A witty Encounter between M. Du. Molin and M. D. Balzack, the two elegant Pens of that Nation. 12o. F. *FLores Solitundinis, certain rare and ellegant pieces of Temperance and Patience; Of life and death: The world contemned by the Bp of Lyons; the life of Paulinus Bp of Nola, &c. 12o. *Mr J. Ferrand. D.P. A Treatise of Love, or erotick Melancholly. 8o. ☞Choice Observations of Sr J. Finet Knight, and Master of the Ceremo∣nies, to the two last Kings, touch∣ing the reception and precedence, treatment, and audience, the Punctillo's and contests of forein Ambassadors in England. 8o. Festem voluptatis, or a Banquet of Jeasts. 8o. *Mr Fullars Pisgah sight of Palestine, and the confines thereof; with the History of the Old and new Testa∣ment acted thereon. folio. —The holy and prophane state. folio. —The History of the holy Warre. folio. ☞—The Church History of Brittain, from the Birth of Jesus Christ, un∣till the year 1648. folio. *—Abell Redivivus, or the dead yet speaking; being the lives and deaths of many eminent Divines. 4o. —Andronicus, or the unfortunate Po∣lititian. 8o. The French Achademy; fully discover∣ing, 1o. Institution of Manners, and Calling of all Estates, 2o. Of the soul and body. 3o. A notable description of the whole world. 4o. Christian Philosophy. folio. Mr Fox. Acts and Monuments of matters speciall and memoriall in the Church, with an universall History of the same, from the primative Age to this present; with the bloody times, horrible troubles, and great persecutions against the Martyrs of Christ by heathen Em∣perours, and Roman Prelats. Three vol. folio. ☞The grand differences between France, Spain, and the Empire, with their severall Titles, Claimes, and
pretenses to each others Domini∣ons, disscussed and stated. 8o. ☞Mr Fowler. The History of the troubles of Sweathland, and Po∣land, which occasioned the ex∣pulsion of Sigismundus the third King of those Kingdomes, with his Heirs for ever from the Sweth∣ish Crown; with a continuation of those troubles till the truce An. 1629. with an account of the great Treaty of pacification be∣twixt the two Kingdoms; with the life and death of Sr Geo. Dug∣lass Knight, Lord Ambassadour extraordinary from the King of great Brittain. folio. ☞Fernand Mendz Pinto a Portugall: His Voyage and Adventures, du∣ring his travell for the space of 21 years in the Kingdom of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria, Cauchinchina, Ca∣laminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part of the West-Indies, the Religious, Laws, Riches, Cu∣stomes, and Government. folio. Mr Feltham. Resolves. 4o. History of Russia, or the Govern∣ment of the Emperour of Mosco∣via; with the manners and fashi∣ons of the people of that Country. By Mr Fletcher Fell. of Kings C. C. and imployed in that Embassy. thither. 12o. Mr Frimston. A generall History of the Netherlands, with the Genealogy and memorable Acts of the Earls of Holland, Zealand, West-Friz∣land, &c. folio. —The generall History of France, from the beginning of that Monar∣chy. folio. —The Imperiall History from the Foundation of the Roman Mo∣narchy, from Julius Caesar the first to this present, containing the lives and actions of all the Roman Emperours, the original and suc∣cess of those barbarious Actions, that have invaded and ruined it by piece-meales. folio. —The History of Pollibius the Me∣galopolitan; with the manner of the Roman encamping. folio. The Rogue, or the life of Gusman de Alfarahe the witty Spaniard; written in Spanish by M. Aleman of Sivill, and Servant to his Ca∣tholick Majesty. folio. ☞The same Epitomized, in 2 vol. 8o. Guildas sirnamed the wise. A de∣scription of the state of great Brit∣tain, writ eleven hundred years since. Guichardin. The History of Italy, the Warres thereof, continued for ma∣ny years under sundry Kings and Princes, with the accidents of the same. folio. ☜Mr Gage. A new Survey of the West-Indies, or the english Ame∣rican, his travell by Sea and Land, containing a journall of three thousand and three hundred miles within the main Land of America; his Voyage from Spain to St John de Ʋlhua, Xalappa, Tlaxcalla, An∣gells, and Mexico; with a descrip∣tion of that great City; from Mexico through the Provinces of Guaxaca, Chiapa, Vera, Paz, Trux∣illo, Comaygua, and twelve years abroad in Guatemala and Mexico, Pinola, &c. his wonderfull con∣version, his return home: with sundry other remarkeable discove∣ries of the Spaniards Government, behaviour of Priests and Fryars, &c. Reprinted. folio. Count Galliazo. An History of the Warres and other state affairs of the best part of Christendome, beginning with the King
of Swead∣landsentrance into Germany, and continued to the year 1640. eng∣lished from the Italian, by Earl of Monmouth. folio. Mr Godwin. Romanae Historiae. An exposition in English of the Ro∣man Antiquities; wherein many Roman and English Officers are parallel'd, and divers obscure phra∣ses explained. 4o. —Moses and Aaron, Civil and Eccle∣siasticall Rites used by the Antient Hebrews observed, and at large opened, what Customes the He∣brews borrowed from the heathen people, &c. 4o. —The succession of Bishops of Eng∣land, since the first planting of Christian Religion in this Island, with their lives and Actions. 4o. Gratiae Ludentes, or Jeasts from the University. 12o. Mr Gregory. An Historicall Anatomy of Christian Melancholy. 8o. Germanies Lamentations, Invasions, and Prodigies. 8o. H. Grotius. Politick Maxims and Ob∣servations: translated for the be∣nefit of the English Statseman. —A Treatise of the antiquity of the Common-wealth of Batavers; Translated from Latin to Dutch, and from both to English by T. Wood. Gent. G. Gardner Esq A true description of the new World, or America Is∣lands Continent, which places are inhabited, and with whom, and where desolate: the Bayes, Rulers, Capes, Forts, Cities, and their la∣titudes; the Seas on their Coasts, the Trades, Wives; North-passage, and converse of the English Nati∣on, &c. Coll. H. Gage. The Seige of Breda, by the Arms of Phil. the 4 under the Government of Isabella, atchived by the conduct of Ambr. Spinola. folio. A brief Description of the future Histo∣ry of Europe, from 1650 to 1710. treating principally of those grand and famous mutations yet expect∣ed in the, world, as the ruin of the popish Hierarchy, the finall anhilation of the Turkish Empire, the conversion of the Eastern and Western Jews, and their restaura∣tion to their antient Inheritances in the holy Land, &c. with princely passages upon every of these, out of that famous Manuscript of Pa. Grebner, extant in Tr. Coll. lib. Camb. composed on occasion of the young Kings arrivall into Scot∣land. 4o. ☞Glossographia, or a Dictionary in∣terpreting all such hard words, wether French, Greek, Latin, He∣brew, Italian, Spanish, Jentonick, Belgick, Brittish or Saxon, as are now used in our refined English Tongue; also the termes of Divini∣ty, Law, Physick, Mathematicks, Herauldry, Anatomy, War, Musick, Architecture, &c. with Etymolo∣gies, Deffinitions, and Historicall Observations on the same. 8o. ☞The Mirrour of true nobility and gentility; being the life of the re∣nowned Nicholas Claudius Fabrici∣us Lord of Peirest, Senator of the Parliament at Aix: by the learned P. Gassendus, professor of the Ma∣thematicks to the King of France. 8o. *Mr Gerbrier. Elogium Heroinum, on the praise of Women. 12o. *Mr Gayton. Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixot. folio. H. Grotius. De Mare libero & P. Merula de Maribus. 24. *P. Gassendius. Viri llustris N.C. Fa∣bricii
de pieresk senatoris aquisextien∣sis vita. 4o. H *Sr H. HOlcroft. The Histo. of the Warres of the Emperour Iu∣stinian, with the Persians, Goths, and Ʋandals, in 8. Books transla∣ted from the Greek. folio. Mr Hooker. Ecclesiasticall policy. folio. Ld Herbert. The life and reign of Hen. the eight. folio. ☞—Expeditio in ream insulam. 8o. T. Herbert. Esq. Some yeares travels into Africa and Asia the great, es∣pecially describing the famous Em∣pires of Persia and Industant, as al∣so divers other Kingdoms in the Orientall Indies, and isles adjacent. folio. ☞Mr Hall. The holy lives of Gods Prophets Historically discribed. 8o. *Mr Hobbs. Thucidides the Peloponesi∣an Warre, translated out of Greek. folio. *—Leviathan. The matter, form, and power of a common Wealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civill. folio. —Philosophicall rudiments, con∣cerning government and civill soci∣ety, containing the elements of ci∣vill policy, in the agreement which it hath both with, Naturall and Di∣vine laws, with the nature, limits, and qualifications, both of regency and subiection. *—Of liberty and necessity; against the Bp Bramhal, Bp of London derry 12o. *—De corpore politico. 12o. —Humane nature or the fundamen∣tall ellements of policy, being a dis∣covery of the faculties of the soul of man, from their originall causes, according to such Philosophicall principles as are not commonly known, or asserted. 12o. *The History of Ireland. Collected by three Learned Authors. Dr Hammen. Mr Champion fellow of S.I. Coll. and Ed Spencer. Esqfolio. C. Helvici. V.C. Theatrum Historicum & Chronologicum, Aequalibus denario∣rum, quinquagenariorum, & cente∣nariorum inter vallis; cum assignatio∣ne imperiorum regnorum dinastiarum regnum, aliorumque virorum cele∣brium Prophetarum, Theologorum, Iuris Consultorum, Medicorum, Phi∣losophorum, Oratorum, Historicorum, Poetarum, Haerecticorum, Rabbino∣rum, Concilliorum, Synodorum, Arch∣ademiarum, &c. folio. ☞Dr Hylin. Cosmographie in four Books, containing the Chorogra∣phy and History of the whole world and all the principall King∣doms, Provinces, Seas, and Isles, thereof. folio. ☞—A survey of France, and some of the adjoyning Islands, taken in the description of the principall ci∣ties and chief provinces, with the temper, humour and affections of the people generally, with the go∣vernment of the Court, Church, and state. 4o. ☞—Extraneus vapulans; against H. L. Strang, in his History of King Charles. 8o. Historia belgica, nostri potissimum tem∣poris belgii sub quatuor burgundis & totidem austriacis principibus conjun∣ctionem & gubernationem breviter. folio. Mr Hume. The Histo. of Douglas and Angus. folio. Mr Harfleet. The hunting of the fox, or display of flattery. 12o.
*Mr Hall Richmond. Of obedience, andgovernment as they stand directed by Scripture and reason, in foure Books. folio. ☞—The true Cavalier examined, by his principles, and found not guilty of Schisme or Sedition. 4o. De hibernia, & antiquitantibus ejus des∣quisitione, per Ja. Waraeo, q. Aurato. 8o. Hermes tres majestas. 8o. *Hist. of virginia, more especially the south part thereof, richly and truly vallewed, viz. The fertile Coralana, and no lesse excellent Isle of Roanoach: of lattitude from 31. to 37. degrees; discovery of silk Worms, implanting of Mul∣berry trees, dressing of vines, for the rich trade of Wines, the saw∣mill of great use, &c. 4o. *Mr Hotham. Fell. P.C.C. An intro∣duction to the Teutonick Philoso∣phy, being a determination of the originall of the soul. Sr J. Harrington. The Character and History of the Bp in the Reign of Q Eliz. and King James, as an ad∣adition to Godw. succession of Bp. 4o. *History of all the present Cardinals of Rome. 8o. *Sundry pieces of that sweet singer of the Temple Mr G. Herbre, Ora∣tor of the Ʋniversity of Camb. now exposed to light. 8o. *Mr T. Hall. An explanation of the 13. Book of O. Metamorph. contain∣ing that Rhetoricall contest be∣twixt Ajax and Ʋlisses, for Achilles armour, exhibiting the power of vallour and prevalency of elo∣quence. 8o. *Historicall Narrations, of the plot∣ting, beginning, and carrying on of that execrable rebellion and buchery in Ireland, with the un∣heard of devillish cruelties and massacres by the Irish Rebbels, ex∣ercised upon the Protestants, with somwhat about the actions of the late King concerning that rebelli∣on. 4o. *J. Hall. Esq Horae vacivae, or Es∣says, some occationall considerati∣ons. 12o. *—The hight of eloquence, writ O∣riginally in Greek by Dionisius Lon∣ginus, now Englished. 8o. *History of the Irish Wars. 8o. History of the defenders of the faith, discoursing of the state of Religion, in England under King Hen. 8. Edw. the 6. and Q. Mary, and Q. Eliz. 4o. ☞History of France, under the go∣vernment of Card. Richlein. folio. *Mr Hall. Ʋindiciae litterarum, The schools guarded, or the excellen∣cy and usefulnesse of arts, sci∣ences, languages, history, and all sorts of humane learning, in subor∣dination to Divinity, with an Ap∣pendix in answer to Mr Webster. 8o. ☞History of the French Achademy, erected at Paris by the late famous Card. de Richelein, and consisting of the most refined wits of that Nation: containing its originall and establishments, its statures, dayes, places and manner of As∣semblies, &c. the names of its mem∣bers, and Character of their persons, and a Catalogue of their works, by the Kings Secretary. 8o. *Mr Howell. The German diet, or the ballance of Europe, wherein the power and weaknesse, glory and reproach, virtues and vices, plenty and wants, advantages and defects, antiquities and moderns, of all the Kindoms and States of Christendom, are impartially poy∣sed. folio. ☞—Parthenopoeja. Or the Histo∣ry
of the most renouned Kingdome of Naples, with the dominions thereof annexed, and lives of all their Kings, the first part by Scipio Mazzella, englished by Mr Len∣nard, the second by J.H. who besides some supplements to the first part drawes on the thred of the story of these times, 1654. all illustrated with the figures of the Kings, and arms of all the provin∣ces. —A survey of the seigniory of Ʋenice, of her admired policy and method of government. —The History of Lewis, the 13. King of France, and of his Card. Richlein. folio. *—Epistolae hoelianae. Familiar let∣ters, domestick and forreign, part∣ly Historicall, Politicall, and Phi∣losophicall, in 3. volumes together. 8o. —Dodonus grove, or the vocall for∣rest, with Englands teares from the present warrs, and preheminences of Parliaments, 1. part. 12o. *—Dodonus grove, or the vocall for∣rest, 2. part. 8o. —Instructions and directions for for∣reign travell, shewing in what course and compasse of time one may take an exact survey of the Kingdomes and States of Christen∣dome, and arive to the practicall knowledg of the languages to good purpose. 8o. —Cottoni posthuma, divers choise pie∣ces of that renouned antiqary Sr Rob. Cotton, preserved from the in∣jury of time, and exposed to pub∣lique light for the benefit of posteri∣ty. 8o. —An exact History of the late revo∣lution in Naples, and of their mon∣strous successe not to be paralleled by any antient or modern Histo. 1. part. 8o. —History of the Warres of Jerusa∣lem, Epitomized. 8o. ☞—Some sober inspections made into the carriages and consults of the late long Parliament, with an account of former Parl. and magna charta, with some reflexes in go∣vernment in generall. 8o. *—Massenello. 2. part. His body taken out of the ditch, and solem∣ny buried; a continuation of the tumult, Duke of Guise, made Gene∣ralissimo, taken by young Jo. Don. of Austria, with the end of the com∣motions. 8o. ☞—Londinopolis. An Historicall discourse, or perlustration of the City of London, the imperiall cham∣ber and chief Emprium of great Brittain, also of Westminster, with the Courts of Justice, Antiquities and new Buildings. folio. —A Dialogue betwixt the body and the soule. —St Paul's progresse on earth. —A Venetian looking glasse. —A winter dream. —The trance or Mercurius Acheronti∣cus. —A Dialogue betwixt Patricius and Peregrin. —An inquisition after blood. —The Instruments of a King. —Bella Scoto-Anglica, or traverses of warre betwixt England and Scot∣land. —Mercurius Hybernicus. —Progresse and pleadings in the Court of Spain, for the death of Mr Askham. folio. History of the 7. wise masters of Rome. 8o. History of the antient and modern e∣state of the principallity of Wales, Duchy of Cornwall, and Earldom of
Chester, collected from the Re∣cordsof the Tower of London. 4o. History of the imperiall estate of the grand Seignours, their habitations, lives, tythes, qualities, exercises, warres, revenues, habit, descent, ceremonies, magnificence, judge∣ments, offices, favourites, religi∣on, power, government, and ty∣ranny. 8o. A help to discourse, or merriment mixt with serious matters, consist∣ing of witty Philosophicall, Gram∣maticall, Phisicall and Astronomi∣call Questions, and Answers. 8o. ☞History of the life and death of that renowned Bp Fisher, compri∣sing the highest and hidden trans∣actions of state in the reign of K. Henry the 8. with morall politicall and historicall animadversions on Card. Woolsey, Sr Tho. Moore, Lu∣ther, with a full relation of Q. Ca∣therines divorce. 8o. History of the life and death of Sr Tho. Moore, sometime Ld Chancel∣lour of England, by J.H. Gent. 8o. History of the life and death of Sr Tho. Overbury. 8o. History of the life and death of Mary Stuart, Q. of Scotland. 8o. ☞History of the iron age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as it was in the yeare, 1500. the causes of all warrs and commoti∣ons, with a discription of the most memorable battles, sieges, actions and transactions, both in Court and Camp, till this present yeare, 1656. illustrated with the lively effigies of the most renowned per∣son. of this present time, render∣ed into English, by B. Harris, Gent. folio. A History of the most unjust, cruel, and barbarous proceedings against the English at Anboina in the East Indies, by the Netherlandish gover∣ners and councell there, with re∣marks on the whole. 12o. History of Sejanus, translated into Eng∣lish. 8o. Mr Hall. A help to understand Engl. History. 8o. Mr Jo. Hayward. The life and reign of K. Edw. the 6. with the beginning of the R. of Q Eliz. 12o. —Englands Elizabeth, her life and troubles from her minority to the Crown. 12o. History of the Anabaptists of high and low Germany. 4o. Mr Habbington. The History of Edward the 4. folio. —Observations on History. 12o. *History of new England, from the first planting thereof, by the En∣glish, in the yeare 1628. to 1653. with the most materiall passages happening. 4o. The Roman History of Amianus Mar∣cellinus, translated by P. Holland, Dr Phes. containing such acts and occurrents as passed under Constan∣tius, Iulianus, Iovianus, Vallenti∣nianus, and Vallens: Emperours, in 18. Books; with a brief Chro∣nologie, and Annotations, &c. folio. *Mr Hunt. M.A. New recreations, or rare and exquisite inventions, for exercising of accure wits, and in∣dustrious dispositions, replenished with mysteries, secrets, and rari∣ties, both Arithmeticall, and Ma∣thematicall. 12o. ☞The common wealth of Oceana, dedicated to his Highnesse, by Mr Ja. Harrington in folio. *☞Mr Holland. The morrals of Plu∣tarch, translated from the Gr. into English. 8o.
The History of the inquisition inRome; by Father Pa. Servita, the Authour of the Council of Trent. 8o. —☞An exact History of the life of James Naylor; his Parents, birth, education, professions, actions, and blasphemies, how he came to be a Quaker, &c. 4o. ☞The History of the transactions of Affairs in England, from 1653 when the Parliament began, till 1657. 4o. ☞The History of the most materiall Parliamentary transactions, from Novemb. 3. 1640 till 1656. by way of Chronologie. 4o. J. JOsephus. The History of the Jews. folio. Mr Jackson. Saturni Ephemerides sive Tabula Historico. Chronologica; con∣taining a Chronologicall Series or succession of the four Monarchies, with an abridgment of the Annuall memorable passages in them, also a succession of Kings and Rulers, over their world, and their several stories epitomized. A compendi∣ous of the Church of God, from the Creation, &c. folio. Ireland's Naturall History, its situation, greatness, shape, and nature: of its hils, woods, heaths, boggs, heads of promontories, harbours, roads, and bayes, springs, fountains, mettals, mi∣nerals; the nature and tempera∣ture of its air and season, &c. by G. Boate Dr of Physick to the state in Ireland. 8o. Itinerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, or Travels of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Kings; our Savi∣our Christ and his Apostles, as they are related in the O. and N. Testa∣ment; the descriptions of the Towns and places to which they travelled, &c. 4o. Instructions for Courteirs, or a Treatise of the Court; in two Books: by Mounseir denis de Refuges Counsell and Ambassadour to the French King. 8o. The Interest of Princes and States of Christendome. 12o. ☞The Italian Convert; News from Italy of a second Moses, or the life of Galliacius Caracciolus, the Noble Marquess of Vic; his admirable conversion from popery, and for∣saking of a rich Marquessdom for the Gospels sake; illustrated with sundry Figures and Cuts. 8o. The Jesuit, the Thief, or the only state Heretick in the world; or the Ve∣netian Quarrell. 4o. The Idol of Clowns, or Insurrection of Watt the Tyler; with his Priests Baal, and Straw; with his fellow Kings of the Commons against the English Church, King, Laws, Nobility, &c. 8o. Italian Proverbs, select and choice, the most significant newly made to speak English, usefull for such as happily not aiming at the language, yet would see the genius of the Na∣tion. 12o. Instructions describing what special Observations are to be taken by Travellers in all Nations, States, and Countries, pleasant and profi∣table; by the three much admi∣red Rob. E. Essex, Sr. P. Sidney, and Secretary Weston. 12o. ☞A Description and Explanation of 268 places in Jerusalem, and the Sub∣urbs thereof, as it flourished in the time of Jesus Christ, answerable to the most exact description of the Map, shewing the severall places of the Acts and
Sufferings of JesusChrist and his holy Apostles, very usefull for clearing many places in the Prophets, Josephus, and other Histories, especially in the Gospel and Acts: Newly translated by Mr Jessey. Mr. Johnsons Essayes expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies. ☞J. Johnstonus. An History of the wonderfull things in Nature: Of Heaven: The Elements, Meteors, Minerals, Plants, Birds, Beasts four-footed: Things wanting blood; Fishes and of Man. folio. ☞An History of the constancy of nature; that the world decaies not universally of it self, nor the Hea∣vens Elements, mixt Bodies, Mete∣ors, Plants, nor man, &c. 8o. Anarchia Anglicana, or History of Independency; being Relations, and Observations Historicall and Politicall, upon the Parliament 1640 1o. The Mysteries of the two Juntoes, Presbiterian and In∣depen. with a continuation of the History of Parliament begun Anno 16 Caroli primi; with the procee∣ding of the Indep. faction Scotland. 4o. K. Mr KNolls. The generall History of the Turks, from the first be∣ginning of the Nation to the rising of the Ottaman Family, with all the notable expeditions of Christi∣an Princes against them; with the lives and conquests of the Ottaman Kings and Emperours. folio. Mt Knocks. The History of the Refor∣mation of he Church of Scotland; in five Books: with some Treaties conducing to the History. folio. L. ☞Mr LIgon. A true History of the Island of Barbados, with a Map of it; with Trees and Plants, with the Ingenio to make Sugar, with the plots of Houses and Roomes, &c. folio. *P. Lansbergio. Gustavi magni Bellum Germanicum. 12o. ☞Ha. La Strang. The Reign of King Charles, faithfully and impartially delivered, and disposed into An∣nals. folio. Lithgoe, his rare adventures, or 19 years travell from Scotland to Eu∣rope, Asia, and Africa; their Laws, Religions, Policies, &c. 4o. Lives and memorable Acts of nine the most worthy Women of the world, three Jews, three Christi∣ans, three Heathens. 4o. *The life of the most learned Father Paul, of the order of the Servy; Counseller of state to the most serene Republick of Venice, and Authour of the History of the Counsell of Trent; Englished from the Italian by a person of quality. 8o. ☞Mr Lambert. The perambulation of Kent, containing the descripti∣on, History, and Customes of that Shire; their Charters, Laws, Priviledges, and cinque-Ports. 8o. ☞Liptius de constantiâ Englished; or comfortable Consolations for all that are afflicted in mind or body. 12o. The life of Alfred the Founder of subordinate Government. 12o. ☞The life of Paulinus Bp of Nola,
collected in his sickness and retire∣ment,by H. Vaugham S. Evirist. 12o. Of Liberty and Servitude; Englished from the French. 12o. *The life of Jacob Behmen, vulgarly called the German Prophet. 4o. Life and death of Almansir, the learned and victorious King that conquered Spain; by Ro. Ashly out of Oxon. Library. 4o. *Legenda Lignea, with an answer to Mr Birchleys Moderator; where he pleads for a toleration of popery: with a Character of some hopefull Saints recalled to the Church of Rome, as well English as others. 8o. ☞Le Cheminabridge, or a compendi∣ous method for attaining of the Sciences; by Card. Richlew. 8o. *The life and death of W. Lawde, Arch Bp of Canterbury. 8o. *An Essay upon the first Book of T. Lucretius Carus, de rerum Naturâ; Interpreted and made English, by J. Elvin Esq illustrated with Histo∣ricall Annota. 8o. *Life and death of Mistris Brettergh. 8o. The great and famous Battell of Lutzen, fought between the renowned King of Sweden and Walstein, wherein were left dead on the the place between 5 and 6000 of the Swedish party, and between 10 and and 1200 of the Imperia∣lists; the King of Sweden unfor∣nately slain; a counterpoise for the death of all the rest: Pappen∣heim, Merode, Isolani, and many great Commanders were offered as Sacrifices on the Swedish altar to the memory of their King; with an abridgment of the Kings. life, and the King of Bohemia's death. 4o. The History of Heliodorus; in ten Books: Translated by W. Lisle. 4o. —Monuments in the Saxon tongue: written 700 years agoe, shewing that the Old and New Testament, Lords Prayer and Creed, were then used in the Mother Tongue. 4o. Lucian,s Dialogues translated. 4o. ☞The life of Christiana Q. of Sweden, her resignation of the Crown, Voyage to Brussels, and ourney to Rome, with her Character; trans∣lated from the French. 4o. ☞Mr Lawson. An examination of the Politicall part of Mr Hobbs Levia∣than. 8o. The life of Jean Arman Du Plessis Duke of Richelein, and Peer of France, &c. 12o. M. H. Earl of MOnmouth. The Civil Wars of Eng. between the two Houses of Lancaster and York, be∣ginning in the reign of Richard the second, to the end of Henry the se∣venth: Englished from Italian. ☞—Pagguagn di Parnassa: or Adver∣tisements from Parnassus; with the Politick Touchstone. folio. ☞—Politick discourses translated from Italian, with the examination of the Authours life. folio. Marcators Atlas, or History of the World, containing his Cosmogra∣phicall descriptions of the Fabrick and Figure of the World, rectified and beautified with Maps and Ta∣bles. folio. Ld Mountaigne. Essaies translated from the French. folio. Madagasker, or St Lawrences, an Island in Asia, near to the East-Indies. A description and
disco∣veryof that famous Island, the healthfulness, pleasure, fertility, and wealth thereof: the condition of the Natives, their Inhabiting, their affability, habit, weapons, manner of living, plenty of food, flesh, fish fowle, &c. Oringes, Lemmons, &c. Also trading from Port to Port, all India and Asia over, to and from Persia, Moco, China, and to the rich Eastern Kingdoms, &c. 4o. Morall and Politick Essayes. 8o. ☞Modern Policies taken from Machia∣vel Borgia, and other choice Au∣thours by an eye witness. 12o. *T. May Esq A breviary of the Histo∣ry of the Parliament of England, the causes, beginnings, progress, of the first and second War. 8o. *—Lucan Phrasalia, or the Civil Warres of Rome, between Pom∣pey the Great, and J. Caesar; with Annotations. 12o. *Marque Malvezi. Considerations up∣on the lives of Alcibiades and Cori∣olanus, two famous Roman Com∣manders. 12o. *—Of the success, and other events of the Monarchy of Spain, in the the year 1649. the means of their revolt. 12o. *—Stoa Triumphans, or a Discourse of the praise of banishment, and dispraise of honours. 12o. *—The Christian favourite drawn from some of the late actions of the Lord Duke of St Lucar; with Max∣ims of State, and politick Observa∣tions on the same story of Count Oliveraz D. of St Lucar. 12o. —Romulus and Tarquin. 12o. —A Discourse on Cornelius Tacitus; translated from Italian. folio. Mayerus Lusus Serious, A Philosophi∣call Discourse of the superiority of Creatures. 12o. Sr Tho. Moore. The History of the pit∣tifull life, and unfortunate death of Edward the fifth, and the Duke of York his Brother; with the ttoublesome and tyrannicall Go∣vernment of usurping Richard the third; with his miserable end. 8o. *Montross Redivivus, or the Portrai∣ture of James, late Marquess of Montross, Earl of Kincardin, in his actions for Charles the first, in his passions for Charles the second King of Scotland. 8o. Morall Philosophy, containing the lives, answers, witty sayings, wise and excellent Counsels, Precepts, Pro∣verbs and Parrables of Philoso∣phers, Oratours, Emperours, and Kings, of what linage and what County soever. 8o. W. Martin Esq The History and lives of the Kings of England, from W. the Conquerour, to the end of K. Henry the eighth; added also Ed. 6. Qu. Mary and Queen Elizabeth. folio. A Magicall description of the soul, the nature, Genesis and Exodus of it 8o. ☞W. Montague Esq The accomplished Woman. 12o. *Musgrave muszled, or a clear Vin∣dication of Sr Arthur Hasselrig. 4o. The Mirrour which flatters not, trans∣lated from the French. 8o. *Mr Mayerius. Lusus Serius, or serious pastime; A Philosophicall discourse concerning the superiority of the Creatures under. 12o. ☞Mazirini his entrance, or some Memorials of the State of France, between the death of Card. Riche∣lein, and the beginning of the late Regency. 12o. ☞The Mystery of Jesuitism
discove∣red, upon occasion the differencesat Sorbone, between the Iansenists and Molinists. displaying the cor∣rupt maxims, and politicks of that society, done by Ld de Montalte, now englished. 8o. ☞Manizi. His most exquisite Ach∣ademicall discourses upon se∣verall choice subjects, englished from the French. 4o. ☞—The loving husband and pru∣dent wife, represented in the per∣sons of St Eustachius, and Theopista Martirs, the story confirmed by Baronius, and Greek and Latine Au∣thors. 12o. N NEwfound-land. A discourse thereof, with the scituation, temperature, and commodity of it. 4o. Mr Nesbit. A Scripture Chronology, wherein the principall periods of time, from the Creation of the world, to the death of Christ are included, and many questions of importance resolved. *Naturall Philosophy, a discription of the world and all therein, of Angels, Heavens, Stars, Planets, Elements, their order, nature, and government, of minerall, metalls, plants, stones, with the colours, forms, and virtues. 4o. *Sr R. Naunton. Mr of C. Wards, Fragmenea Regalica, or observati∣ons on the late Q. Eliz. her times and favourites. 12o. The new starre of the north, shining upon the victorious King of Swe∣den. 4o. O Mt OSborn. Advise to a sonne, or directions for your better con∣duct through the various and most important encounters of this life, under these heads; study, love and marriage, travell, government, religion. 12o. —Politicall reflections, upon the governments of the Turks; N. Machiavell; the King of Swedens, discent into Germany; the conspi∣racy of Piso, and vindex against Ne∣ro; the greatnesse and corruption of the Church of Rome, the electi∣on of Pope Leo, the 11. the defecti∣on from the Church of Rome, and Mr Luther vindicated. 12o. Sr Tho. Overbury. His Wife with addi∣tions of new Characters. 8o. Ortelius Epitomy. Or a theatre of the world, wherein the principall re∣gions of the earth are discribed in small Mapps. 8o. ☞Observations on Sandersons Histo. of Q. Mary of Scotland, and King James of England. 4o. P *Politick and millitary observations, of the civill and military govern∣ments, the birth, increase, and decay of monarchies, the carri∣age of Princes, Majestrates, com∣manders and favourites, by D.P. Esq 4o. C. Pline. The History of the world commonly called the naturall Hi∣story. folio. Mr Puchase. His pilgrimage, or rela∣tions of the
world by the religionsobserved in all ages, and places, discovered from the Creation in 4. parts; being a Theologicall and Geographicall History of Asia, Af∣fica, America and Europe, with the Islands adjacent, declaring the religions before the flood, and since, the severall Opinions, Idols, Oracles, Temples, Priests, Fasts, Feasts, Sacraments, &c. with a discription of all Countries. folio. Plutarch of Chaeronia, that grave and learned Philosopher, and Historio∣grapher, his lives of the noble Gre∣cians, and Romans. folio. Dr Potter. The History of the quarrels of Pope Paul the 5. with the state of Venice, writ in Italian, by the Author of the counsell of Trent, now Englished. 4o. Bp Prideaux. An easie and compendi∣ous introduction for reading all sorts of Histories, contrived in a more facile way then heretofore hath been published; to which is added a Synopsis of counsel, &c. 4o. Parradoxis de la selle. 12o. *E. Philalothes. Euphrates or the wa∣ters of the east. 8o. *—Anthroposophia Theomagia, or a discourse f the nature of man, and his estate after death. 8o. A prospect of the most famous parts of the world, Asia, Africa, Europe and America, with the Kingdoms contained therein. 8o. Pollicy unvailed, or maxims and reasons of state by I.M. of Oxon. 4o. Mr Peacham. The compleat Gentle∣man, fashoning him absolute in the most necessary and commendable qualities, concerning mind or bo∣dy, that may be required in a no∣ble Gentleman. 4o. —The truth of our times reveaeld, out of one mans experience, by way of Essay. 12o. Postillion, or Propheticall progno∣sticks of the warres of Christen∣dome, translated from the high Dutch. 4o. A Philosophicall banquet. 8o. Principles for young Princes, collect∣ed from sundry Authors. 12o. Picturae Lonventes, or pictures drawn forth into Characters. 12o. ☞A panegyrick of the most renown∣ed and serene Princess, Christiana, Q. of Swedland. Goths, and Vandals. 12o. ☞A president of female perfection, presented to such as will be subject to the government of virtue, in a Historicall discourse of the most virtuous woman. 12o. R Sr W. Rawleigh. The History of the world, 1. from the Creation unto Abraham, 2. from that to the destruction of Solomons Temple, 3. from thence to Philip of Macedon, 4. then to the stablishing of that Kingdome, in the race of Antigonus, 5. from the setled rule of Alexan∣ders successors, untill the Romans made conquest of Asia, and Mace∣don. folio. —His ghost, or his aparition to an in∣timate friend, written against the Atheists and Policitians of this age. 12o. —Judicious and select essaies and ob∣servations, on the first invention of shiping, the misery of invasive warre, the Navy Royall and sea service, with his apologie for his sea voyage to Guina. 8o. *—Maxims of state, instructions to his sonne and
posterity with thedutifull advice of a loving sonne to his aged father. 12o. *—Observations concerning trade and commerce with the Hollander and other Nations, wherein is shewed, that our sea and land com∣modities serve to enrich and strengthen other Nations against our own, with other passages of high importance. 12o. —Septicks, or speculations and ob∣servations of the magnificency and opulency of cities, his seat of go∣vernment, with letters to the King and others of quality, with his de∣meanour before his execution. 12o. —Warrs with forreign Princes, dan∣gerous to our Common Wealth, or reasons for forreign Waers an∣swered, 8o. Lablais. 5. Books of the lives heroick deeds, and sayings of Gargantua, and his sonne Pantagruel, with the Pantagrueline prognostica, the orac. of Bachuc and response of the bot∣tle in English. 8o. The rich Cabinet of rare inventions. 8o. Mr Rosse. The continuation of Sr Wal∣ter Rawleighs History of the world, wherein the most remarkable pas∣sages of those lives, Ecclesiasticall and civill, in the greatest states, Empires and Kingdoms are repre∣sented. folio. —A view of all religions in the world, with the severall Church governments, from the Creation to these times, with a discovery of all known Heresies, all ages and places, with the lives, actions and ends of certain notorious Here∣ticks, with their effigies, in Copper∣plate. 8o. —The new planet, no planet, or the earth no wardering starre, unless in the wandering hearts of Galile∣ans. 4o. —The epitome of Sr W Rawleighs Hi∣story of the world, containing all the passages from the Creation to the end of the Macedonian warre. 12o. —Rerum judaicarum, or the jewish affairs in 4. books. —A Philosophicall touch-stone. 4o. —A caveat for reading the Turkish Alcharon. —Observations on Sr W. Raleighs Hi∣story of the world. 12o. *—Leviathan drawn out with a hook. 12o. ☞A veiw of the jewish Religion, containing the manner of life, rites, ceremonies and customs of the jewish Nation, throughout the world, at this present time, with the articles of their faith, as now re∣ceived. 8o. *—Against Ld Bacon, Dr Harvey, Mr Brown, &c. as at large in catalogue of physick books, an advertisement to the jury men of England, and touching witches. 4o. The reply of the most illustrious Car∣dinall of Perron, to the answer of the most excellent King of great Brittain. folio. *The regall apology. 4o. *Mr Raymond. An itinerary, containing a voyage made through Italy, in the yeare 1646. & 1647. illustrated with divers figures of antiquity. 8o. *The reign of Sultan Orchan, second K. of the Turks, translated out of Hojah Effendi, an eminent Turkish Historian. 8o. *The royall Charter granted unto Kings. 12o. *The Roylalists defence Printed at Ox∣ford. 4o.
Romish forgyries, or a discovery ofthe falsities of the Church of love. 4o. A review of the counsell of Trent, con∣taining the severall nullities there∣of, with the many grievances and prejudices done by it to Christian Princes, translated from French to English. folio. *A relation of the no lesse honoura∣ble then unfortunate expedition of Colechester. 12o. ☞The right of dominion, and pro∣perty of liberty, whether naturall, civill or religious, wherein is com∣prized the beginning and continu∣ance of dominion, by arms, the excellency of Monarchy, with the necessity of taxes, with their mo∣deration. 8o. *The rise and fall of that great states∣man, count Oliveras, with other Histories, concerning the Kingdom of Portugall. 8o. The renowned Sr Tho. Roe, Ambassa∣dor, A discourse concerning the K. of Spains surprizing of the Va∣teline. 4o. *A restitution of decayed intelligence in antiquities concerning the most noble and renowned English Nati∣on, dedicated to his Majesty. 8o. An excellent oration of that late fa∣mously learned Dr Reynolds, fit for all such as effect the studies of Logick, and Philosophy, and ad∣mire profane Learning. 12o. Mr Rouse and Bgan. Archaeologiae atricae lib. Septm. 7. Books of the artick antiquities, containing the descrip∣tion of the cities glory, govern∣ment, division of the people and towns within the Athenian territo∣ries, the religion, superstition, sa∣crifices, account of the yeare, the customs in marriages, burials, feast∣ings, divinations, &c. S ☞W. SAnerson Esq A compleat History of the lives and reigns of Mary Q of Scotland, and her Son and successor Ja. the 6. King of England, reconsiling severall opi∣nions in testimony of her, and con∣futing others in vindication of him, against two scandalous Authors, the Court of King James, and Wil∣son's History of great Brtttain. folio. A survey of London. Containing the originall antiquity, increase of mo∣dern estate, and description of that City, &c. 4o. Speculum mundi. Or a glass, repre∣senting the face of the world, that it did begin, and must also end, the manner how and when largly ex∣pressed. 4o. *The Scots design discovered, relat∣ing their dangerous attempts, late∣ly practised against the English Na∣tion, with the sad consequences of the same. 4o. *The state of France, as it stood in the 9th. yeare of this present Mo∣narch, Lewis the 14. in. 12o. The Swedish intelligenter, containing the principall passage, and actions, done in the best part of Christen∣dome. 4o. Mr Scot. A discovery of witchcraft, proving the common opinion of witches, contracting with Devils, spirits, or familiars, with their power to kill, torment, and con∣sume the bodies of men, women, and chidren, their flying in the ayr, &c. to be but imaginary, errone∣ous, conceptions, and novelties, with many other secrets opened, that have lien hid. 4o. The soveraignty of the Brittish seas. 12o.
Mr Sleyden. The key of History, or methodicall abridgement of the 4. chief monarch of Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome, being a Chrono∣logy from the flood. 8o. Eadmeri monachi cantuariensis, Histo∣ria novorum, Johannes Seldinis, notis. folio. Mare clausam, seu domino mare. folio. —History of great Brittain, from the first peopling thereof, to the reign of K. James, by W.S. illustrated by I.S. Esq folio. —History of tythes in the payment of them, the laws made for them, and touching the right of them. 4o. Mr Swan. The standerd of time, or the measuring reed, containing an ex∣act Chronologicall computation of the years of the world from the Creation thereof, to the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, by the Romans, relating the various mutations and transactions hap∣pening therein, wherein also the hidden mysteries of Daniels 70. weeks, and other prophesies, &c. 4o. The Spanish gallant, instructing men in their carriage to be beloved of the people. 12o. Mr Sydnham of Newcastle. The false brother, or the mappe of Scotland, drawn by an english pencill. 4o. —An english interpretation of the Scotch declaration. 4o. —The anatomy of John Lilburns spi∣rit and pamphlets, or a vindication of the two honourable Patriots, Oliver Cromwell, Ld governour of Ireland, and Sr A Hesselridg Knight Barronet, wherein the said Lilb. is demonstratively proved to be a common lyar, and unworthy of ci∣vill converse. 4o. ☞Curia politiae, or the appologies of severall princes, justifying to the world, their most eminent actions, by the strength of reason, and the most exact rules of policy, written in French by the accurate pen of Mounseir de Scudery, governour of Nosterdam, now englished. folio. Plinies Panegerick. A speech in the senate, to the emperour Trojan, englished by Sr Rob. Stapleton. 4o. A seasonable expostulation, with the Netherlands, declaring their ingra∣titude to the necessity of their a∣greement. 4o. The works of L. A. Senaeca, both morrall, and naturall, containing, 1. of Benefits; 2. Epistles; 3. of Providence; 4. Anger; 5. of cle∣mency; 6. of its blessed life; 7. of the tranquility of the mind; 8. con∣stancy of a wise man; 9. of the shortnesse of life; 10. Consolati∣ons to Martia, Helvia, and Polibi∣us. with his 7. Books of naturall questions, all translated by T. Lodge, Dr in physick. folio. A survey of Tyrranny: or anatomiz∣ing of Tyrants, whether they be Saints or Samaritans, Jews or Gen∣tiles, professors of godlinesse or profane persecutors, that the cen∣ter in one point; Infancy upon their names, unavoidable ruin upon their own persons and posterity: proved by sundry examples, both antient, and modern. 4o. The conspiracy of Catteline against the government of the Senate of Rome, and the warre with Iugurth for many years, maintained against the state, by C. C. Salustius. 4o. A survey of the King of Sweden, by a brief description of the provinces of that dominion, their riches, an∣tiquity, nature and manners, go∣vernment, power, great offices and revennues of the
Crown, Ca∣talogueof the Kings, for the last 500. years, their acts, deeds, alli∣ance, issue, and off-spring, of Gusta∣vus Adolphus, the 2. his acts be∣fore his coming to the Crown, and before and after his entrance into Germany. 4o. Mr Stanley. The History of Philoso∣phy, containing those on whom the attribute of Wise was confer∣red, being the birth, lives, acts, parts, &c. morall sentences, of Tales, Solon, Chilon, Pittacus, Bi∣as, Cleobulus, Periander, Anachar∣sis, Myson, Epimenides, Pherecil∣des, Anaximander, Anaxinenes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Socrates, Xenophon, Aeschines, Crito, Simon, Glaucon, Simnias and Cebes: The first part illustrated with divers fi∣gures in Copper-Plates. folio. The History of Philosophy, the se∣cond part, being the lives, deaths, &c. of Aristippus, Hegesias, Anni∣seris, Theodorus, Bion, Euclid, Eu∣bulides, Alexinus, Euphantus, Ap∣pollonius, Chronus, Diodorus, Ich∣thias, Clinomachus, Stilpo. Phaedo, Pisthenes, Menedemus, Plato, Speu∣sippus, Xenocrates, Polemo, Cra∣tes, Crantor, Arseilaus, Lacidos, Graneades, Clitomachus, Philo, An∣tiochus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Stra∣to, Lyco, Aristo, Critolaus, Diodo∣rus, Antisthenes, Diogines, Moni∣mus, Onesicritus, Crates, Metro∣cles, Hipparchia, Menippus, Mene∣demus, Zeno, leanthes, Chrysippus, Zeno, Diogenes, Antipater, Panaeti∣us, Posidonius. folio. Mr Stephens. An Essay on statutes, or the first 5. books of Pub. Papini∣us. Statius, the baies. Mr Spring. Englands recovery, or an Historicall relation of the warres thereof, under the command of the Ld Fairfax Generall. folio. *Manzini. Exquisite accademicall discourses, upon severall subjects, by Mounseir Scuddery, governour of Nosterdance. Mr Spye. A Treatise of Civill Govern∣ment. 4o. *Secritaries study, New familiar Epi∣stles, wherein Laydies Gent. and all that are ambitious to speak and write elegantly, in a succinct and sacetious strain, are here furnished. 4o. The Spanish History, or generall Hi∣story of Spain. folio. Mr Speed. The History of great Brit∣tain, under the conquests of the Roman Saxons, Dane and Romans, the originall manners, habits, warres, coines and seales; with the successions, lives, acts and issues of the English Monarchies. folio. —A prospect of the most famous parts of the world, drawn forth in Mapps and descriptions of Asia, Affrica, Europe and America; with the Kingdoms therein, as Grecia, Roman Empire, Germany, Bohemi∣a, France, Belgia, Spain, Italy, Hungary, Denmark, Poland, Per∣sia, Turkish Empire, Kingdome of China, Tartarea, with some islands, as England. &c. Mr Stow. Annales, or a generall Cro∣nologie of England, with an Ap∣pendix or Chorolary of the foun∣dations of the Universities of Eng∣land, and continued to the yeare 1631. folio. Scotish tumults, from their first ori∣ginalls, with a particular deducti∣on of the seditious practises of the prime leaders of the Covenants, collected out of their own soul acts and writings. folio. Mr Simson. Chronicon Historiam Catho∣licam complectens, ab exordio, mundi ad nativitatem, D.N. Jesu Christi,
& ex inde ad annum à Chisto nato, 71. ex sacris bibliis caeterisque, pro∣batae fidei, anctoribus seriem, Histori∣arum, omnis aevi secundum tempora di∣gestarum, E. S. S. T. D, &c. Para∣scent ad chronicun Catholicum acces∣sere, 1. Tabulae chronologicae, 2. Stem∣mata quaedam insigniora, 3. Successio∣nes regum, 4. Catalogus olympioni ca∣rum. folio. Mr Sandys Travils. Containing a Histo∣ry of the originall and present state of the Turkish Empire, their laws, government, &c. the Mahometan Religion; description of Constanti∣nople, Seragleo; with his manner of living; of Greece and their Religi∣on; of Egypt, the antiquity Hiero∣glyphicks and Religion, a voyage on the River Nilus, of Armenia, grand Carre-Rhodes, &c. Holy land of Jerusalem, also Italy described, and the islands of Cyprias, Crete, Nalla, Sicilia, and Rome, Venice, Zaples, &c. with 50. mapps engra∣ven. folio. —Speculum Europiae, or a survey of the state of Religion, the western parts of the world, wherein the Roman Religion and their policies are notably displayed. 12o. —Ovid Metamorphosis englished, with cuts. folio. ☞Bp Spotswood. The History of Scotland, from the yeare of our Lord, 203. to the end of King James the 6. wherein is described, the progress of Christianity, persecutions and interruptions of it, the founda∣tion of Churches, &c. Reformati∣on of Religion, and frequent de∣sturbances of that Nation by wars, conspiracies, tumults, schismes, &c. by Bp S. privy Counsellor to King Charles the first, that most religious and blessed Prince. folio. *Strada de bello Belgico. The Histo∣ry of the low Countery wars, eng∣lished from (the Latine, by Sr Ro∣bert Stapleton. folio. ☞—The siege of Antwerp, translated from Latine, by Mr Lancastle. 8o. T THe Theatre of honour and Knight∣hood, being a History of the Chri∣stian world, containing the origi∣nall of all Monarchies, Kingdoms, and estates, with their Emperours, Kings, Princes, their beginnings, continuance and successions to this present, &c. written in French by A. Favine Parisian and advocate to the Parl. folio. Mr Trussell. A continuation of the col∣lection of Daniels History of Eng. ending when Vicount St Albans be∣gan with H. 7. being a compleat History of the beginning and end of the dissention, betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster, with the matches and issue of all the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Vicounts of this Na∣tion deceased, during those times. folio. The tryall of L. Coll. John Lilburn at Guildhall London, done with an e∣ven hand, in reference to court and prisoner. 4o. ☞Tears of the Indians, being an Hi∣storicall and true account of the cruell massacres and slaughter of a∣bove 20. million of innocent people by the Spaniards in Hispaniola, Cu∣ba, Jamaica, also in Mexico, Peru, and other places in the West-Indies, written in Spa. by Casans, an eye witnesse, now in Engl. 8o. Truth it's manifest, or a short and true relation of
divers main passa∣gesof things concerning the Scots, from the beginning of these trou∣bles to this day. 12o. The Testaments of the 12. patriarch∣es, the Sons of Jacob translated from te Greek by the Bp of Lyn∣colnd. 8o. Mr Terry. Chaplin to Right honourable Sr Tho. Row Ambassador. A voy∣age to East-India; many things in our passage, with more observa∣tions in our abode, is taken notice of within that rich and spacious Empire of the great Molgo. 8o. A Treaise of the Court, writ in French, by that great Counsellor de Refu∣ges, oft Ambassador to the 2 last French Kings now in Eng. 8o. *Teratologia, or a discovery of Gods wonders, manifest in former and modern times, by bloody rain and waters. Themis Aurea, The laws of fraternity, of the Rosie Cross, by count May∣erus, now englished, to inform that honourable society of wise Philosophers. *Sr J. Temple. The History of the Jrish Rebellion. 4o. Mr Taylor. Wit and Mirth. 8o. *The Theatre of Complements, or art of eloquence, and most refined way of speaking. 8o. *J. Tradesane, rarities published by himself. 8o. Truth brought to light, and discover∣ed by time, or an Historicall nar∣ration of the first 14. years of King Jame's Reign. 4o. V. ☞THe vale Royall of England, or Countrey Pallatine of Chester il∣lustrated; being a Geographicall or Historicall description thereof, its hundreds, seats of Nobility, Gen∣try, &c. rivers, towns, castles; all adorned with Mapps, &c. 4o. *A view and defence of reformation of the Church of Englnd by K. Edw. and Q. Eliz. wherein her doctrine discipline, and lythurgy are consi∣dered and preferred before all o∣thers. 8o. A voyage as strang as dangerous, by Capt. Tho. James in his intended discovery of the northwest passa∣ges to the south sea, wherein the miseries indured both going, win∣tering and returning, with the rari∣ties observed both Philosophicall and Mathematicall. 4o. Mr Vicars. A Chronicle of the late wars in the reign of K. Carles of England. A short view of the long life and reign of H. 3. K. of Eng. and of Hen. 4. 8o. The Venitian History or the generall discription of Venice, it's originall, strength, &c. ☞Letters of affairs, love, and court∣ship, writ to severall persons of ho∣nour and quality by the exquisite pen of Mouseir de Voiture, a member of the famous French Achademy, established in Paris, by Card. Rich∣lein. 8o. Villare Anglicum, A Catalogue of all the towns and villages, and in what liberty they stand in Eng. and Wales. W. J. WIlson Esq The History of great Britiain, being the life and reign of K. Ja. relating to what passed from his first accesse to the Crown till his death. folio. *S. H. Wotton. lath Prov. Eaton. Col. A collection of lives, letters, and cha∣racters of sundry personages, and
other incomperable pieces of lan∣guageand art. 12o. ☞—The state of Christendome; or a most exact and curious discovery of many secret passages and hidden misteries of the times. folio. ☞Wit revived. 12o. *De hiberniâ & antiquitatibus ejus dis∣quisitione; Authore Jac. Waraeo, E. Aurat. 8o. Mr Weaver. Antient Funerall monu∣ments, within the united Monar∣chy of great Brittain, Ireland, and Islands adjacent, with the dissolved monuments therein contained, their founders, and what eminent per∣sons have been interred in the same: also the death and buriall of certain of the blood Royall, the nobility and gentry of those Kingdoms en∣tombed in forrain Nations, a work reviving the dead memory of the Royall Progenie, nobility, gentry, and commonality intermixed and illustrated with variety of Historical Observations, Annotations, and brief notes, extracted out of appro∣ved Authors, manuscrips and judi∣tious antiquities; with the foundati∣on and fall of Religious houses, or∣ders, of Ecclesiasticall state of Eng. &c. folio. Mr Withers. The nature of man. 12o. ☞—The modern Statesman. 12o. ☞Mr Whitlock. Essayes or observations on the present manners of the Eng. briefly anatomizing the living by the dead, with an usefull detection of the Mountebanks of both sexes. 8o. Sr Isa. Wake. A threefold help to po∣liticall observations, in 3. discour∣ses, 1. On the 13. Cantons of Swit∣zerland; 2. the state of Italy, in the yeare 1625. 3. The K. of Swedens war in Germany. 12o. *d. Waterhouse Esq An humble apolo∣gy, for learning and learned men. 8o ☞Mr White. The grounds of obedience and government. 12o. ☞—The state of future life and pre∣sent orders to it. 12o. ☞—Peripateticall institutions, in the way of that eminent person the excellent Philosopher, Sr Kenelm Digby, the theoicall part, with a theologicall index of the begining of the worl 8o. A World in the Moon, or a discourse tending to prove that it's probable there maybe another world in that planet. 8o. Wits recreation for ingenious head pei∣ces, or a pleasant grove for wits to walk in, of epigrams, 700. epitaphs, 200. fancies a number, fantasticks abundance. 8o. ☞Wits interpreter. The English Par∣nassus, or a guid to those admirable accomplishments that furnish our English Gentry, in the most accep∣table qualifications of discourse, or writings: The mystery of eloquence Theatre of court-ship: Inditer of letters alamode. 8o. ☞Mr Wood. Florus anglicus. Or an ex∣act History of Eng. from the reign of W. the Conq. to the death of the late King. 8o. Y *YOuths behaviour, or decency in con∣versation amongst men, with a dis∣course of powdered hayre, patch∣es, and naked breasts. 8o.
BOOKS OF Physick AND Chyrurgery.
A THe Astrologicall Physici∣an, teaching how to find the cause and na∣ture of any Disease, according to the se∣cret rules of the Art of Astrology; with Mr Lillies Epistle to it. 12o. ☞Laday Arrundell, Natura exenterata, or nature unbowelled, being choice secrets and receits for the cure of all sorts of infirmities. 8o. Alexis Secrets. 4o. The Problems of Aristotle, with other Philosophers and Physicians; con∣taining divers Questions and ans∣wer, touching the state of mans body. 8o. ☞Theatrum Chymicum Britanicum, con∣taining severall pieces of our fa∣mous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermeticall My∣steries in the antient Languages; by the truly noble Elias Ashmole Esq B. ☞Dr BRowne. Natures Cabinet unlockt, the naturall causes, of mettals, stones, precious earths, juyces, humours, and spirits: the nature of plants in generall, their affections, parts and kinds, in particular, &c. 12o. ☞Mr Brunworth. A new discovery of the French Disease, and running of the Reigns; their causes, signs, and cures. 12o ☞Enchiridion Medicum; containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those diseases that do chiefly affect the body of man: also added, de fa∣cultatibus medicamentorum composi∣torum & Docibus: by Mr Bayfeild. 8o. Mr Banister's Chyrurgery. Of tumors, wounds, ulcers, fractures, and lux∣ations; Of all Medicins, of distil∣ling oyls, to prepare all minerals, to draw forth their salts and oyls. 4o. —A Treatise of one hundred and thirteen Diseases of the eyes and eye lids. 8o. T. Bartholini Casp. F. Anatomia, ex Cas∣pari Bartho. Parentis Institutioni∣bus omniumque recentiorum & pro∣priis observationibus tertiam ad san∣guinis circulationem reformata, cum Iconibus novis accuratissimus. 8o. Mr Bruell. Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians practice, of all inward Diseases from the head to the foot; the nature of each disease, with signs and causes, and directions for diet. 4o. Mr Barrow. The method of Physick, the causes, signs, and cures of in∣ward diseases in mans body; with directions to make Medicins. Mr Bradwell. Help for suddain acci∣dents, endangering life, by which those that live farre from Physicians and Chyrurgians may happily pre∣serve the life of a poor friend or neighbour, till better help may be procured: Collected from the best Authours for the good of all. 8o.
Pharmacopeia, cui, adjecta sunt para∣phrasis, & Miscendorum medicamen∣torum modus, scripta à Briscio Bau∣dereno, huic accedunt. J. du Bois Pharmacopeia Parisiensis observatio∣nes in Methodum Miscendorum medi∣camentorum. jfolio. Observationes Medicae de affectibus omnissis, Authore Arnoldo ootio Med. D. 12o. Mr Board's Breviary of health. 8o. Mr Bruges. The Marrow of Physick, or a learned discourse of the seve∣rall parts of mans body; being a Medicamentary; the way of ma∣king and compounding all Oyls, unguents, sirrups, cataplasmes, waters, powders, pills, &c. with little labour, cost, and time; with some rare receits for beauties, pre∣serv. candying, &c. with other se∣crets. 4o. *A Book of Fruits and Flowers; their nature and use, either for meat or medicine; as also to pre∣serve, candy, conserve; to make powders, civit-baggs, to pickell, &c. to makes pyes, biscat, snow, cracknels, &c. all oyntments and waters for wounds, &c. for stop∣ping of suddain bleeding, curing the piles, ruptures, coughs, consumpti, dissolve the stone, pain in ears and teeth, &c. 4o. C. DE Morbis Capitis, or the chief inter∣nall disease of the head; with their causes, signs, prognosticks, and cures. 8o. Mr Crooke. The Anatomy of the body of man, with their controversies thereunto belonging; published by his Majesties order. folio. Mr Clowe. A profitable and necessary Book for curing wounds made with Musket, or any shot or wea∣pon of Warre, or burned with the flame of Gunpowder, with the cure of Lues venerea; with other choice receits in Chyrurgery. 4o. Closet for Ladyes and Gentlewomen, or the Art of preserving, conser∣ving, and candying; how to make sirrups, with sovereign Medicines and salves. 12o. Mr Crooke, his Anatomy Epitomized. 4o. Mr Cooke. Mellificium Chyrurgiae, or the marrow of many good Authours, wherein is briefly and faithfully handled, the Art of Chyrurgery; their deffinitions, causes, signs, prognosticks, and cures of di∣seases; with an addition of severall magistrall receits, approved and heretofore kept secret. 12o. The Art of Sympleing; An introducti∣on to the knowledg and gathering of plants, the deffinitions, divisions, places, descriptions, names, virtues, and uses, temparatures, signatures of plants; with a discovery of the lesser world: by W. Coles. M.D. Chimicall Collection. 8o. Lexicon Medicum Graeco-latinum; A Bartho. Castello. Messanense inchoa∣tum, &c. *A Ternary of Paradoxes, of the Magnetick cure of wounds; Na∣tivity of Tartar in Wine; Image of God in man: by I. B. Van. Helm∣out; now translated, and illustra∣ted by D. Carleton, Physician to King Charles. *—The Errors of Physicians con∣cerning defluxions. 4o. ☞The Compleat Midwifes Practice, in the most weighty and high con∣cernments of the birth of man; perfect rules for Midwives,
Nurses, for Women in conception, bearingand nursing of Children, not from the experience of the english only, but Spanish, French, and Italian Nations; with the instructions of the Midwife to the King of France (given to her daughter before her death) concerning this Art; illustrated with brass Cuts, and approved by T.C. I.D. M.S. T.B. Practitioners. 8o. ☞Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants: A description of all english plants, wild or otherwise, with their signatures applied to the bo∣dy of man, their Physicall use; that a man may be his own Physi∣an; with a Lattin and English Table, both of the simples and di∣seases: by W. Coles Herbalist. folio. *Mr Culpepper. The Anatomy of the body of man, describing every part thereof exactly, as is shewed in publick Anatomies: in Lat. by J. Veslingus, reader to the publick Anatomy at Padua; now english∣ed. folio. ☞—The Pract. of Physick, in 17 Books: wherein is plainly set down the nature, cause, differences, and sorts of signs; with the cure of them: by N.C. A.C. and W.R. Physicians; being the translation of the Works of that renowned Dr Lazarus Riverius, Counseller and Physician to the King of France. 15000 of the said Books in Lat. having been sould in few years. folio. *—Pharmacopeia Londinensis, or Lon∣don dispensatory englished, and further adorned by the studies and collections of the fellowes now living of the said Colledg; con∣taining the virtues, quallities, pro∣perties of each simple, with the use of the compounds, cautions for all dangerous Medicins; with a key to Gallens Art of Physick. 8o. *—The english Physician, being an Astrologo-physicall discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation, containing a compleat Method of Physick, for preserving the body in in health, or cure himself for 3d charge, only with english herbs: Also how to make plaisters, oynt∣ments, pultesses, sirrups, decocti∣ons; time of gathering, way of keeping and drying what plant governs each Herb and Tree, &c. 8o. *—Semiotica Ʋranica, or an Astro∣logicall judgment of Diseases from the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged; the way to find out the cause, change, and end of the di∣sease, whether likely to live or die, with the time according to the judgment of Hippocrates. A Table of logisticall Logarithmes: also of Urins. 8o. *—A new method of Physick, or a short view of Paracelsus, and Gal∣lens practice; opening the nature of Physick and Alchimy, things are requisite to both; with a Hermonicall Systeme of Physick; by Si. Partlicius, Philosopher and Physician in Germany: now in english. 8o. *—A Directory for Midwives, or a guide for women in their concep∣tion, bearing, and sucking. 8o. *—Gallens Arts of Physick; with a large Comment. 8o. *—A Treatise of Rickets, being a common Disease to Children, shew∣ing the essence, cauess, signs, and re∣medies: writen in Lat. by Fr. Glisson. G. Bate, and A. Regemorter. now englished. 8o. ☞—His last Legacy bequethed to his Wife for the
publick good;being the choicest secrets, which while he lived, were locked up in his breast; and resolved never to be published till after his death; being admirable experiences in se∣verall Sciences, especially in Chy∣rurgery and Physick. 8o. ☞—His Treatise of Aarum potabile, a description of the three-fold world; Elementary, Celestiall, In∣tellectuall; containing the know∣ledge necessary to the study of Hermetick Philosophy: to which is added his ghost. 8o. ☞—Medicaments for the poor, or physick for the common people; being excellent remedies for most diseases common to mans body; made of such things as are to be had plentifully in every Countrey in the world, made with little art and small charge: writ in Lat. by J. Prevotius, professor in Padua: now englished. 8o. ☞—Health for the rich and poor by diet without physick. 8o. *—Opus Astrologus. 8o. ☞Sure guide to Physick and Chy∣rurgery: The art to heal by Medi∣dicine and Mannuall operation, being an Anatomicall description of the whole body of man, and its parts, demonstrated from the fa∣brick and use of the said parts: in six Books; by Dr Riolanus to the Queen Mother of France. Now englished by N.C. and Dr R. folio. ☞Mr Carr. Med. The universall bo∣dy of Physick, in five Books: of Diseases, their natures, causes, symptoms, of preservation of health and cures. Translated from Rive∣rius Praxis. folio. D. THe Distiller of London, with the clavis to unlock the deepest secrets in that mysterious Art; with the most excellent Cordiall Waters by the ablest Doctors. 8o. ☞The Doctress, a plain and easie me∣thod of curing those Diseases which are peculiar to women; with phy∣sicall Paradoxes, or a new discove∣ry of the Aeconomy of nature in mans body. 12o. ☞The Doctors dispensatory: the whole art of Phis. restored to pract. the Apotheca. shop, and Chyrurg. closet opened. A survey of all the best dispensa. and epito∣mized. Added also a body of Phys. by Jac. à Brunn of Basil. 8o. E ENchridion Physicae Restitutae, or the summary of Physicks restored. 12o. Dr Edwards. The cure of Feavers of all sorts, their deffinitions, kinds, causes, signs, differences, &c. 4o. —The Analysis of Chyrurgery, the Theorick and practick part there∣of. 4o. The Expert Midwife. 4o. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory, &c. Englished. F. FR. Feynei Medicina Practica in qua∣tuor libros. 4o. Mr Fletcher. A Treatise of Judgment of Urin. 8o.
☞The French and English Cooke, for exact making all sorts of pasts, pasties, Florentines, &c. ordering of French, Span. and Ital. kik∣shawes, dressing, flesh, fowle and fish; with admirable sawces. 12o. *Dr French. The Art of distillation, treating of the choicest spagericall preparations, performed by way of distillation; describing also the furnases and vessels used by Chy∣mists; with the Anatomy of gold and silver. 4o. *—The Yorkshire Spaw, or a Trea∣tise of four Medicinall Wels, viz. the Spaw or Vitrilone Well, the sting or sulpher, the droping or purifying, and St Mugnus Well in Yorkshire; their causes, virtues, and use. 12o. G. Mr GErrard's Herball, or the generall History of plants. folio. The Garden of Health, sundry rare and hidden virtues of all kinds of simples and plants, with their use for the health of mans body. 4o. *Mr Glawber. A description of new philosophicall Furnases, or the art of distilling, in five parts; of the tincture of gold, or the true Aurum potabile; with the first part of the Minerall Work. 4o. H. *THe Anatomicall Exercises of Dr W. Harvey Physician to the Kings most excellent Majesty, concerning the motion of the heart and blood, with Dr de Back of Rotterdam, his his discourse of the heart. 8o. The same Lat. 12o. *—Anatomicall exercitations con∣cerning the generation of living creatures, with particular dis∣courses of Births and conceptions. 8o. *—Exercitationes, de generatione ani∣malium, quibus accedunt quaedam de partu; de membranis ac humoribus uteri & de conceptione. 12o. ☞Dr Hamand. Ourography, or spe∣culations on the excrements of Urin, with the distinctions, causes, colours, and contents thereof, and other symptoms observed in na∣ture; with a philosophicall dis∣course of the colours of Urin; with the art of mixing them ac∣cording to quantity, number, and weight. 8o. The Haven of Health. 4o. *An Hermeticall Banquet drest by a Spagericall Cooke, for the better preservation of the Microcosme. 8o. K. THe Lady of Kent; A choice mannu∣all of rare and select secrets in Physick and Chyrurgery, with the rare virtues of the Gascoin powder, and Lapis contra Yarvam, with exquisite waies of preser∣ving, conserving, candying, &c. 24o. L. ☞THe Ladies Cabinet enlarged and opened, containing many rare and rich Ornaments of preserving, conserving, candying, and physick, chyrurgery, cookery, and hus∣wifry, with waters,
oyls, &c. bythe Lord Ruthen. 12o. Lessius. Hygiasticon, the right course of preserving life and health, unto extream old age, with the sound∣ness and integrity of the senses, judgment, and memory. 24o. Mr Low Dr to the King of France. A discourse of the whole art of Chy∣rurgery, the deffinitions, causes, prognosticks, and cures of all di∣seases. 4o. *The Ladies dispensatory, containing the natures, virtues, of all Herbs and Simples, usefull in Physick. 8o. M. de Lobell. Med. Insulani Sereniss. & Juvictiss. Ja. Mag. Brik. &c. Bo∣tanographi, sive plantarum Historiae Physicae, tam indigenarum & Brita∣niae inquinilarum, quam exoticarum Scriptoris accesserunt auctoria in An∣tidotaria vulgata sensurae Benevolae, & diluci dae simplicium, Medicamen∣torum explicationes. Cum L. Myrei Pharmacopolae Reginei Paragraphis utiliss. &c. folio. ☞Mr Lewen. M.A. The pathway to health, most excellent Medicins of great virtue, notable potions and drinks, with the art of distilling pretious waters, oyls, &c. with o∣ther receits. 8o. M. ☞Dr MƲffett. Healths improve∣ment, or rules comprizing, and discoursing the nature, me∣thod, and manner of preparing all sorts of food used in this Nation: corrected and enlarged by Dr Ben∣net of London. 4o. ☞Medicina Magia, Tamen Physica, the method of curing diseases by Sympathy and Antipathy. Alb. Magnus. De secretis mulierum. Item de virtutibus Herbarum, lapi∣dum, & Animalium. 12o. P. Jac. PRimrosii Enchiridion Medicum Practicum, complectens omnium Morborum communium & particula∣rum naturam, causas, signa & cura∣tionum. 12o. —Enchridion Medicum sive Brevissi∣mum Medicinae Systema. 12o. —Ars Pharmaceutica Methous brevissi∣ma, de eligendis & componendis Me∣dicinae. 12o. Mr Perkinson's Herbalist. Theatrum Bri∣tanicum, or generall History of plants. folio. ☞—Paradisi in sole Paradisus Ter∣restris: or a choice Garden of all sorts of rare flowers, with their nature, place of birth, time of flowering, names and virtues to each plant, usefull in physick, or admired in beauty; with a Kitchin Garden furnished with all herbs, roots, and fruits, for meat or sauce: with the art of planting an Or∣chard for all fruit-trees, and shrubs, with the nature of grafting, inoccu∣lating and pruning of them, and preserving them and select virtues, all unmentioned in former Herb∣als. folio. Pharmacopeia Londinensis Collegarum hodiè viventium studiis a Symbolis ornatior. folio. *—The same. 24o. ☞—The same. 8o. ☞Pharacelsus his Dispensatory and Chyrurgery, containing the choicest of his physicall Reme∣medies, with wounds, ulcers and aposthumes. 12o. —Of transmutation of Mettals, &c. ☞—Secrets of Alchimy. 8o.
Popular Errors in matters of physick. 8o. *Physicall Rarities, containing the most choice receits of physick and chyrurgery, for cure of all diseases incident to mans body; with the physicall Mathematicks of Hermes Trismegistus. 8o. Paraeus, The whole body of Chyrur∣gery. folio. ☞A Philosophicall and Chymicall Treatise of fire and salt. ☞The Chymists Key to open or shut, or the true Doctrine of corruption and generation: by H. Nolins, pub. by Eug. Philalathes. 8o. Mr Pemell. Traciatus de simplicium Me∣dicamentorum facultatibus: Of the nature and qualities of simples used in Medicins, with many compound Medicins for the health of man, with an explaination of the termes of art. 4o —Of the chief internall diseases of the head, their signs, prognosticks and cures. 8o. —Help for the poor, sundry Medi∣cins easie to be had; with letting blood, and helps for Small Pox. 8o. —De morbis puerorum; The diseases of Children, their causes, signs, prognosticks, and cures. 4o. The Skilfull Physician, being directi∣ons for preservation of a healthfull condition, with remedies for all diseases outward or inward, In∣structions for use of all Medicins, to the severall constitutions of eve∣ry patient; with instructions for perfumes, and preservation of Wines. 8o. A Rich Closet of Physicall secrets, col∣lected by the illaborate paines of four severall Students in Physick; being also some physicall experi∣ments presented to Queen Eliz. and other secrets taken out of a Manuscript found in an old Abby. 4o. L. Phioravant Knight and Dr, his ratio∣nall secrets and Chyrurgery, with excellent experiments and secrets, collected out of famous Authours of both faculties, with Paracelsus, 114 experiments: also J. Hollan∣dus secrets of his vegetable and animall Works. 4o. ☞The poor mans Physician and Chyrurgeon, 300 rare and choice receits for cure of all diseases in∣ward and outward, with rules for purging and opening a vein. 8o. Philologia Brittanica, natales exhibens, Indigenarum stirpium sponte emer∣gentium. 8o. The Annatomicall Experiments of J. Pequet of Deipe, by which the hitherto unknown receptacle of the Chyle, and the transmission from thence to the Subclaviall Veines by the now discovered lacteall channels of the Thorax is plainly made appear in bruites, with an Anatomicall dissertation of the motion of the blood and Chyle, and an Anatomicall History proposed by Dr Burto∣line. 12o. ☞A Physicall Dictionary, or an interpretation of such crabbed words and tearmes of Arts as are derived from the Greek and Lattin, used in Physick, Anat. Chyrurgery, and Chy∣mistry. 8o.
Q. ☞THe Queens Closet opened: In∣comparable secrets in Physick and Chyrurgery, preserving, can∣dying, and Cookery, as they were presented to the Queen, by the most experienced persons of these times, and honoured by our own practice: published by one of her domestick Ser∣vants. R. Laz. RIverii. Observationes Medicae & curationes Insignes. 8o. —Praxis Medica, Integra, Morberum Theoria, & quam plurimis remediis selectissimis locupletata. Two vol. 8o. Regimen sanitatis Salerni; or the Schoole of Salernes Regiment of health, being learned and judi∣cious directions for preservation, guide, and government of mans life, dedicated to the King by the University, and published by consent of learned Physici∣ans; with a discourse of the use of fish, with sundry secrets from a noble hand. 4o. *Dr Reynolds. The Birth of man∣kind; or a guide for Women in conception, bearing, and suck∣ing their Children: illustrated with severall Figures and Cuts. 4o. *Mr Record. The Urinall of Physick, with an ingenious Treatise con∣cerning Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chyrurgeons, with Papius Ahalsossa concerning Apotheca∣ries consecting the Medicins. 8o. Dr Read. The Mannuall of the Ana∣tomy or dissection of the body of man, the ennumeration and de∣scription of the parts which are shewen in publick Annatomicall exercises, illustrated with figures. 12o. —Most excellent and approved Me∣dicins for the most diseases and Malladies incident to mans body. 8o. —Chyrurgicall Lectures of Tumors and Ulcers, the re-unition of the parts of the body disjoynted, with the Methodicall Doctrine of wounds. 4o. *Mr Ross. Archana Microcosmi, or the hidden secrets of mans body dis∣covered, in an Anatomicall Duell between Aristotle and Gallen, concerning the parts thereof, with a refutation of Dr Brownes vulgar errors, the Lord Bacon's Naturall History, and Dr Harves de generatione annimalium; Com∣menius, and others. 8o. ☞Rhenodeus King of Fran. Physician. A Medicinall Dispensatory con-the whole body of Physick: The natures, propetties, and virtues; Of vegetables, minerals, and an∣imales; Of compounding Medi∣caments: Of philosophicall and pharmactuticall institutions: Of physicall materials, Gallenicall and Chymicall: with an absolute Pharmacopeia. Translated by Mr Johnson of London Apothe. folio. Rich Storehouse, or Treasury for the diseased, wherein are many ap∣proved Medicins for sundry di∣seases, which have been long hidden till now, being for the good of poor people. 4o. ☞Mr Rumsey. Organ salutis; An
In∣strument to cleanse the Stomack,with divers new Experiments of the virtue of Tobacco and Coffee, how much they conduce to hu∣mane health. 12o. S. ☞THe Compleat Practice of Physick. wherein is plainly described the nature, causes, differences, and signs of all diseases in the body of man, with the choicest cures for the same: by D. J. Smith, with Dr Ridgley's Epistle to it. 12o. Jac. Holleri Stephani. Medici Pari∣siensis celeberimi ad libros Gall. de compositione Medicamentorum, &c. 8o. Dr Sinnertus. Institutiones Medicae, &c. 8o. —Epitome. 16o. ☞—The Institutions or Fundamen∣tals of the whole Art, both of Physick and Chyrurgery, in five Books, plainly discovering all that is to be known in both, as the subject and end of Physick; the nature of all diseases, their causes, signs, differences, events, and cures: also the grounds of Chy∣mistry, and the way of making all sorts of salves, and prepa∣ring Medicins according to Art. Nothing of the like nature having been in English before this: Eng∣lished from the Latin, by N.D.B.P. of Cambridge. 8o. ☞Mr Starkly. Natures explication and Helmonts vindication, or a short and sure way to a long and sound life, being a necessary and full A∣pology for Chymicall Medica∣ments, with a vindication of their excellency against the Gal∣lenists. 8o. M. Sadler. Enchridion Med. 8o. T. ☞Mr TƲrner. De Morbis Faemine∣is, Wom. Counsellor. mo∣destly treating of such occult ac∣cidents and diseases incident to that Sex, &c. 12o. A Thousand notable things of sundry sorts, wonderfull, strange, plea∣sant, necessary, profitable and pre∣cious. 8o. The Touchstone of Complections, ex∣pedient and profitable for all such as desire their health, where∣by one may know the exact state, habit, disposition and con∣stitution of his body outwardly, with the inclinations, affections, motions, and desires of his mind inwardly. Englished from the Latin. 4o. *Dr Turner. The description of the little World, dileneating the bo∣dy of man in all the members, bones, veins, sinues, arteries, &c. from head to foot; also of wounds, of fractured bones, urin, and baths. 8o. ☞—The Compleat Bonesetter, with the method of curing broken bones and strains, and dislocated Joynts, with ruptures, vulgarly called broken bellies is fully de∣monstrated; with the perfect oc∣culist, and mirrour of health, treat∣ing of the Pestilence, and other di∣seases incident to men, women, and children: with the accute judg∣ment of Urins. Originall writ by Friar Moulton of order of Sr Au∣gustine. 8o. Trautzelius his Transmutation of Di∣seases. 8o.
V Dr VEnner. Via recta ad vitam Long∣am: wherein the right way of living for attaining to a long and healthfull life, is demonstrated and applied to every age and con∣stitution of body; being a full description of the use of all sorts of meats, to whom properly each is most fit, and what to be avoided by such and such constitutions of body: with a Treatise of baths, and Tobacco. 4o. The English mans Treasury, with the true Anatomy of mans body, by Dr Vicary, Physician to Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary and Q. Eliz. with many excellent receits an∣nexed: The rare Treasury of English Baths; with a thousand approved waters for Physick and Chyrurgery; with oyntments and plaisters. 4o. —The Chyrurgeons Directory for young Practitioners in Anatomy wounds and cures, the excellency of divers secrets belonging to that noble Art and Mystery. 8o. Mataeotenicha Medicinae Praxeous; the vanity of the craft of Physick, or a new dispensatory, wherein is dissected, the errors, igno∣rance, impostures, and supinities of the Schooles, in their main pillars of purges, blood, issues, diet, &c. ☞Hermeticall Physick, or the right way to preserve and to restore health; by that famous Chymist H. Nolius, Englished by H. Vaugham. 12o. The Vade Mecum, or a Companion for a Chyrurgeon, the use of In∣struments, virtues of Medicins, with rules to make them; with the dressing of green wounds. 8o. ☞Dr Vanderhyden of Gaunt. Speedy help for rich and poor, certain Physicall discourses touching the virtue of Whey in the cure of the griping Flux of the belly, and of the Dysentery of cold water in the cure of the Gout, and green wounds: Of wine Vinegar in pre∣servation from and cure of the Plague, &c. 8o. ☞Medicina Magnetica, or the rare and wonderfull Art of curing by sym∣pathy: laid open in Aphorismes, proved in Conclusions, and di∣gested into an easie method drawn from both; wherein the connex∣ion of the causes, and effects of their strange operations are more fully discovered then heretofore: all cleared and confirmed by pithy Reasons, true Experiments, and pleasant Relations. Preserved and published, as a Masterpiece in this skill: By C. de Iryngio, Chyrurgo. Medcinae in the Army. 8o. Vestlingij. Syntagma Anatomicum. 4o. W. Mr WOodall. The Chyrurgeons Mate. folio. *The Generall Practice of Physick, containing all inward and outward parts of the body, with all the ac∣cidents and infirmities thereunto incident, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, by what means to cure them by the help of God: by Dr Wirtzung German. Now englished. folio. Reprinted with Additions. A Treatise of the virtues of warm Beer. 12o. Mr Wood. An Epitomy of excellent secrets of
Physick and Chyrurgery,with the judgment of urins. 8o. Dr Whittaker. The Tree of life, or Blood of the Grape. 8o. Andenagraphia, sive glandularum toti∣us corporis discriptio Auct. Tho. Whartono M.D. ☞An Experimentall Treatise of Chyrurgery in four parts. 1o. The abuses of modern Chyrurgeons. 2o. Of the cures of all wounds. 3o. Symptoms of wounds. 4o. Of Balms Salves, Plaisters, Oyntments, &c. by F. Wurtz. of Basell; Translated out of the 28th Copy in high Dutch, now englished; with the Childrens Books. 4o. ☞Mr Westwood. De variolis & Mor∣billis: of the small Pox and Mea∣sels; their diffinit. dictinct. causes, differ. signs, prognost. and cures: with cautions in aire and diet, with cordiall remedies to preserve us from them, &c.
BOOKS OF THE Common and Civil LAW.
A THe Attornies Achade∣my; being the manner of proceedings in all his Maesties Court of Record, together with the usuall and ordinary sees of Officers and Mi∣nisters of the said Courts, &c. 4o. The attorney of the common pleas, or directions and instructions, con∣cerning his practice therein, with the fees due to the judges and offi∣cers there, and the Kings Bench. 8o. The arguments of the learned judges about shipmoney. 4o. A compleat Table to the whole com∣mon law, by Tho. Ash, Gent. in 2. Volumes. folio. The arguments of the learned judges of the upper Bench, upon the writ of Habeas Corpus, with the opini∣ons of the court thereupon, and Sr J. Elliots case. Wherein divers an∣tient and obscure Records most amply and elaborately debated and cleared. 4o. B REports of divers choice cases in Law, taken by those late and most judici∣ous Prothonotaries of the common pleas; viz. R. Brownlow; and J. Golds∣borough, Esq with directions how to proceed in many intricate actions both reall and personall, &c. the first and second part. 4o. —Declarations, counts and pleadings in English; being the authentick form of presidents in the court of common pleas, in actions reall, personall, and mixt in the reign of Q Eliz. K. James, and K. Charles, by R.B. Esq the second part. The first being pleas, replications, rejoynders, demurrs, assignments of errors, and the entries of judg∣ments thereupon affirmed. Mr Bernard. A guid to grand-jury-men. 4o. Sr R. Brooks. The reading of the statute of limitations. Books of drawing up all manner of judgments. Book of presidents, with additions of divers necessary instruments, fit for such as would learn the man∣ner of evidences, instruments, &c. 8o. The body of the common Law of Eng∣land, as it stood in force before it was altered, by statute or acts of Parliament or state, with a collecti∣on of such statutes as are altered with a summary of the whole Law, profitable to such students as af∣fect method, by E. Wingate Esq 4o. H. de Bracton. De legibus & consuetudini∣bus. 4o. The elements of the Law by the Ld Bacon. 4o. An antient learned book of the Law called Britton. 8o. ☞The report of E. Bulstrode, of the
Inner-Temple Esq Of divers re∣solutions and Judgments given with great advice and mature de∣liberation, by the grave and Re∣verend Sages of the Law. folio. C. ☞THe Compleat Clark and Scrive∣nors guide, being exact draughts and presidents of all man∣ner of Assurances, and Instru∣ments now in use, as they were penned and perfected by divers learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, both Modern and Antient; to which is added a Concordance of years, from Rich. the third till now. 4o. Mr Cowel's Institutes of the Laws of England, digested into the method of the civil or imperial Institutions; usefull for all Gent. who are studi∣ous to know the Customes of this Nation. 8o. *Reports of speciall cases of the Li∣berties of the City of London; by Sr H. Calthrop, sometimes Recor∣der thereof, after Attorney Gen. of the Courts of Wards and Li∣veries, with the antient Customes and usages of the said City. 8o. A Mannuall or Analecta, called the Compleat Justice, or an Epitomie of the Statutes. 12o. The Compleat Copyholder; A learned discourse of the antiquity and na∣ture of Mannours and Copyholds, with present meats, admittances, surrenders, forfeitures, customes, &c. necessary both for Lord and Tennant: by Sr Edw. Cook. 8o. The Lord Cook. The first part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, or a Commentary upon Littleton. folio. —The second part: an Exposition of many antient Laws, and other Statutes of Magna Charta. folio. —The third part: Pleas of the Crown and criminal Cases. folio. —The fourth part: The Jurisdicti∣on of Courts. folio. —Reports of the Lord Cook. The 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 parts. In three vol. folio. ☞—The 12 Report. Of divers Resolutions and Judgmens given upon solemn Arguments, and with great deliberation and conference with the learned Judges in cases of Law; the most of them very fa∣mous, being of the Kings especiall reference from the Council Table; Also the forms and proceedings of Parliaments both in England and Ireland; With an Exposition of Poinings Law. folio. Cook's Book of Entries. folio. *Englands Compleat Law-judge and Lawyer, by G. Cook, one of the Judges of the Admirall Court, and Probate of wills. 4o. Reports of Cases in Chancery, by Sr Geo. Carey, one of the Masters thereof, out of the Labours of Mr Lambert, with the Kings order and decree in the Chancery. 12o. L'Athority & Jurisdiction des Courts de la Majesty de la Roygne: Novell∣ment collect & compose per R. Crompton de Milein Temple Esq Apprentice de lex. 4o. A Treatise of Baile and Mamprise: by E.C. Knight. Now published for a generall good to the Nation. 4o. Cases Select and speciall, out of the reports and Year-Books of the Common Law, concerning the persons and
Estates of all menwhatsoever. 4o. *Mr Cook, Grayse-Inne. A Vindication of the Law so farre as Scripture and reason may judge, and speedy Justice which exalts a Nation may be advanced. 4o. The Interpreter: or a Book containing the signification of Words, where∣in is set forth the true meaning of all or the most part of such words and tearmes as are mentioned in the Law-Writers, or Statutes of this Kingdom, requiring an Exposition or Interpretation, fit for such as desire the knowledg of the Laws, Statutes, or other Antiquities: by J. Cowell, Doctour, and the Kings Professor of the Civil Law in Camb. 4o. Mr Collin. A brief Summary of the Laws and Statutes in England. 8o. J. Arn. Corvini. J.C. Posthumus Pacia∣nus; seu deffinitiones, Juris utrius{que} viri, C.L. Julii Pacii: à Berigo J.C. posthumae. 16o. —Juris prudentia Romana H. Vulteii contracta. 16o. —Digesta per Aphorismos strictim ex∣plicata. 16o. —Enchridium, seu Institutiones Impe∣riales insertis latioribus materiis, The∣oricè, & practicè digestae & explica∣tae per erotemata. 6o. *Mr Clark. The Clerks Vade Mecum, or a collection of modern Presi∣dents, according to the best forms extant, and such as have not for∣merly been printed: containing all sorts of Bargains and Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Grants, &c. usefull for all persons that have relation to the practick part of the Common Law, or desire to be exquisitely qualified therein. 8o. The Compleat Attorney. S• Rob. Cotton Knight. An exact abridg∣ment of the Records of the Tower of London, from Edw. 2. to Rich. 3. of all Parlia. in their Reigns, their acts, the Names and Titles of all Dukes, Marq. Earls, Visco. Parr. &c. folio. D *Mr DAlton. The Countrey Justice, containing the practises of the Justices of the Peace, out of the Sessions, ga∣thered for the better help of such Justices of Peace, as have not been much conversant in the stu∣dies of the Laws of the Realm, enlarged now with many presi∣dents; also all such Acts and Or∣dinances as are necessary to be known and put in execuion. folio. —The Office and Authority of She∣riffs. 8o. An Exact Abridgment of all the re∣ports of that Reverend and Learn∣ed Sr Ja. Dyer; being the substance of all those Reports at large. 8o. Sr John Davis. A perfect Abridgment of the eleven Books of the Reve∣rend and learned Knight Sr Edw. Cook. Translated from the French. 12o. —Upon the Question of Impositions, tonnage, poundage, prizage, cu∣stomes, &c. Synopsis: or an exact abridgment of the Lord Cooks Commentary upon Littleton; being a brief Explanati∣on of the grounds of the Com∣mon Law; Composed by Sr Hen. Davenport, Lord Chief Barron of the Exchequer. 8o. The Doctour and Student.
Sr J. Dodridge Knight. The EnglishLawyer, describing a method for the managing of the Laws of this Land, and expressing the best qua∣lities requisite in the Student, Practicer, Judges, and Fathers of the same. 4o. E CErtain Observations concerning the Office of the Lord Chancellor, com∣posed by the right Honourable the Lord Ebbesemere. 8o. F. THe Filacers Office, or the measure process Filacers make out before appearance: the nature and forms of their severall Writs, and man∣ner of proceedings: with Fees. 8o. Four Books of the Law, by Sr H. Finch. 8o. ☞Mr Fidell. A perfect guide for the studious Lawyer: both delightfull and profitable for any Gentleman, being presidents for conveyances, and other business of the like kind: gathered out of the learned la∣bours of the reverend and learned Sages of the Law: The Lord Cook, Lord Hobbart, Lord Richard∣son, Mr Haughton, Mr Reve, &c. Also divers Copy-holds, Entries in Court Barons, with Justice of Peace busines. 4o. Judge Fitzherbert. La Grand Abridg∣ment. folio. *—The new Natura Brevium of the reverend Judge Mr Ant. Fitzher∣bert, with the Authorities of the Law, collected out of the Year-Books; an Abridgment with Writs, and return of Writs. Now Englished. 8o. —The same in French. 8o. G. REports of the learned and judicious Clark J. Gouldsborough Esq his Collection of choice cases, with learned Arguments at the Barr and on the Bench, with the resolutions and judgments of the chief Justices Anderton and Popham. Published by W.S. Esq 4o. Godbolts Reports. ☞Mr Greenwood. Curia comitatus Re∣diviva, or practick part of the County Court revived: its anti∣quity and proceed, from orig. to execution, and all actions lying therein. 8o. H *THe Reports of the reverend and learned Judge the right Honour∣able Sr H. Hobart Knight and Bar∣ronet, Lord Chief Justice, &c. Enlarged with some new Cases never before printed: also purged from the numberless and incurable errors of the former impression. folio. Reports of certain cases arising in the severall Courts of Record at West∣minster in the Reigns of Q. Eliz. and K. Charles, with the resoluti∣ons of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debates and solemn Arguments; Collected by good hands, and approved by the learn∣ed Justice Godbolt, now published by W. Hughes Esq 4o. —The Parsons Law, collected out of the body of the Common Law, and some late Reports. 8o.
—A Commentary on original writs. 8o. ☞Mr J. Hern. The Law of convey∣ances; the natures, kinds, and ef∣fects of all manner of Assurances, their executions and operations; directions to sue out and prosecute all Writs of extents, elegit, and Judiciall Writs upon Statutes, Re∣cognizances, Judgments, &c. with a Concordance of years. Expos. of obscure words, of warrants to summon a Court of Survey, and the Articles to be given in charge, and enquired of in that Court. 8o. ☞The Learned Judge Hutton his Re∣ports. English. folio. ☞Mr J. Herne. The Pleader, con∣taining presidents of declar. plead. issues, judgments, and proceed. in actions reall and personall, and mixt with many points of great Learning, &c. folio. ☞Mr Huges. An Abridgment of Com. Law, with the cases thereof, drawn out of all old and new Books of Law, reduced into Chapt. Sect and Divisions, for use of Practi∣cers and Students. 4o. ☞—An Abridgment of publick Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, made from the year 1640, to 1656. Also of all divers Ordin. and publ. Orders of the Ld P. and Council. 4o. ☞Sr T. Hetly Knight, Serj. at Law. Reports and Cases taken in the 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 years of K. Cha. as they were argued by most of the Kings Serjeants at the Common-pleas Barre. folio. ☞J. Jenkins. Facis Consultum. The antiquity, extent, and practice of severall Countrey corporation Courts especially the Court Leet: with an abstract of the penall Statutes. 12o. K. J. KItchin Esq Jurisdictions, or the lawfull Authority of Courtleets, Court Barrons, Court of Marshall seyes, Court of Pyepouder, and an∣tient demesne, with learning of ten∣nures and all their incidents; of essoyns, imparlance, views of all manner of pleadings, of contracts, all sorts of actions, of maintenance, the Authentick forms of all sorts of Writs. 8o. Relationes Quorund am Casuum ex lib. R. Keilwex: qui tempor. faelicissii∣mae memoriae Regis Hen. Sept. & in∣clitissimi Reg. Hen. Octavi, emerse∣runt, & in prioribus impressionibus, relationum de terminis illorum Regum non exprimuntur: nec non relationes non nullorum Casuum per. Rever. Ju∣dic. Guil. Dalison & Guil. Beudlora servientem ad legem, &c. folio. L. THe Laymans Lawyer, or practick part of the Law, shewing the Office of a Compleat Attorney in the full prosecution of any action; reall, personall or mixt, from the origi∣nal to the execution in all Courts; with exact fees of all officers, and Ministers of Courts; with In∣structions for soliciting any Case in Chancery or elsewhere. 8o. ☞The Laymans Lawyer revived and enlarged, being a second part of the practice of the Law, relatng to the punishment of offender, a∣gainst the publick peace; the forms of process, indictments, and proceedings to judgment
in allmanner of crimes concerning death, and corporall and pecuniary punishments; also a discourse of pardons, the office and duty of a Goaler, Constable, and other as∣sistants for the preservation of the peace. 8o. Les tennures de Monseir Littleton, &c. French. 8o. The Lawyers Guide. Mr Leigh. The Philologicall Com∣mentary: Or an illustration of the most Obvious and usefull words in the Law. 8o. Mr Lambert's Archeion, or Comments upon the high Courts of Justice. Sr Ja. Ley Knight. A learned Treatise of Wards and Liveries. The Laws and Resolutions of Wo∣mens Rights, or the Laws provisi∣on for Women. A methodicall Collection of such Statutes and Customes, with the cases, opinions, arguments, and points of learning in the Law as do properly con∣cern Women. 4o. ☞Mr Lane. Attor Gen. to P. Cha. Re∣ports in the Court of Exchequer; from the 3d year to the 9th year of K. James. folio. M. Mr J. MArsh. Some new Cases of the years and time of King Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q Mary: written out of the great Abridgment of Sr Rob. Brook. Now Englished. 8o. —Actions for slander; the first and second part, with a second part of Abitrements, with directions and presidents to them: also what de∣famations are determinable in Ec∣clesiasticall Courts. 8o. —Amicus Reipublicae, the Common-wealths friend, or an exact and speedy way to Justice, for preven∣tion of Law-suits. 8o. Sr H. Martin and Mr Glanvills speeches in Parliament touching the Petition of Right. M. Millitte. Sometimes Chief Justice of the Bench. folio. Magna Charta. 8o. N. W. NOy Esq Attorney Gen. to his Majesty. The Compleat Lawyer: or a Treatise concerning Tenures and Estates in Lands of Inheritance for life, and for years; of chattels reall and personal, how to be conveyed in a legall form, by fine, deed, &c. 8o. —The grounds and maxims of the Laws of England, usefull for all Stu∣dents and such as desire the know∣ledg of the Law. 8o. ☞—Reports and Cases taken in the time of Q. Eliz. K. Ja. and K. Charles, containing the most excel∣lent exceptions for all manner of de∣clarations, pleadings, and demurrs, exactly examined and laid down. folio. A Declaration of Neusance, concer∣ning dwelling houses, with the re∣solutions of the Judge of Assize, upon Questions touching Parishes: the power of Justices, Constables, &c. 4o. The new Natura Brevium, or the Law returned, from Westminster, and restored to its native, antient, and proper habitation, language, power, purity, integrity, and plain∣ness. 12o.
O. ALl the Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament for the true payment of tythes, and other such duties according to the Laws and Customes of this Realm. 4o. The Orders of a Court Leet, and Court Baron, with the charges be∣longing thereunto. 8o. The Office and Duty of Executors, or a Treatise of wills and Execu∣tors, directed to Testators in the choice of their Executors and Contrivance of their wills, with drections for Executors, Creditors, &c. 8o. ☞The Reports of Judge Owen, where∣in are many choice cases, most of them throughly argued by the learned Serjeants, and after argued and resolved by the grand Judges of those times, with many cases wherein the differences in the Year-Books are reconciled and ex∣plained. folio. ☞A Collection of all the Ordinances, Proclamations, Declarations, &c. which have been printed and published since the government of the Lord Protector, with the several dates and dependencies. folio. *A Collection of all the Orders for Regulating the Chancery: with alterations and additions by the Lords Comiss. for the great Seal. for reform. multiplicity of Suits, Motions, unness. charges, &c. 8o. P. A PRofitable Book of Mr J. Perkins, fellow of the Inner Temple, treating of the Laws of England. 8o. Mr Powel's Search of Records. 4o. Mr Poulton. A Collection of all the Statutes frequent in use, with Notes on the Margin, and referen∣ces to the Book Cases. folio. Reports and Cases by Sr J. Popham: with remarkeable Cases and Re∣ports by other learned Pens since his death. folio. ☞The Perfect Conveyance, or severall select and choice presents as have not been formerly printed; col∣lected by four Sages of the Law, viz. E. Henden Knight, one of the Barons of Exchequer: W. Noy Attorney Generall to his Majesty: R. Mason, Recorder of London, and H. Fleetwood Reader of Grase-Inne. 4o. Mr Poultons Abridgment of his Book of Statutes at large. folio. Mr Powdens Abridgment of all his Re∣ports and Cases in Law. folio. ☞The Practice of the Sheriffs Court London: the manner of entring Actions, making Attaches, and Se∣questrat. with fees, &c. 12o. Q. LOng Quinto of Edw. the fourth. folio. R. Sr Tho. RIdley. A view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and and wherein the practice of them is straitned, and may be relived within this Land. 4o. Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before severall Judges in that Circuit, with some presidents use∣full for Pleaders at the Assizes: Never Englished before. 8o.
Mr Rastall, his Book of Entries. folio. The Reading of the Satute of Limi∣tation. The Register of Writs. folio. Three learned Readings made upon three very usefull Statutes. 1o. By S• Ja. Dyer, upon the Statute of 32 . 8. Chap. 1. of wills, and 34, 5. H. 8. Ch. 5. for explanation of hat Statute. 2o. By Sr J. Bro∣rave upon the Statute of 27. H. 8. Ch. 10. concerning joyntures. 3o. By T. Ridsden Esq upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. Ch. 9. of forci∣ble Entry. 4o. S. Mr SWinburne. A brief Treatise of the Testaments and last Wills, fit to to be understood of all Subjects of England (that desire to know, whether, whereof, and how they may make their Testaments, and how it may be effected or hinder∣ed) compiled of such Laws, Ec∣clesiasticall and Civil, as are not repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customes of England, nor de∣rogatory the Prerogative Royall. 4o. ☞Mr Sheapeard. An Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of this Nation now in force, wherein 1500 hardest termes are explained, with the most usefull and profitable heads or titles of the Law are ex∣plained by way of common place, largely, plainly, and methodically handled. folio. —The faithfull Counsellor, or Mar∣row of the Law, in two parts. First, Shewing how any Action may be laid in the Common Law, &c. The second part, in what causes, and for what injuries relief is to be had in the High Court of Chancery. 4o. —The whole Office of the Countrey Justice of Peace, setting down all their power and duty, both in and out of the Quarter Sessions: with the Ordinances and Acts of Parli∣ment abridged, that any way con∣cern the power. 8o. —The Touchstone of common As∣surances, opening the learning of the Common assrance or convey∣ances of the Kingdom. 4o. —The young Clarks Guide, or an exact collection of choice presi∣dents, according to the best form now used for all sorts of Inden∣tures, Letters of Attorney, Re∣leases, Conditions, Obligations in English, Letters of licence and composition, Assignments, &c. In two parts. 8o. —The Court-keepers Guide. A plain and usefull Treatise for the help of keeping Law daies, or Court Baron. Shewing the Juris∣diction of their Courts, with the learning of Mannours, Copy-holds, Rents, Harriots, &c. 8o. *—The Offices of Constables, Church-wardens, Overseers of the poor, Supervisors of High-wayes, Treasurers of the County Stock, and other Country Offices plainly set set forth. In two Books. The first of the High-Constables, Bursholds, Tything-men, &c. 8o. —The Justice of Peace, his Clarks Cabinet, or a Book of Presidents or warrants fitted and made rea∣dy to his hand, for every case that may happen within the compass of his Masters Office, for the ease of the Justice of Peace, and more speedy dispatch of Justice. 8o.
☞—The President of Presidents, or one generall President for com∣mon assurances by Deeds: being an extract of all the Readings and Presidents thereof extant, of sin∣gular use for all men. 4o. ☞—The Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tythes, shewing who must pay Tythes, to whom, and of what, when, and how, also how they may be recovered, and how a man may be discharged at the pay∣ment thereof. *—A view of all the Laws and Sta∣tutes of this Nation, concerning the service of God or Religion. 12o. ☞—A Survey of the County Judi∣catures, commonly called County Court, Hundred Court, County Court, and Court Baron. ☞—Proposals humly presented to his Highness and the Parliament touching the regulation of the Laws. 8o. Statuta Pacis, or a Table of all the Statutes now in force, which any way concerned the Office of a Justice of Peace, the severall duties of Sheriffs, head Officers of Corporations, Stewards in Leets, Constables, &c. 12o. *A Collection of severall Acts of Parliament, published in the years 1648, 1649, 1650, and 1651. very usefull especially for Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in ex∣ecution of their duties, and admi∣nistration of Justice: with some Ordinances of Parliament of like concernment: Also severall Acts of Parliament, made in the 17 and 18 years Reign of the late King, and Ordinances touching Adventerers for Ireland: by H. Scobell Esq folio. Mr Stone. The Reading of the Sta∣tute of the 13th of Queen Eliz. Chap. 7. Learnedly and amply explained. 8o. Duke Hemiltons Case argued by Lord Chief Baron Steele. 4o. Fleta. An antient Manuscript of the Laws of England. published by J. Selden Esq 4o. Sr J. Skeene, Clark of the Kings Regi∣sters; Regiam Majestatem, the old Laws and Constitutions of Scot∣land, faithfully collected from the Register, and other Authentik Books: from the daies of King Malcolne the second, till King James the first. Corrected from many Errors committed by ig∣norant Writers; also added two Treatises: First, Of the order of process observed, before the Lords of the Council and Session. Secondly, Of crimes, and Judges in cases criminall. English. folio. —The same in Latin. folio. ☞Mr Stile. Inner-Temp. Regestum Practicale, or Practicall Register; containing Rules and Orders con∣cern, the com. Law, and Pract. thereof, chiefly relating to the Upper-Bench. 8o. T. Le TErmes de la ley, or certain diffi∣cult and obscure words and termes of the common Laws and Statutes of this Realm now in use, expouded and explained, with a new addition of 250 words. 8o. A generall Table to all the severall Books of Reports of the late most Reverend Judg St Ed. Cook. 8o. Mr Tratman. The Abridgment of the Lord Cook's 11 Reports. 8o.
V. VIcessimo priveo Jacob, & primo, & tertio Caroli. folio. W. ☞J. WIngate Esq an exact Abridg∣ment of all Statutes in force and use, upon the 4th of January 1642. extracted out of the said Statutes, from the beginng of Mag∣na Charta to the said time. 8o. Mr Welwood. An abridgment of all sea-Laws, amonst any people or Nati∣on the coasts of the great Ocean. 8o. A Treatise collected out of the Statutes concerning the Office and Autho∣rities of Coroners and Sheriffs, with an easie method for keeping a Court Lee, Court Baron, and Hun∣dred Court: by M• J. Wilkinson: The return of Writs newly added, by Mr J. Kichin. 8o. ☞Reports of that Reverend and Learn∣ed Judg Sr H. Winch Knight, con∣taining many choice cases, and ex∣cellent matter touching declarati∣ons, pleadings, demurrs, judgments, and resolutions, in point of Law, in the last four years of King James. folio. Presidents, the first and second part: by H. West. 4o. Mr White. For the sacred Laws of the Land. A learned Book. 8o. De priscis Anglarum Legibus, the anti∣ent Laws of England. Translated from Saxon and Latin, out of Mr Lamberts own Manuscript Copy, now with ad∣ditions of Mr Weelock of Cambridge. ☞Mr Wiseman Dr of the Civil Law. The Law of Laws, or the excel∣lency of the Civil Law, above all other humane Laws whatsoever: shewing of how great use and ne∣cessity the Law is to this Nation. 4o. Y. W. YOung Esq Vade Mecum; contain∣ing the substance of such Statutes, wherein any one or more Justi∣ces of the Peace are enabled to deal in or out of the Sessions of the Peace. 12o. The Year-Book of Edw. the 4th. folio. Z. Mr R. ZOuch Professor of the Civil Law in Oxford. Cases and Qestions resolved in the Civil Law 8o. —Juris & Judicii fecialis, sive Juris inter gentes, & quaestionum de eodem explicato. 4o. —Specimen quaestionum Juris Civilis, cum designatione authorum a quibus in utramque partem discuituntur. 4o. ☞—De legati delinquentis judice com∣petente dissertatio. in quâ H. Grotii, de eâ re sententia explicatur, expen∣ditur & asseritur. 12o.
BOOKS OF THE MATHEMATICKS. VIZ. Arithmatick, Geometry, Musick, Astro∣nomy, Astrology, Dialling, measuring of Land and Timber, Gageing Vessels, Navigation, Architecture, &c. ALSO Of Horsemanship, Faulconry, Merchandize, Limning, Millitary Discipline, Herauldry, Fire-works, Husbandry, &c.
DEcimall Arithmatick, or the use of Napiers Bones: by W. Barton. 8o. The Handmaid to A∣rithmatick, refined by Mr Hunt. 8o. ☞The Idea of Arithmatick. 8o. *Artificiall Arithmatick, the quintes∣sence of the golden rule, with the true valuation of all Annuities: by Mr Jagar. 8o. The Art of numbering by Rods, ex∣traction of Roots, Square and Cu∣bick roote,: by the Lord Napier. 12o. —His Logarithms. Arithmatick made plain to the easiest ca∣pacity, in two Books, naturall and decimall, being most usefull for all Gent. Merchants and others, by Mr Wilsford, 8o. *The Jewell of Arithmatick. 12o. Mr Record. Arithmatick, or the grounds of Arts, teaching the per∣fect work and practice of Arith. both in whole numbers and fracti∣ons, after an easie and exact form; with enlargements of the rules of practice, valuation of all coins, extraction of roots, Tables of board and timber, with Tables of inte∣rest, &c. 8o. Mr Hills. The Art of vulgar Arith. in Intigers and Fractions, also added Musae Mercatorum, containing all profitable rules for Merchandizing. 4o. Mr Johnson. Arithmatick in two Books. 1o. Of vulgar Arith. with easie rules to work all the four parts of Arith. in numbers and fractions. 2o. Of Decimall Arith. &c. 8o. Mr Baker. The Well-Spring of Sci∣ences, the perfect work and pra∣ctice of Arith. in numbers and fractions, with Tables of measures and weights. 12o. Mr Wingate. Arithmatick made easie, in two parts. 1o. Of naturall Arith. in numbers and fractions, enlarged with rules, and seven Chapters, by Mr Kersby, Teacher of the Mathematicks. The se∣cond containing a perfect method for the true knowledge and pra∣ctice of artificiall Arith. perform∣ed by Logarithmes; resolving all Arithmeticall Questions, by addi∣tion and substraction: with the use of the line of proportion, ex∣hibiting the Logarithme of any number under 100000. with equi∣ation of time, interest, &c. 8o. *Mr Moore. Arithmatick in two Books, discovering the secrets of that art in numbers and species; after a more plain, exact, and easie way then ever. 1o. By Precept. 2o. By Example. The ordinary operations in numbers, whole, and broken: the rules of practice by Decimalls: pract. Logarithmes, Napiers bones; with new propo∣sitions touching quantities, quali∣ties, resultments, and rules of Me∣dicins fitted for Mathematicions. The second Book of the great rule of Algebra in species, resol∣ving all questions by suppositions, with Trigonometry, Planiteritry, Steriomitry, and all other parts of their art military ☞Mr Rawlin. Practicall Arithmatick
in whole numbers, fractions, and decimalls, fitted to the most rea∣sonable understanding, and very usefull for Gent. Merchants, or Tradesmen. 8o. Mr Fisher. Arithmeticall Questions, touching the buying or exchange∣ing of Annuities, taking of leases for fines or yearly Rent, purchase of Fee-simples. 8o. Mr Blundevill. Eight exercises disco∣vering the knowledg of Arithma∣tick, cosmography, Astronomy, Navigation, Geography, &c. 4o. Mr Webster. Tables of interest, simple interest direct. simple interest to rebate, &c. also compound with true valuation of annuities, leases, fines, with a speedy way for sum∣ming up the price of commodi∣ties. 8o. *Mr Gibson. Syntaxis Mathematica, or a construction of the harder pro∣blems of Geometry, with so much of the Conicks as is therefore re∣quisite, and other more ordinary and usefull propositions intermix∣ed. 8o. Mr Butler. The scale of interest, or Tables and Brevials, shewing the forbearances and discounts of any summes of money for any time. 8o. Mr Howes. Short Arithmatick, or the old and tedious way of number∣ing, reduced to a new and brief method. 12o. ☞Mr Lysbourn. Arithmatick vulgar; decimall, and instrumentall, &c. 8o. Mr Bridges. Vulgar Arith. explaining the secrets thereof, &c. 8o. ☞—The compleat Surveyor, con∣taining the whole art of surveigh∣ing land; by the plain Table, The∣odolite, circumferentor, and pe∣actor; taking of all heights, &c. folio. *The Purchasers Pattern, shewing the true valuation of any purchase of Land or Houses, by lease or o∣therwise: with a Table of interest, and for measureing of Timber. In two Books: with gauging. 12o. Mr Wingate. Two Tables of Loga∣rithmes; containng, 1o. The Lo∣garithme of any number, from one to 100 thousand, by Mr Rowe. The second, The Logarithme of the right signs and tangents, of all the degrees and minutes of the quadrant, each degree divided in∣to a 100 minutes, and the loga∣rithme of the Kadius or Semidi∣amiter, with the admirable use for resolving problmes in Geom. A∣stron. Geogra. Navigation, &c. 8o. —The construction and use of the Logarithmericall Tables whereby multiplication is performed by ad∣dition; division by substraction, and resolution of Triangles, right lined and sphericall by addition and substraction. Englished from the French. 8o. —The use of the rule of proportion in Arithmatick and Geometry, wherein is incerted the constructi∣on and use of the same rule in questions that concern Astronomy, Dialing, Geometry, Navigation, Gageing, &c. 8o. —The construction and use of the line of proportion, whereby the hardest questions of Arith. and Geom. in broken and whose numbers are resolved by addition and substraction. 8o. *Tactometria seu tetagne nometria, or the Geometry of Regulars practi∣cally proposed after an exact and new manner, with rules for gage∣ing vessels. 8o.
*The exact Surveighour of Land, to plot all grounds, to reduce and di∣vide the same, by the plain Table, Theolodite, and Circumferentar; to find the Area of Land; to make a Map thereof, and adorn it. 8o. *Mr Foster. Elliptical or Azimuthall Horologiography, containing seve∣rall waies of describing Dials: upon all kinds of superficies, ei∣ther plain or curved, &c. 4o. —The use of the Quadrant, fitted for daily practice, both for the ordinary lines, for the hour and azimuth, and other things of the same course in reference to the Ho∣rizon, with new lines; also to find the hour of the night by Stars; the description of usuall sorts of Dials, to perform all common things in Mensuratior. 8o. Shinerii Ars Nova delineandi. 4o. —Fundamentum opticum. *The Key of the Mathematicks new filed, with the resolutions of Ad∣fected equations, with the Art of Geometricall Dialling. 8o. *Mr Goodwin. A Table of gageing all manner of vessels. 8o. Trigonometry, or the doctrine of Tri∣angles: writ in Lat. by B. Pitiscus in Selesia, now Englished: also added certain nauticall Questions in the finding of the variation of the compass; all performed by Arithmetick, without Map, Sphere, Globe, or Astrolobe. 4o. Mr Dary. The description and use of a universall quadrant. *Mr Scarborough. Trigonometry. 4o. Cor. Agrippa, his occult Philosophy, of Geomany; Magicall elements, of P. de Albano. The nature of spi∣rits. 4o. Euclid's Elements of Geometry. The first six Books, in a compendious form contracted and demonstrated, by Cap. T. Rudd. chief Engenier to hi late Majesty; with a Mathe∣maticall Preface, by Mr J. Dee. 4o. *Mr Fale. Horologiographia, or the Art of Dialling, for making all sorts of Dials, and how to know the hour of the night by Diall. 4o. *The Antiquity and Excellency of Globes, what the Globe is, and of the Cir∣cles, Horizon, Meridian, Pole, Axes, &c. Tropicks, Zodiacks, &c. 4o. Mr Hewes. Tractatus duo Mathemati∣ci, quorum primus de globis Caelestibus & Terrestribus eorum{que} usu. Alter Bre∣viarium totius orbis Terrarum. Pet. Bertii Math. & profess. Regii. 12o. The same in English. 12o. Mr Carpenter's Geography delineated forth in two Books, containing the Sphericall and Topicall parts thereof. 4o. The Works of that famous Mathemati∣cian Mr E. Gunter, professor of A∣stronomy in Gresham Colledge, newly printed with many Addi∣tions and Corrections: by S. Foster late Professor of the same Col∣ledge. 4o. ☞Vignola. The Compleat Architect, the rules of the five Orders in Ar∣chitecture, &c. Tuscan, Dornick, Jonick, Corinthian, and Composite; shewing the proportion of all the members, which in a building have relation to one another. English. 8o. —The Same Lat. folio. Parralelle de Architecture. folio. Vitruvii Architectura. folio. Sabastian Shirley's Architect. folio. Hans Blooms. S. Colloms. folio. Andr. Poladio's Architect. folio. Albect. Duer's Architect. folio. Ving boon's Architect. folio. *Mr Gillibrand. The Institution
Tri∣gonometricall, explaining the Doctof Dimension, of plain and sphe∣ricall Triangles, done by Tables both of signs, tangents, secants, and logarithmes; with their applica∣tion in Quest. of Astron. and Na∣vigation. 8o. *Dialling proved instrumentally by our Hemispheare in Plane, first projected by Mr Oughtred: with one and twenty severall Diagrams, or Schemes, demonstrating the ground work of all Dialling: also to know, distinguish, and set down the hour-lines for both fa∣ces of all planes at one working. 4. Varie Architecture D.J. Fr. Fanelli. Florentino scultore, del Redella grand Britagne. 4o. Mr Digge. Tectonicon: The exact measuring of all land, squares, timber, stone, steeples, pillars, globes, making, and use of the Car∣penters rule; fit for Surveighors, land meaters, joyners, carpen∣ters, masons, &c. *Mr Oughtred. Clavis Mathematicae de uno limata sive potens fabricata: cum aliis quibusdam ejusdem commentationibus qua in sequenti pagina recensentur. 8o. *Circles of proportion. ☞Trigon. or manner of calculating the sides and Angles of Triangles, by the Mathematicall cann. de∣monstrated. English, 4o. ☞—Trigonometria. Hoc est modus computandi triangulorum, latera & Angulos, ex canone mathematico Tra∣ditus & demonstratus. 4o. Lansbergi Tabulae perpetuae motuum cae∣lestium. 4o. Tabulae Rudolphine. folio. Josephini Blunchani de sphera mundi. folio. Anguelonii Optica. folio. Tabulae Mathematicae, containing the naturall and artificiall signs and Tangents, and the secants naturall of every degree, and hundred part of a degree, with an institu∣tion Mathematicall, for the use of the said Tables, in the solution of all triangles, plain and spericall, with the application thereof, in Astronomy, Dialling, and Naviga∣tion. 8o. Mr Partridg. The art of numbering by Rods, whereby the operations of Multiplication and division, ex∣traction of rootes, &c. Are per∣formed by addition and substracti∣on, with many examples for pra∣ctice of the same. 8o. Mr Brigges. Trigonometria Britanica, seu de Doctrina triangulorum, lib. duo. 8o. —Arithmetica logarithma, sive loga∣rithmorum, chiliades centum pro nu∣meris naturali seriae cresentibus ab unitate ad 100000. Hynd linij. Mathematica. 4o. ☞Mr. Norwood. The doctrine of Tri∣angles, shewing the mensuration of right lined Triangles, and Spheri∣call, with grounds and demonstra∣tions, both by logarithmes, with the application thereof in three kinds of sailing, with Tables of the Suns declension. 4o. ☞—Epitome. Or the application of the Doctrine of Triangels, in cer∣tain problems, to the use of the plain Sea-Chart and Mercators, with a table of artificiall signs and tangents, and complements Arith∣meticall of sines, supplying the use of Secants. 8o. Mr Batts. His Water-Works, and Fire-Works. 12o. ☞Mr Stirrup. The artificers plain scale, or the Carpenters new rule. 1. Shewing how to measure all superficies and
solids, as timber,stone, &c. Geometrically, 2. To do the same instrumentally, upon the scale it self, without Arithme∣ick, or Geometry, also to take heigth, and distances severall waies and to draw the plot of a Town or City. 12o. *—The universall quadrant. 8o. *Oedipus. The resolver of secrets in nature. 8o. A Book of Scheemes and Figure. A discourse of artificiall Fire-Works, the true grounds of that art, with a treatise of Geometry, by Mr Brabing∣ton, Student in the Mathematicks. folio. Mr Blagraves Things of Mathematicks. 8o. Mr Hoptons Things of Mathematicks. 8o. Mr Ward. Institutiones Trigonom. 4o. *Mr Newton. Justitutio Mathem. 12o. ☞—Help to calculation, or two Ta∣bles of Decimall numbers and Lo∣garithmes, for converting of Sexa∣genary Tables into Decimals, and the contrary Tables of Declination, right and oblique assention, &c. 4o. Mr Shackerle. Tabulae Brittanica; con∣taining Logisticall Arithmetick, Doctrine of the Sphere, Astrono∣micall Chronology, Ecclesiasticall account, equation and reduction of time, with Calculation of the mo∣tions of the fixed and wandering starrs, &c. 8o. ☞Mathematicall Recreations, Or rare and exquisive inventions for accute wits, and industrious disposions, replenished with misteries, secrets, and rarities, both Arithmeticall, and Mathematicall. 12o. *Mathematicall Magick. 8o. ☞The use of nocturall. by W.P. 8o. ☞Mr Wallis. Due correction for Mr Hobbs for not saying his lesson right in reference to the Mathema∣ticks, 8o. ☞The use of the quadrant, shewing to know the height of steeples, trees, houses, &c. Of the Sun, Moon and Starrs, Sun setting and rising, &c. 8o. *Mr Hotham. Teutonick Philosophy. *Mr Morgan. Horologiographia optica, Dialling Universall and particular speculative and practicall, in a threefold precognita, Geometricall, Philosophicall, and Astronomicall, in a threefold pract. Arith. Geom. and instrumentall, with the court of art, for dyalls, globes, diffe∣rence of Meridians, and propositi∣ons of Astronomy. 4o. ☞Aurora, Or the day spring, the root or mother of Philosophy, A∣strology, and Theology from the true ground, by J. Behmen. 4o. ☞Dyalling universall, performed by an easie and speedy way the houre lives, &c. by scales on a portable Ruler. 4o. ☞The Caelestiall Ambassador. 8o. ☞Mr Turner. Astrologicall opticks, representing the face of every sign, the images of each degree in the Zodiach, &c. The signification of each Planet, &c. Translated from J. Angellus, and J. Regiomontanus Mathem. at Venice. 8o. Johanes Angelius. An antient and sober Treatise of Astrology. Textus de sphera, I. de Sacrobosco, in∣troductoria (quantum necessarium est,) comentariopue ad villitatem studenteum, Philosophiae, Parisien∣sis, Achademiae illustratus, cum compositione annuli, Astronomici, B∣neti, Latensis: & Geometria, Eucli∣dis, Megarensis. folio. *Mr V. Wing. Harmonicon caeleste, or
the Celestiall Harmony of the visi∣ble world, containing an entire and absolute piece of Astronomy. folio. *—An Ephemeris for the Celestiall motion, for 7. years, beginning 1651. ending 1658. Diligently calculated according to the Do∣ctrine of Harmonicon celeste, and applied to the Horizon of London; with an Introduction of the use thereof. 4o. *—Astronomia Instaurata; or a new and compendious restauration of Astronomy in Foure parts. 1. Lo∣gica Astronomica, Astronomicall A∣rithmetick. 2. The Doctrine of the Sphere, &c. 3. The Theory of the Caelestiall motions, repre∣senting the face of the visible world, &c. 4. Astronomicall Ta∣bles, exhibiting the true motion of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets and Eclypses past, present, and to come; also a Catalogue of the Cae∣lestiall motions, that have been made by T.L. Gasendus Land∣grave, of Hessia and others. folio. —Ʋrania practica, or practicall A∣stronomy in Seven parts, with somewhat concerning Navigation. 8o. *Mr Warren. Magick Astrology vindi∣cated from aspersions, their justifi∣cation, &c. 4o. ☞Mr Ramsey. Astrologia Restaurata, or Astrology restored, being an introduction to the generall and chief part of the language of the Starrs, proving the legallity of A∣strology, from Scripture and rea∣son; with the manner and Cha∣racters of Planets, Signs and Revo∣lutions of the World, Eclypses, Co∣mets, blazing Starrs; how to judg of generall accidents, of Countries, Kingdomes, Provinces, alterations of Empires, &c. folio. ☞Dariotus Redivivus, or a brief in∣troduction of the judgement of the Starrs, wherein the whole art of judiciall Astrology is made plain. 4o. ☞Mr Hartgill. Astronomicall Tables, shewing the declensions, right as∣sentions, and aspects of 365. of the most principall fixed Starrs, and number of them in their con∣stellations. 4o. Mr Lillie. Christian Astrology modest∣ly treated of in Three Books. 1. The use of the Ephemeris, er∣recting of a scheme of Heaven, &c. With an introduction to the whole art of Astrology. 2. How to resolve questions in health, rich∣es, marriages, &c. 3. How to judg on nativities. &c. 4o. —Monarchy noe Monarchy, with the prophecies of the white King, and severall Hierogliphicks. 4o. —Annus tenebrosus, or the dark year, shewing how to judg of Ec∣clypses, &c. 4o. —Astrologicall predictions, &c. 4o. Mr Culpepper. Catastrophe magnatum, or the fall of Monarchy; a caveat for Majestrates, deduced for the Eclypse of the Sun. 4o. —The mistery of Astronomy made plain to the meanest capacity, by an Arithmeticall description of the Terrestiall and Celestiall Globe, shewing the wonderfull Works of God, from the Earth his footstool, to his Throne the Heaven. 8o. The most excellent profitable, and pleasant Book, of the famous and expert Astrologian Archandum, to find the fatall destiny, constellati∣on, complexion, and naturall incli∣nation of every Man
and Child, by birth, with an addition of Phisi∣ognomy.8o. *Magia Adamica. Or the antiquity of Magick, and the descent there∣of from Adam downward proved, The true Caelum terrae, or Magici∣ans Heavenly Chaos, and first mat∣ter of all. 8o *Lumen, de Lumine. Or a new Ma∣gicall light discovered and commu∣nicated to the world. 8o. The knowledge of things unknown, shewing the effects of the Planets, and other Astronomicall constella∣tions, with the strange events that befell men, weomen, and Children born under them. 8o. *Chilmend. Unheard of curiosities, concerning the talismanicall sculp∣ture of the Persians, the Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and reading of the Starrs, translated from the French. 8o. ☞Mr Wright. Certain errors in navi∣gation, detected and Corrected, with many additions. ☞An excellent Tutor for Masons, Carpenters, Joyners, Glasiers, Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Painters, and all Handicrafts; Certain neces∣sary and reddy helps of Geometry, which is the first degree of all good art. folio. *A Tutor to Astronomy and Geo∣graphy, or an easie and speedy way to understand the use of both Globes; Caelestiall and Terestiall, translated from Guil. Blian. by J.M 8o. I. Bambrigii. Astron. Profess. Ox. Quibus accesserunt, Insigniorum ali∣quot stellarum longitudines, & lati∣tudines ex Astron. obser, &c. 8o. Euclidis elementorum, lib. 15. acces∣sit, lib. 16, de solidorum regula∣rum, &c. Cum clavii notis. 2. Voll. 8o. The spirall line Printed. ☞Mr Eaton. A Treatise of Months and Years, comprehending a sur∣vey of the Solar and Lunar months and years, of the months and years formerly in use, among the He∣brews, Babilonians, Persians, E∣giptians; &c. with abridgement of the History of the world, with Mathem. observations. 8o. *Sr Ch. Hyden. An Astrologicall dis∣course with Mathematicall demon∣strations, proving tha influence of the Planets and fixed Starrs upon Ellementary bodies in justification of the verity of Astrology. 12o. *Mr Street. An Ephemeris, Geocentri∣call and Heliocentricall for, 1653. ☞Ars notoria. The notory art of Solomon, shewing the Cabalisticall key of Magicall operation, liberall sciences, divine revelations, art of memory, with an Astrologicall Ca∣techisme, fully demonstrating the art of juditiall Astrology, with an excellent invention done by the Magick virtue of the loadstone, translated from Latin by R. Turner. 12o. ☞Astronomia Britanica. Exhibiting the Doctrine of spheare, and theo∣ry of the Planets, Decimally by Trigonomitry, and by Tables fit∣ted for the Meridian of London, ac∣cording to the Copernican System, as it is illustrated Bullialdus, and the easie way of calculation, by Dr Ward. I. Newton. M.A. 4o. The secrets of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of herbs, stones, and certain beasts; with a short dis∣course of the Planets, governing the nativities of Children; also of marvelous things of the world, &c. 8o. *Chyromancy. Or the art of divining by the lives in
the hand in 19. Ge∣niturus;a discourse of the soul of the word by G. Wharton, Esquire. 8o. *The Book of Palmistry and Phisi∣ognomy, being a brief introducti∣on both naturall, pleasant and de∣lectable to the art of Chyromancy, or the mannuall divination and Phisiognomy, with circumstances upon the faces of the signs: also of naturall Astrology, with the na∣ture of Planets. 12o. The Dutch Fortuneteller. folio. Ʋia Regia ad Geometriam. The way to Geom. being necessary and usefull for Astronomers, Geogra-Land-meaters, Seamen, Engineers, Architecks, Painters, Carvers, &c. by P. Ranus, englished by Mr Bed∣well. 4o. ☞That excellent piece of Phisiog∣mony and Chyromancy metopos∣copie, the symmetricall proportions and signall moles of the body, the Subject of Dreames, with the art of memory. by Mr Saunders, in folio. Erra pater. 8o. *Bosthuma Fosteri. The description of a ruler, with divers scales and uses thereof, whereby most pro∣positions in Astron. Naviga. and dialling are easily performed, al∣so delineating of far declining di∣als, and delineating all Horizontall dials. 4o. ☞Mr Cattel. A perpetuall and univer∣sall Alminack; with the most ne∣cessary propositions in Astronomy and Cosmography, by tables and Trigonometry. 8o. A description of the admirable Tables of Logarithems, with a declaration of the most easie and speedy use thereof in both kinds of Trigono∣metry, as also in all Mathemati∣call Calculations, by Ld Napier. traslated by Mr Wright, with an addition of the istrumentall Table, to find the first part porportionall, by Mr Brigges. 12o. *Mr Dansie. A Mathematicall man∣nuell, handling Arith. Planime∣try, Stereometry, and embattail∣ing of Armies; measuring of Super∣ficies, solids, the gauging of Cask, with proportionall numbers fitted to gauging of Rods, &c. 12o. ☞A Tutor to Astrology, or Astro∣logy made easie; an introduction to the whole art; a Table of the houses, with other Tables, by W E. 12o. *A Table of the Twelve Astrological Houses of Heaven; carefully com∣posed in a Book of Figures ready set for every four minutes of time, whereby judgement of a question may be given without an epheme∣ris, by V.W. 8o. The Sea-mans Chalender, or an ephe∣merides of the Sun, Moon, and certain of the most noble fixed Starrs. A Table of the longitude and latitude of all the most emi∣nent places of the world, an ex∣act table of the North Starre, new Tables of 65. of the principall fix∣ed Starrs, the time of the coming upon the Meridian every day, with a discovery of a way to find the long hidden secret of longitude, by I. Plat. and H. Bond. Teacher of Mathematicks. 4o. ☞Orthodox all Navigation, or the ad∣mirable and excellent art of Arith∣meticall great circle sailing, inlarg∣ed and applied to the places of all situations, with a new and Para∣doxal chart. 8o. The Sea-mans secrets, in two parts saling; Horizontall, Paradoxall, and upon a great circle, an Hori∣zontall tide Table,
with a regi∣mentnewly calculated, for the finding of the declension of the Sun, &c. 4o. The safeguard of Sailers, or great Rutter. Containing the courses, distances, soundings, floods and ebbs, with the marks of the en∣trance, severall harbours, of Eng. France, Spain, Irel. Fland. and the sounds of Denmarke; with other necessary rules of common naviga∣tion, by R.N. Hydographer. 4o. The Sea-mans Glasse; or a plain scale whereby all questions, nauticall and propositions Astronomicall, are easily and demonstratively wrought, by I. Aspley. 4o. The Seamans Practice, containing a fundamentall problem in Naviga∣tion, experimentally verified, viz. Touching the compass of the earth and sea, and the quantity of a degree in our English measure, al∣so to keep a reckoning at Sea for all sailing, &c. by R. Morwood, reader of the Mathematicks. 4o. The Navigator, shewing and ex∣plaining all the chief principals and parts, both Theorick and Practick, that are contained in the famous art of Navigation, with a new and admirable way of sailing by the arch of one of the greatest Circles, with the true proportion of all par∣rallels, in respect of the Meridian, by Cap. Ch. Saltingstoll. 4o. The Geometricall Sea-man. or the art of Navigation performed by Geo∣metry, shewing how all the three kinds of Sailing, by the plain chart, by Mercators chart, and by a great circle, may be easily and exactly performed by a plain ruler, and a pair of compasses; without Arith∣meticall Calculation, by H. Phil∣lips. 4o. A path-way to perfect sailing; shewing the fix principall points of Naviga∣tion, by R. Potter, one of the prin∣cipall Masters of the Navy Royall, with a nauticall discourse, to prove the way of a ship (upon the su∣perficies of the Sea) outward and and homeward to be both one, re∣turning by the opposite point of the Meridian compasse, also to prove the East and the West di∣rected by the Meridian compasse, to lead in a magneticall parallel, by H. Bond. 4o. The Sea-mans Grammer. *A description and plat of the Sea-Coasts of England from London to New-Castle, so to Edenburg and Scotlaad; also Norway, Denmark sound, &c. 4o. The Sea-mans Dictionary; or an expo∣sition and demonstration of all the parts and things belonging to a Ship, with terms and phrases used in the Practick of Navigation, by Sr H. Manwaring. 4o. Mr Nye. The art of Gunnery. 8o. The Pilots Mirour; or Sea-mans look∣ing-glasse, setting forth the Nor∣thern, Eastern, and Western Na∣vigation, both of Seas and Coasts, furnished with many necessary Sea cards, discoveries of lands, with divers differences in courses and distances, with a brief introducti∣on to the art of Navigation. folio. M. Descartes. An excellent compen∣dium of musick, with necessary and judicious animadversions thereupon, by a person of honour illustrated with figures. 4o. A musicall banquet, set forth in three choice varieties of musick. 4o. A brief introduction to skil of Musick by song or voyall. 8o.
Mr Dock. His little consort of three parts, containing, Pavans, Ayres, Corants, and Sarabrands for Voyalls or Voy∣alins, in two varieties, the first 20. for too Trebles and a Base, the last 20. for Treble, Tenour, and Base, to be performed alone, or with Theorbo's and Harpsicon. 4o. Mr Child. Choice Musick to the Psalms of David, for three voices with a continuall Basse, either for Organ or Theorbo. 8o. A Book of Dancing, in plain rules for country dances, with tunes to each dance, with tunes for French corants, with pleasant tunes for Treble-Violin, for beginners. 8o. Musick Recreation, or choice tunes for the lyra voyall. 4o. Ayres and Dialogues, for one two or three voices, by Mr Lawes, ser∣vant to his late Majesty in his pub. and private Musick. folio. New and choice tunes for the Cit∣tern, with lessons for Gittern, &c. 4o. Court aires; Or Pavins, Almains, Co∣rants and Sarabrands of two parts; Treble and Base, for Voials or Vy∣olins in consort, to the Theorbo, Lute or Virginals. 4o. Elians Tracticks; or the art of embat∣teling of an Army. folio. Animadversions of Warre; or the mili∣tary Magazine, by Mr Ward. folio. Instructions for Musters and Armes. 4o. Mr Elton. The compleat body of the art, military, exactly compiled and gradually Composed, for the foot in the best refined manner, accord∣ing to the practice of the modern times in three Books, or with the duties of Officers and Souldiers, &c. 4o. Mr Barriffe. Millitary discipline, or the young artillery-man, shewing the postures of Muskut and pike, formes for embatteling, also Mars his Triumph. 4o. A Tract of Fortifications, with 22. brass cuts. 8o. The compleat Captain. Or an abridg∣ment of Caesars warrs, with ob∣servations upon them, with the order of the militia of the antients, and a particular treatise of modern warre, written by the D. of Roan, late Generall. 8o. The art of Warre, or military dis∣course, by Mr J. Crus. Cotgraue, the French and English Di∣ctionary, with the animadversions and supplement of J. Howell Esq folio. The sure guid to the French Tongue, teaching to pronounce French na∣turally, read perfectly, and write truly. 8o. The French Bible. 8o. 12o. The French Accidence. 4o. The French Grammer. 8o. The French Verbes. 8o. The Marrow of the French Tongue, containing rules for pronounciati∣on, an exact Grammer of the nine parts of speech, and Dialogues for Courteirs, Citizens, &c. with phrases, letters, missives, proverbs, &c. folio. ☞An introduction to the French Tongue, teaching with much case, facility and delight, how to attain briefly and most exactly to the true and modern pronounciation there∣of, illustrated with elegant ex∣pressions, and choice Dialogues. 8o. Advise concerning Bills of Exchange, wherein is set forth the nature of Enchange of monies, and Bills of Exchange, different languages,
manner of proceed in protests, countermane, security, letters of credit, assignments generally; and the whole practicall part and body of exchang anatomized, with two Tables of new stile and old stile, by I. Martius, P. Notary. 8o. Mr Carpenter. Most excellent instru∣ctions for keeping Merchants books of accounts, by way of debtor and creditor, after the Italian man∣ner. folio. ☞Choice phrases in Italian, render∣ed into English for the benefit of Learners, with Italian proverbs. 8o. Lex Mercatoria. Or ancient Law Merchant, in three parts according to the essentiall parts of Traffick, fit for all Statesmen, Judges, Ma∣gistrates, Lawyers, Merchants, and all that Negotiate in any part of the world; added also the Merchants mirrour for keeping accounts by way of debtor and creditor after the Italian manner, &c. folio. Enchiridion Arithmeticon, A mannuel of millions or accounts ready cast up, to shew suddenly thereby the true valiew of any commodity, at any price whatsoever. 8o. The book of rates of all the customes payable by Merchants for goods exported and imported. 8o. The Merchants Avizo, Necessary for their Sons and Servants, when first sent beyond the Seas. 4o. The Merchants Mapp of Commerce. The Treasure of Traffick, or a dis∣course of forreign trade, wherein is shewed the benefit and commo∣dity arising to a common wealth, by the skilfull Merchant, by a well ordered commerce and regular traf∣fick. 4o. The circle Commerce, or ballance of trade, in defence of a free trade, wherein exchanges in generall are considered, and the whole trade of this Kingdome, with forreign Countries, poised in the ballance. 4o. Directions for all Gold currant in England. 8o. The scale of interests, or Tables and and Breviate, shewing the forbea∣rance and discounts of any summes of money for any time, by R. Butler. Accounts of Merchandise ready com∣puted, Tables for measuring tim∣ber, glasse, board, land, &c. 8o. The Tradesman's Companion. 8o. A generall treasury of accounts for all countries in Christendome. 8o. Of a free trade, tending to the bene∣fit of a right ordered trade, the relative, nature, degrees, are qua∣lifications of liberty, which is to be enlarged or restrained accord∣ing to that good which it relates to. 4o. Most excellent instructions for keep∣ing Merchant's books, by way of debtor and creditor, after the I∣talian manner, by I. Carpenter Mer. folio. Apprentises times entertainer accomp∣tantly, or a methodicall meanes to obtain the exquisite art of ac∣countantship, by Mr Dafforn. 4o. Mr Markham. His Master-piece con∣taining all knowledg belonging to Smith Farriers, or Horsleach, for curing all diseases in Horses. 4o. —The way to get wealth, con∣taining the natures, ordering, cure∣ing, breeding, choice, use, and feeding all sorts of Chattell, with the knowledge use and lawdable practice of all recreations fit
forGent. with the office of a House∣wife, Phisick, Chirurgery, Ban∣quets, Cookery, preserving wine and other secrets, and for enrich∣ing all barren ground, also for Orchards, planting, and grafting. 4o. —The faithfull Farrier, or secrets in Horsmanship. 8o. —The Country Farrier, curing all diseases in Horses, Kine, sheep, Hoggs. 8o. —A Method or Epitomy for curing all diseases incident to Horses, which are 300. all cured with 12. medicines, also for curing all sorts of Beasts and Birds. 8o. —The Compleat Ferrier, wherein the depths of his skill is laid open in all those principall and opprov∣ed secrets of Horsmanship, never before discovered, but lay in the Authors breast. 8o. —The perfect Horsman, or experi∣enced secrets of Markhams fifty years practice, shewing the know∣ledge of a breeder, seeder, ambler, rider, keeper, and buyer. 8o. Mr Maskhall. The government of cat∣tel, oxen, kine, calves, horses, sheep, goats, &c. 4o. T. De, Gray. The compleat Horsman, and expert Ferrier, for breeding choice natures, riding and dieting Horses, with the cures for all disea∣ses incident. The Garden of Eden, an accurate de∣scription of all flowers, fruits, seeds, herbs, trees, and plants in England, with rules how to advance their nature and growth, as well in seeds and herbs, as the secret ordering of trees and plants, by that learned and great observer, S. H. Plat, with a Philosophicall garden, and touch at the vegetable work in Physick, whose principall fire is the stomach of the Ostrich. 12o. The Gardiners Labrinth, or a new art of Gardening, or rare secrets in that mistery, never before pub∣lished, both for delight and ser∣vice, with divers knots for delight of a garden, with the use of every Physicall Herb, with distillation of waters. 4o. A new Orchard or garden, the best way for planting, grafting, and also the husbandry of Bees, &c. 4o. Butler on Bees, the art thereof exactly described. 4o. Bread for the Poore, and advance∣ment of the English Nation, promis∣ed by inclosure of the wasts and common grounds of England. 4o. The English Improver, or a new sur∣vey of Husbandry, discovered to the Kingdome, that some land both arrable and pasture, may be advanced double or treble, other land to a five or ten fold, some 20. fold improvement; yea, some not above 1. or 2. an acre to be worth, 3. or 4. or more, clearly demon∣strated from principles of sound reason, ingenuity, and late, but most certain reall experiences, held forth in six pieces of improve∣ment. 4o. Markham. The whole art of husbandry, in 4. Books, 1. Of the form of mansion, house, pasture, and mea∣dew, 2. Gardens, orchards, woods, 3. Breeding and feeding all cattel, 4. Of poultery, foule, fish, Bees, fighting cocks, angling, &c. 4o. A perfect platform for a Hopp gar∣den. Austen. A Treatise of fruit trees, the manner of grafting, seting pruning, and ordering them in all respects, according to
the new and easie rules of experience, gathered inthe space of 20. years. 4o. Hartlib. His legacy of husbandry, be∣queathing to Eng. not only Bra∣band, and Flanders, but many o∣ther outlandish experiments, and secrets of plots and others, usefull for universall husbandry, never before published. 4o. Mr Guillians. Desplay of Herauldry, ma∣nifesting a more easie accesse to the knowledg thereof then former∣ly, also explaining the tearms of hawking, and hunting, for delight of the Gentry. folio. Mr York. The union of honour, con∣taining the Arms, Matches, and Issues, of the Kings, Dukes, Marq. and Earles of Eng. from the Con∣quest to 1640. with the Arms of English Vicounts, and Barons, &c, folio. ☞Mr Carter. Honor Redivivus, or an Analisis of honour and armory. 8o. The painting of the Antients. The Cabinet of Jewels, discovering the nature, vertue, vallew of pre∣cious stones, with infallible rules to escape the deceit of all counter∣feit. 8o. Mr Lathams Faulconcy, for training and ordering hawks, with cures. 4o. Mr Peacham. The Gentlemans exer∣cise, or art of limning, painting, and blazoning of Coats of Armes. 4o. A book of limning, drawing, washing, colouring of Mapps, and Prints, with the art of painting, with names and use of colours used by Limners. folio. Orpheus, or a book of souls, birds, and flies, upon branches of fruits, and slips lively discribed. 4o. Flora, or a book of flowers, fruits, beasts, birds, and flies exactly drawn with their lively colours. 4o. The compleat Angler, or contempla∣tive mans recreation, being a book of fish and fishing. 8o. The needlesse excellency, a most pleasant book of cutworks. 8o. A book teaching the best way of carving and serving. 8o. A book of all sorts of fishes. 4o. The mystery of nature and art, of waterworks, fireworks, drawing, painting, and sundry experiments. 4o. A book of habits and fancies, of Hol∣lare. 4o. Pictures of vandicks originals, and co∣pies. 4o. All sorts of books for teaching to write short-hand or Charracters. All sorts of books for teaching to write all sorts of hands, used in England, as secretary, Roman, Ita∣lian, &c. A book of Beasts, lively drawn. 4o.
Romances Poems AND Playes.
ROMANCES. ARiania, in two parts. folio. Prince Arthur. 4o. Artamnes, or grand Cirus in seven parts. folio. Aristippus, or jealous lovers. 12o. Albino and Bellania. 12o. Astrea or loves Mirrour. 8o. Advertisements from Parnassus. 8o. The banished Virgin. follo. Barclay, his Argenis. 4o. Cloria, and Narcissus. 8o. Chast and lost lovers in Archadius, and Sephia. 8o. Choice Novels, and amorous Tables. 8o. Cassandria. 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5. parts. folio. Cassandria. The three first books. 8o. Card of Courtship. 8o. Cleopatria. 8o. Cleriae, and Loria. 8o. Glelia, by M. d. Scudery, in two volumes folio. Coralbo, in three books. Don Fenise. 8o. Dorastus, and Favonia. 4o. Don Quixit. folio. Dianea, 1. & 2. part. 8o. Eupheus, golden legacy. 4o. Elize. or innocence guilty. 12o. Grand Cirus, King of Persia. folio. Golden Asse, 2. bo. of L. Apulius. 4o. Gerrardo the unfortunate Spaniard. 8o. Heptameron, the Qu. of Navar. 8o. Hypolite, and Issabella. 8o. Illustrious Bassa. 4. parts. folio Illstrious Sheperdess. Innocent Lady, or illustrious Inno∣cence. 8o. Imperious Brother. 8o. Leoline, and Sydanis. 8o. Lysander, and Calista. 8o. Mock Romance. folio. Natures Paradoxes. 4o. Nissena. 8o. Nuptiall lover. 8o. Ornatus and Artesia. 4o. Pembrooks Archadia. folio. Pleasant notes on Don Quicksot. folio. Pollixander. folio. Parismus Prince of Bohemia. 4o. Palmerins of England. 4o. Palmerins de oliva. 4o. Philoxipes and Pollicrite. 8o. Paris and Viena. 4o. Parthenissa by Ld Breghall, 4. parts. 4o. Mr Renolds flower of fidelity. 8o. —Gods revenge against murther. folio. Seven Champians of Christendome. 4o. Triumphant Arch, to the glory of the fe∣male Sex. 4o. Tragicall Hist. of Fortunatus. 8o. Triumphant lady or Crowned Inno∣cence. 8o. Unfortunate Queen. 4o. Vallentine and Orson. 4o. Boccales Table, or Quintessence of wit, loquence and Conversati∣ 12o.
POEMS. ALlarm to Poets. 4o. Mrs Bradstreet. The 10. muse, a Poem. 8o. Psyche, or loves mistery, by J. Beamont. 4o. Mr Barrons Poems. 8o. Mr Cowley, severall love verses. 8o. —Poems, Misselains, Pindarque deos, and a sacred Poem of the troubles, of David. folio. Mr Curews Poems, with a masque. 8o. Mr Crashaw. Steps to the Temple. 12o. Mr Cartwrights Poems, Traged. and Tragicom. 8o. Mr Cleavelands Poems. 8o. Mr Cotgrave. A collection from the best drammatick Poems. 8o. Mr Chapman. The crown of all homers work, with the battle of Froggs and Mice. folio. Bp Corbetts Poems. 4o. Mr Chamberlins Epigrams and Epitaphs. 8o. Mr Colop. Poesis Rediviva. 8o. Mr Denham. The destruction of Troy. —Coopers Hill. A Poem. 4o. Mr Davenant. Madagasker, with other Poems. —Gondibert. A Poem. 8o. Dr Donne. Poems. 8o. Mr Draytons Poems, Barrons Warres. 8o. —The battle of agincourt, the my∣steries of Q. Margaret. 8o. —p pastor fido, with other Poems. 4o. Dubartas. folio. Mr Fanshaws Poems. 8o. Mr Flecher. The purchased Island, be∣ing poeticall misselanies. 4o. Mr Farloes Emblems. 8o. Godf. of Bulloin, or recovery of Jerusa∣lem, with his life. folio. Mr Herbert. Sacred Poems of the Tem∣ple. 12o. Mr Heaths Carrestella, Poems, Ellegie, &c. 8o. Mr Hausted. A Poem in honour of To∣bacco. 8o. Mr Harvey. The bucolicks of B. Mantua. 8o. —Hist. of Baalam, and Jonab, and J. the Baptist. 8o. Horrace, de arte poeticae, englished by B. Johnson, an execration against Vul∣can, a mask of Gipsies. 12o. Mr Haulcing. Odes of Horrace. 8o. Henry the Seventh. 8o. Mr Howell. A vote or Poem of royall, presented to his Majesty. 4o. —Two Counter-Poems, 1. An clegy on the E. of Dorset, 2. An Epithalamium to the Ld Maior of Dorchest. —Anglicae suspiria & lachrymae. 12o. Mr Harmands Poems. 8o. J. Hall Esq Poems. 12o. Mt Herrick. Poems, Humane and Di∣vine. 12o. Lyptius de constantia. 12o. Mr Lawrance. the melancholly Knight. 4o. Mr Milton's Poems with a mask before the Earl of Bridg water. 12o. Mr Murford, Fragmenta poetica. 12o. Orlando furioso. folio. Cuts. O. Metamorpho. folio. Cuts. O. Epistle. 8o. Cuts.
Mr Oglebie's Virgil. 8o. —Esop. with cuts. 4o. Ov. De arte amandi, engl. 12o. Ov. De Tristibus. engl. 8o. Orchestra. A Poem of the antiquity and excellency of dancing. 8o. Poems and fancies by the Lady Marg. Newcastle. folio. A sacred Panegerick. by S. Marshall. 4o. Mr Quarels, Poems. 8o. —Emblems. 8o. —Divine fancies. 12o. —Boanerges, and Barnabas. 12o. Fons Lacrimarum, an ellegy on Sr C. Lucas. 12o. —Enchridion. 12o. —Sheperds Oracles. 4o. —Solomon's Recantation. 4o. —Argalus and Parthenia. 4o. Cuts. —Rape of Lucretia. 8o. Mr Stanly. Poems and Works. 8o. Mr Shaksper's Poems. 12o. Mr Stapleton. Muses on Hero and Lean∣der. 12o. —Juvenals, and Satyrs, with Annota∣tions. 8o. —Herodian of Alexandria. 4o. Sr J. Sucklings, Fragmenta aurea. 8o. Mr Shirs Poems with a mask, the tri∣umph of beauty. 8o. Satyr, against Hypocrites. 4o. The sinagogues sacred Poems, in imi∣tation of Mr Herbert. Syon and Parnassus, or divine Epigrams. 12o. Mr Short's Poems. 12o. Mr Stevenson's Poems. 8o. Mr Sherbon's Poems. 8o. Mr Tatham. Ostolla. A Poem. 12o. Tenth Muse, or an exact Epitomy of the four monarchies. 8o. The works of J. Taylor, the water Poet. folio. Mr Vaughams Poems. 8o. —Silex Scintillans, 2 parts. 8o. Mr Watt's Poems and Epigrams. 8o. Mr Waller's Poems. 8o. Mr Wither's. Brittains Remembrancer. 8o. —Campo musae. 8o. —Vox pacifica. 8o. —Abuses stript, and whipt. 8o. —Emblems quickened with metricall and divine Illustrations, with lot∣teries. folio. Mr Washbourn's divine Poems. 12o. Mr Wincoll's Poems. 12o. Mr Wishhart's Immanuell. 4o. English Parnassus. 8o. Mr Willan. The Phrigian Fabulist, or Esop. Fab. extracted from the lat. and moralized. 8o. PLAYES. B. IOhnson's Playes. 2. vol. folio. The marriage of the arts. 4o. Michaelmas Terme. 4o. Just Generall. 4o. Fine Companion. 4o. Phenix. 4o. Combate, of love and friendship. A comedy, by Mr Mead. Mr Beamont, and Flecher, Wildgoose chase, a Tragy-comedy. folio. —34. Playes, Comedies, and Trage∣dies, with a mask. folio. —Thiery and Thaeodoret. 4o. —Mounseir Thomas. 4o. —Cupids Revenge. 4o. —Two noble Kinsmen. 4o. Elder Brother. 4o. —Scornfull Lady. 4o. —Woman Hater. 4o. Mr Denham. The Sophy, a Tragedy. folio.
The Countrey Capt. and the variety. 4o. Sr J. Suckling. Discontented Collonell. 4o. The deserving Favourite. 4o. The Sophister. 4o. Mr Chapman. Revenge of dussy de ambois. 4o. —Byron's Conspiracy. 4o. —Byron's Tragedy. 4o. Mr Shirley. Contention for honour and riches. 4o. —Triumph of peace. 4o. —Six Playes, The Brother, the Sister, the doubtfull Heir, the Imposture, the Cardinall, and Court-secretary. 8o. —The Gamester. 4o. —Royall Master. 4o. —Gentleman of Venice. 4o. —The Pollitian. 4o. Mr Quarel's Virgin Widow. 4o. The Rebellion, a Comedy. 4o. Mr Stroad. The floating Island. 4o. The gratefull Servant, a comedy. Tragedy of the famous Roman Ora∣tor, M. T. Cicero. 4o. Mr Flecher. Rule a wife and have her. 4o. —Tragedy of Rollo Duke of Norman∣di. 4o. —Faithfull Shepardess. 4o. Mr Shakspear's Playes. folio. —King Leare, and his three Daughters, with the unfortunate life of Edgar. 4o. —The life and death of Rich. the 2o. 4o. Lingua. A combat of the tongue, and five sences. 8o. The Ball 4o. The Tragedy of the Chamlet. 4o. The Example. 4o. The Gamester. 4o. Dukes Mistres. 4o. The old Law. 4o. The merry wines of Windsor. 4o. Mr Flecher. Three new Playes, viz. The bashfull Lover, the guardian, and the very Woman. 4o. 'Tis pitty she's a whore. 4o. The honest whore, 2. parts. 4o. The Oppertunity. The swaggering Damsell. 4o. Four Playes in Latine; Lotola, Stoicus, Vapulans, Cancer, and Pazia, 4o. Perkin Werbeck. 4o. Phillis, of Sciros. 4o. Mr Goff. The couragious Turk, or A∣murath the first. 4o. —Tragedy of Orestes. —The Bastard, a Tragedy. 4o. —Rageing Turk, or Bajazet. the 2o. 4o. Tragedy of Alphonsus, Emperour of Germany. 4o. Mr May. Cleopatria, Q of Egypt. 12o. —Agrippina, Emperess of Rome. 12o. The Duchess of Malsey. 4o. The Cid. A Tragy-comedy translated from the French. 4o. Unfortunate mother, a Tragedy. 4o. Edw. the 4. 1, and 2. part. 4o. The Widow, a Comedy, by Mr John∣son, and Mr Fletcher. The Changling. 4o. Medea. A Tragedy, translated from La∣tin. 8o. The royall slave, acted at Oxford. 4o. Tragedy of Masse velto. 12o. Sr W. Davenant. Platonick lovers. 4o. —The wits a comedy. 4o. —Triumphs of Prince de amour. mas∣que. 4o. —Albovine, K. of Lombardy. 4o. —Just Italian. 4o. —Passionate lovers. 4o. —Crewell Brother. 4o. —Unfortunate lovers. 4o. —Love and Honour. 4o. Mirza. A Tradegy realy acted in Persia. 4o. A Challeng for Beauty. 4o.
The costly whore, by the company ofRevells. 4o. The Hectors, or false challeng. 4o. The Scotch figaries, a knot of knaves. 4o. Ram-ally, or merry tricks, a comedy. 4o. To chose a good wife from a bad, a comedy. 4o. The amorous warre, a Tragy-comedy. 4o. Mr Broome. Five Playes, viz. A madde couple well macht, Novella, the Court begger, City wit, Damo∣sella. 8o. —The Northern Lasse. 4o. —Joviall crew. 4o. Turrence Comedies, Latin and English. 4o. St Patrick, for Jreland. 4o. Constant maide, a comedy. 4o. Landgartha. A Tragy-Comedy. 4o. Unfortunate mother, Tragedy. The famous comedy, and masque of Pellus and Thetis, by J. Howel Esq 4o. Mr Holloday. Marriage of the arts. 4o. The Martyr. 4o. Horatius. 4o. Wit without money. 4o. Ignoramus comed. coram Regia Majest. Jac. R. The Ghost, or the woman wears the Breeches. 4o.
Hebrew, GREEK, AND LATIN BOOKES. SUCH As falls not directly under the Heads of Divinity, Physick, or Law, &c. BUT Are properly usefull for Schooles and Scholars.
A EPitome doctrinae mo∣ralis, ex decem, lib. Ethic. Arist. 8o. Amyraldi. De libero hominis arbitrio disputatio. 8o. Aristophinis. Comoe∣diae undecem, Grece & Lat. 12o. Apthonii. Progymnasmata. 8o. Askamii. Familiar. Epist. lib. 3. Magna orationis elegantiâ conscripti. 12o. Anglicism's latinized; or English proper∣ties, rendered into proper Latin, for Scholars, making, writing, and talk∣ing Latin. 8o. Analecta. Poetica Greca Latina, or cap∣ping of Verses, Greek and Latin. B BƲsbies Gr. Gram. 8o. J. Burdiani. In decem libri Arist. pollit. 4o. Bird's Grounds of Gram. 8o. Bulie's Gram. Or a new English Gram. made easie, for teacher and Scholler. 8o. C. Bartholini. Enchridion ethicum. 8o. R. Baronii. Philosophica, Theologiae Ancillans. 12o. —Metaphisica. 8o. J. Buxtorphii. Thesaurus Gramat. Lin∣guae, Sanctae, Hebr. Lexicon Hebra∣icum: Complectens omnes voces tam primas quam deri vitas, quae in sacris Bibliis, Hebr. & ex parte Caldeâ Lingua Scriptis extant, in ter pro fide, exemplorum biblico∣rum copiâ, locorum plurimorum difficilium, ex variis Hebraeorum, comment. explic. auctum & il∣lustratum. 8o. —Appendix practica ad J. Buxtrophii, Epito. Gram. 8o. —Mannuale Hebraicum & Caldaicum. 12o. —Florilegium Hebraicum. 8o. —Institutio Epistolaris Hebraica. 8o. —Concordantia. folio. —Anti. critica capelli. 4o. —De punctis. 4o. —Doctor perplexorum. 4o. —De divortiis. 4o. —De caena domini. & contr. capel∣lum. 4o. —Dissertationes. 4o. —Lexicon Syriacum. 4o. —De abreviaturis. 8o. —Synagoga judaica. 8o. —Gram. Cald. & Syriac. 8o. Brachelii. Historia tempo. ab ann. F. Burgersdici. Institutionum logica∣rum. 8o. Bithneri. Lingua eruditorum, five me∣thodica institutio linguae sanctae, cui addita est introductio ad linguam caldeam veteris Test. 8o. Idea Philosophiae. Tum moralls, tum naturalis, F. Bergersdicio. 12o. Bellarmini. Institutiones linguae Hebra∣icae. 8o. Bibliotheca, Scolastica instructissima. A treasure of antient addages, and sen∣tentious proverbs, from the Gr. Lat. Eng. Fr. Ital. and Spanish. 8o. Butleri. Rhetoricae, lib. duo, quorum
prior de tropis, & figuris, posteri∣or, de voce, & gestu praecip. 12o. Boethii. De consolatione philosophiae. 32o. Biblia Sacra. sive Test. ve. ab Im. Tremelio, & Fr. Junio, ex He∣braeo, Latine reditam, & Test. N. A Theo. Baeza, à Greco in Lat. ver. 12o. Breerwood. Elementae logicae. 12o. —Ethica. 12o. Bacon. De sapientia veterum liber. 12o. —Histo. Naturalis, & experimentalis, de ventis. 24o. Berchetii. Elementaria traditio Christia∣num fidei aut Catech. Gr. Lat. 8o. Brinsley. Corderius Dialogues, Transla∣ted Grammatically. 8o. C RHetoricum, M. T. Cicer. ad herereni∣um. 8o. Castalion. Dialogus sacrorum, lib. 4. 12o. N. Clenardi. Gr. La. Institutiones. 8o. Carminum Proverbialium, totius hu∣manae vitae statum, breviter deline∣antium, nec non utilem de moribus doctrinam jucundè proponentium, loci comunes in gratiam juventutis selecti. 12o. Clavis Gr. Linguae. 1. Vocab. Lat. Greca. 2. Omnes totius linguae gr. voces primogeniae in vulgari lexico, &c. 8o. Clavis Homerica reserans, significatio∣nes, Etymologias, derivariones, compositiones & dialecticos omni∣um vocab, &c. 8o. C.J. Caesaris quae extant ex emendatio∣ne, J. Scall, J. Caesaris filii, ex mu∣seo, J. Isa. Pontani. 24o. C. L. Claudianus. Ex optimorum codi∣cum fide. 24o. Catonis disticha de moribus. 8o. M. Corderii colloq. Scholasticorum. 8o. Cato Gram. translated. 8o. G. Cartwright. Poemata Gr. & Lat. 8o. Coock. The art of Logick, unfolding to the meanest capacity, the way to dis∣pute well, and refute all fallacies whatsoever. 8o. Clark. Formulae Oratoriae in usum Scholarum concinnatae, cum praxi & usu earundem in Epistolis, The∣matibus, Declamationibus, Con∣texendis, &c. 8o. —Phraseologia puerilis, sive elegan∣tiae Sermonis, Latini pariter, atque anglicani concinnatae, &c. 8o. —Dux oratoris. 8o. —Oratoria sacra sive Ecclesiastica. 8o. —Phraseologia Biblica, or Scripture phrases. 8o. D. DEs Cartes. Meditationes de prima Philosophia, in qua Dei existentia, & animae immortalitas demonstra∣tur. 8o. —Meditationes metaphisicae. 8o. A Dictionary Engl. and Lat. for Chil∣dren and beginners, with phrases, sentences, epigrams, &c. 8o. Drax Calliapea. A store-house of proper choice, and elegant Lat. words and phrases, collected from Tul. voo. 8o. Dux Grammaticus. Tyronem Schola∣sticum ad rectam Orthographium, Syntaxin, & prosodiam dirigens, &c. 12o. Selectae demosthenis orationes: qua∣rum titulos versa indicabit pagina. 12o. G. Dugardi. Rhetorices elementa quest. & respon. explicata, quae ita for∣mantur ut quest. &c. 12o.
Institutionum peripateticarum ad men∣temsummi viri K. equitis Dygbaei pars Theorica, item Appendix Theologica de origine mundi. 12o. D. Donn. Fasciculus Poematum & Epi∣grammatum Miscelaneorum. 12o. J. Dansii. Paralipomena Orthogra∣phiae, Aetymologiae, Prosodiae una cum Scholis ad canones de ge∣nere sustantivorum, de anomalis preterito & supinis verborum, Syntaxi carminum ratione, & fi∣guris: collecta ex optimis autho∣ribus in Qut. lib. 4o. G. Dugressij Dialogi Gallico-Anglico. Latini. 8o. Dane. A light to Lillie, an easie Me∣thod for the better teaching of the grounds of the Lat. 8o. G. Dugard. Graecae Gramatices Rudi∣menta quae tironibus necnon para∣lipomena, quae provectioribus graecae linguae studiosis propo∣nuntur. 8o. E D. ERrasm. Rott. Apothegmata. —Adagiorum, cum Stephani Animadversionibus. folio. English Gram. or plain Expos. of Lillies Gram. with easie Rules for parsing and making Lat. 8o. English Accid. or speedy way to attain the Lat. 4o. Des. Erasm. Rot. Colloquia familiaria cum omnium notis. 8o. & 24o. Aesopi Phrygis fabulae. 12o. Erasm. de copia verborum. 8o. —De vanitate Scientiarum. 8o. —De civilitate morum puerili∣um. 8o. Aemilii Porti Dictionarium Ionicum, & Doricum, Gr. Lat. 8o. F T. FArnabii. Systema Gram. 8o. —Ter. comediae sex. ex re∣centione Heinsiana. 12o. —Index Rhetoricus & oratorius, Scholis & Institutioni tenerioris ae∣tatis accomodatus. 12o. —Phrases Oratoriae Elegantiores. 8o. —Pub. Virgili cum notis Farn. 12o. —Juvenalis & Auli Persii Flacci Sa∣tyrae. cum annota. Farn. 12o. —F.P.O. Metamorph. cum notis Farn. 12o. —M. Val. Martialis Epigrammata. cum notis Farn. 12o. —M. Ann. Lucani Pharsalia. sive de bello civili Caesari & Pompei lib. 10. cum notis H. Gross. & annota. Farn. 12o. Illustrium Poetarum Flores. per Octav. Mirandulam olim collcta. & in locos communes digesti. 12o. Fundamenta Grecae linguae, quae sunt tanquam Epitome lexici & Etymologici graeci. 8o. Gram. Grec. Enchyridion. J. Fla∣vell. 8o. —Tractatus de de nonstratione. J.F. 8o. Gram. puerilis. A Synopsis contain∣ing the Rudiments of the Lat. 8o. Flores Doctorum. 16o. G GRegorii Etymologicum Parvum ex magno illo Sylburgii, Eusta∣thio Martinio, alius{que} magni no∣minis authoribus excerptum, di∣gestum, explicatum. 8o. Gerardi Meditationes Sacrae. 12o.
Grecae Gram. Institut. compendia∣riain usum Regiae Scholae West∣mon. H. Grotii. Baptizatorum Puerorum Institutio alternis interrogationi∣bus & responsionibus. 8o. J.C. Galcateus, seu de morum ho∣nestate, & elegantia. cum notis Na. Chylnae. 8o. Gattaker. De dipthongis, sive voca∣bulis. 12o. Gardiner. Ex Aede C. Oxon specimen Oratorium. 8o. Gulston. in Rhetoricam Aristotelis Gr. & Lat. 4o. *Golii lexicon Arabico-Latinum contextum ex probatioribus Ori∣entis Lexicographis. folio. H HEsiodi Asacraei quae extant cum notis Corn. Schrevelii. 8o. A. R. Hues. Tractatus duo Mathe∣matici, quorum primus de globis Caelesti & Terrestri, que eorum usu. 12o. Haine. Pax in terra, seu tractatus de pace Ecclesiastica. 8o. Herodiani Historiae sui temporis lib. 8. E. Graeco, quondam in Linguam Lat. converse ab Angelo politiano. cum notis D. Parei. 8o. Homeri Ilias, id est de rebus ad Tro∣jam gestis. 8o. Homeri Ilias & Odyssea, & in easdem Scholia, sive Interpretatio Di∣dymi, cum Latina versione accu∣ratissima Indice{que} Grae. locuple∣tissimo rerum ac variantium Lecti∣on. accurante Corn. Schrevelio. 4o. *Ch. Hoole. Η. ΚΑΙΝΗ ΔΙΑ∣ΘΗΚΗ. Nov. Novum Test. Huic editio omnia difficiliorum vocab. Themata. quae in Geo. Pass. lex. Gram. resolvuntur, in Margine apposuit. 12o. *—M. Cord. Colloq. Scolastica Anglo-Latina, in varias clausulas distri∣buta, &c. 8o. *—Gram. Lat. in usum Scholarum adornata. Gram. Lillianae verbis, &c. 8o. *—Terminationes & exempla de∣clinationum, & conjugat. in usum Gram. 8o. *—Pueriles confab. Anglo-Lat.! in varias clausulas distributae. observ. utrius{que} linguae idiomate. 8o. *—Sentent. pueriles Anglolat. quas ex diversis authoribus olim collegerat Leo. Culman & in ver∣naculum Sermonem nuperrime transtulit. 8o. *—Phraseologiae pueriles Anglo-Lat. &c. 8o. —An easie entrance to the Lat. tongue; containing the grounds of Gram. a Vocab. of common Latin and English words. Examples, ellegant Express. &c. 8o. ☞—The Common Rudiments of the Lat. Gram. in the Accidence ex∣amined; propria quae Mar. quae Genus, and As in presenti, Eng∣lished and Explained. 12o. *—A plain and easie Primmer for Chil∣dren, both the pictures of Beasts and Birds for each Letter in the Alpha∣bet for their easie remembrance and delight in Learning. *—Catonis Disticha de mor ibus. Di∣cta insignia Sept. Sapient. Graec &c. Anglo-latina. 8o. Homeri Odyssea, id est de rebus ab Ulysse Gestis. Ejusdem Batra∣chomyomachia, Hymni & Epi∣grammata. 16o. Q.H. Orratii Flacci Poemata, Scholiis sive annota. quae brevis commen∣ta. vice esse possint à I. Bond. 8o. Famill. Colloq. Operâ. C. Helvici D.
& profess. Giessensis Olim. 12o. I. Haukins. Particulae Latinae Orat. col∣lectae, dispositae, & confab. digestae. 8o. —A brief Introd. to Syntaxis, Collected from Nebressia his Sanish Copy. 8o. C. Hanboesium Angeli Caninij Hellenismus, Copiosissime, Gre. Lat, &c. 8o. Hobbs. De corpore politico. 12o. —De corpore Elementorum, philoso∣phiae 12o. —De cive. 12o. T. Horn. ΧΕΙΡΑΓΩΓΙΑ sive manuductio in Aedem Palladis, &c. 12o. —Rhetoricae compendium anglo Lat. 8o. Hodges. A speciall help to Orthogra∣phy, being of such words which are like in sound, and not in signification. 4o. Holiday. Philosophia. 4o. Hesiodi Ascraei quae extant, cum no∣tis, ex probatissimis quibusdam authoribus, breviss. selectiss. Ope∣ra & stud. C. Schervelij. 8o. Biblia Hebraica. 8o. 4o. I ISocrates, Orationes & Epistolae, Gr. 8o. Ianua Linguarum, sive metho. & ratio Compend. & facilis ad Lat. Lin∣guam maxime viam aperiens. 8o. Justini, Ex Trogi Pompei Hist. exter∣nis, lib. 44. His accessit ex sexto Aurelio Victore de vita & moribus Roman. imperat, Epito. 12o. J. Iuvenalis, Et auli Persii flacci Sa∣tyra, cum Annotat. quae obscuris∣sima quae{que} dilucidare possint. 8o. Isocrat. Ora. 3. ad Demonicum, ad Nico∣clem, Nicocles, Item Plutarchi Chae∣ronensis, de liberis educandis, libel∣lus. 8o. Judicium Vniversitatis Oxon. de so∣lemni lege & faedere, juramento ne∣gativo, &c. 8o. ☞Jan. ling. reserata sive omnium scien∣tiarum & linguarum seminarium, J.A. Comenio Authore. 8o. ☞Introd. to the Art of teaching the Lattin speech. 12o. K D. KIckermanni. Oper. omn. quae ex∣tant Systema Logica, Phys. Astron. Geogra. Metaph. folio T. Kempis. De imitatione Christi. 24o. —Viatoris Christiani soliloquium a∣nimae vallis liliorum de tribus Ta∣bernaculis, &c. 24o. L J. LƲshingtonij. Logica analytica de principijs regulis & usu rationis rectae. 8o. M.A. Lucani pharsalia sive de Bello civili Caesaris & Pompeij lib. 10. additae sunt in sine, H. Grotij, o∣tae & F. Farn, &c. 12o. L. An. Flori. Rerum Romanarum, lib. 4. ex Musaeo J. Isa. Pontani. acce∣dunt eusdem notae at{que} observat. praesertim politicae. 12o. L. Flori. Rerum à Romanis Gestarum, lib. 4. A.I. Stadio cui accesserunt Chronologicae dòctis. C L. Salma∣excerptiones. 12o. Lucani Samosatensis, Dialogorum Selectorum; Grec. Lat. 12o. J. Lypsi. De constantia, lib. 2. qui allo∣quium praecipue, continent in pub∣licis malis. 24o.
T. Lucretius Carus, De rerum natura. 24o. Lillies Lattin Grammer. —Rules construed. Lycosthenes. D. Longini Rhetoris. 8o. —De grandiloquentiâ, Gr. Lat. cum not. 8o. M P. MOlinaei, Elementa logica ex ul∣tima autoris recognitione. 8o. N. Machivelli Florent. Disputationum de republica, quas discursus nuncu∣pavit, lib. 3. Quomodo in Rebus∣pub. ad antiquorum Romanorum imitationem actiones omnes bene maleve institunantur. 8o. M. Val. Martialis Epigram. 8o. P.O.N. Metamorpho. seu fabulae po∣eticae carum{que} interpretatio Ethi∣ca, Physica, & Historica. 12o. Marcelli Palingenii Stellati Poetae Doctissimi, Zodiacus vitae; hoc est de hominis vitae studio, ac moribus optime instituendis, lib. 13. 8o. Phrases Linguae Lat. à P. Manutio. 8o. Methodus de conscribendis Episto. A.G. Macropedio secundum ve∣ram artis rationem tradita. 8o. Manuale Grae. Lat. Gnomologicum novum, quo omnia praedictae lin∣guae primitiva integris Sententiis, &c. 12o. Bap. Mantuani Carmelitae adolescen∣tia, scu bucolica brevibus, J. Ba∣dij coment. illustrata. 8o. P. Manutij Episto. lib. 12o. 16o. Mancinus. In qua tuor virtutibus. 12o. Epigrammata, T. Mori Angli. 16o. Moriae encomium cum Ger. Lystrius comm. Manductio, Or leading by the hand to the Latin Tongue. ☞Biblia Universa & Hebraica quidem cum Latina interpretatione, Xan∣tis Pagnini Lucensis, Benedicti Ariae Montani, &c. folio. N. Machiavelli. De Republica, lib. 3. quo∣modo in rebuspub, ad antiquorum Romaor. imitationem actiones omnes bene maleve instituantur. 12o. —Princeps. 12o. N *NOmenclatura brevis, Anglo. Lat. Gr. 8o. A. Nowell. Christianae pieratis prima institutio, ad usum Scholar, Gr. & Lat. 12o. —Chatech. parvus pueris primum Lat. qui edicatur, proponendus in Scholis. 8o. O P. O. NAss. Opera Dan. Heinsius, textum recensuit, Herod. E∣pisto. amorum, lib. 3. De arte a∣mandi, lib. 3. de remedio amoris, lib. 2, &c. 24o. —Episto. Una cum Sabini Episto. tribus, ad totidem Ovidianas re∣sponsorijs. 8o. —Metamor. ex accuratiss. virorum Doctiss. castigationibus. 8o. —Detristibus, lib. cum Annotat. 8o. P C. V. PAterculi Histo. Romanae ad M. Vinicium Cos. cum notis Ger. voisij, G.F. 12o.
G. Passoris. Lexicon, Gr Lat. in N. Test. ubi omnium vocab. tam appella∣tiv. Themata. quam nominum pro∣priorum Etyma exquisite indican∣tur, & Gram. resolvuntur. 8o. Porta Languarum Trilinguis resera∣ta & aperta. hoc est compend. Lat. Angl. Gallicum, &c. 8o. Poetae minores Gre. Hesiodus, Theo∣critus, Theognis, Solon, Orpheus, Mos∣chus, Phocylides, Pythagoras, &c. 8o. M. Acci Plauti comaediae superst. 2o. ad Doctissimorum virorum, re∣presentatae ex musaeo, J. Isa. Pon∣tani. 24o. Posselij Syntaxis. 8o. Pueriles Consab. 8o. Pueriles Sententiae, pro primis Lat. linguae. 8o. G. Pasoris. Manuale Gr. vocum N. Test. Cui accessit Index anomalorum & difficiliorum vocab. item Tract. de Gr. N. Test. I. Posselii. Famill Colloq. libellus Gr. & Lat. auctus & recognitus, accessit & utillis Dialog. de ratione studio. rum recte instituenda It. Ora. de ratione discendae, ac docendae linguae Lat & Gr. 8o. Posing of the Accidence. 4o. G. Pemble. Enchiridion Orat. 4o. —De sensibus Internis. 12o. I. Pridiaux. Tabulae ad Gram. Gr. In∣trod. 4o. Eryci, Puteani, Suada Attica, Sive o∣rat select. Syntagma. 8o. —Historia Insubrica. 12o. C. Plinij. Caec. Sec. Epist. lib. 9. ejus∣dem & Trajani imp. Epist. amaebaee ejusdem, Item Claudiani Panegi∣rici, adjunctae sunt, Isa. Causabo∣ni notae in Epist. 120. Q M. Fabii, Quintiliani. Institutionum O∣rato. lib. 12. Summa diligentia ad fidem vetusissimorum codicum re∣cogniti, ac restituti. 8o. Q. Curtii. De rebus gestis, Alex. Mag. regis Macedonum. 24o. R RAvis. A generall Grammer, for rea∣dy attaining of the Hebr. Sama. Calde, Syriac, Arab. and Ethiopic languages; with a pertinent discourse of the Orientall tongues, with 15 Adoptive Epist. sent out of divers parts of the World, for promoting the care of the Orientall Tongues 8o. G. Richell. Contemplationes metaphy∣sicae. 8o. P. Rami. Mathemat. 4o. —Arith. & Geom. 4o. *Robertson. Hebrew Text of Psalms and Lamentations, for the help of such as study the Hebrew. 8o. *—Key to the Hebrew Bible, unlocking the most usuall words therein, by an Alphabeticall praxis. 8o. *—Hebrew Lexicon, a gate or door to the holy Tongue opened in Engl. the chief grounds of the Hebrew Grammer; A Table of the Roots, with a praxis to it. 8o. H. Robinson. Phrases Latinae: for use of Grammer Schools. 8o. *Rudiments of the Hebrew tongue, ne∣cessary for all that desire to under∣stand the holy Bible in the Originall. 8o. P. Rami. Dialectia variorum & maxi∣me illu strium exemplorum natu∣rali artis progressu, &c. 8o. A. Rosse
Virgilii Evangelisantis Chri∣ados, lib. 13. in quibus omnia quae de Dom. Nostro, J. Ch. in utro∣{que} Test. vel dicta vel predicta sunt, &c. 8o. D. Reynaldi. Orationes. 12o. N. Reusneri. Symbolorum imperatorio∣rum, classis prima, qua Symbola continentur Impp. ac Caes. Rom. Ital. à C.J. Caes. us{que} ad Constan∣tinum magnum, &c. 12o. Riders Dictionary, Gr. Lat. Eng, &c. 4o. A. Ruvio. Coment. in uniuersam A∣risto. Dialect. 4o. A. Rossei. Isagoge Gram. in gratiam il∣lorum qui nolunt memoriam mul∣tis & longis regulis gravari, concin∣nata. 8o. Rivij. Historia Navalis. 8o. A. Rossei. Enchiridion duplex orat, nempe & poet. verborum copiam, & elegantiam phrasium Lat Ser∣monis, &c. 8o. S ☞Η ΠΑΛΑΙΑ ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ ΚΑΤΑ ΤΟΥΣ 'ΕΒΔΟΜΗΚΟΝΤΑ, vetus Testamentum Gr. ex versi∣one Septuaginta interp. 8o. ☞In sacra Biblia Graeca ex versione LXX. Interpretum Scholia; simul & interp. Caeterorum lectiones va∣riantes. 8o. Idos. Stimpelii. Parnassus Epithet. sin∣gula Ravisij. multa{que} rosodiae Smetij, &c. 12o. Stanbridgij, Vocab. 4o. Sidelius. A manuell to the Greek Tongue. 8o. Spencer. Ars Logic. 8o. Smith. Art of Logick. 8o. ☞—Mistery of Rheto. unvailed, in which are 130. Tropes and Figures, derived from the Greek into English, with lively definitions and variety of Lattin, English, and Scripture exam∣ples, pertinent to each apart. 8o. Schicardi. Hebr. Grammat. 8o. Schibleri Topic. 8o. F. Stradae. De Bello belgico decas pri∣ma & secunda ab excessu Caro. 5. Imp. us{que} ad initia praeecturae Alex. Farnesii Parmae ac Placentiae ducis, 3. Additis hominum illustri∣um ad Histo. praecipuè spectanti∣um imaginibus ad vivum expressis. 12o. —Prolusiones Academicas, sive pro∣lixiones exhibet orat. ac faculta∣tem oratotiam poeticam Histori∣am{que} spectantes, &c. 12o. H. Senecae. Tum Rheto. tum Philosi. o∣pera omnia, &c. 8o. —Opera omnia ex ult. I. Lipsij, & I. F. Gronovij emen dat, 4. Vol. Ludg. Batavo. 12o. I. Stoughtoni. Felicitas ultimi saeculi Epistola. in qua inter alia, calami∣tosus aevi presentis status serio de∣ploratur, &c. 12o. C. Suetonius. Tranquillus cum Anno∣tat. diversorum. 8o. I. Susenbroto. Epitome troporum ac Schematum & Gram. & Rheto. 8o. N. Test. D.N.J. Chr. Gr. cum notis R. Stephani, J. Scaligeri, & Isa. Causaboni. 8o. Aeschinis contra Ctesiphontem, & Demostthenis pro corona orat. à J. Sturmmio, Illustratae Graecè. 8o. D. Sennerti. Epitome naturalis scientiae. 8o. J. Stockwoodi. Disputatiunoularum Gram. libellus, ad puerorum. 12o. M. Dan. Sthali. Metaphisicae compen∣dium. 8o. Prosodia H. Smetij, quae Syllabarum positione & Dipthongis carentium quantitates solâ veterum poeta∣rum autoritate, adductis evemplis, de monstrat. 8o.
Silva Synonimorum olim a Simone. Pelegromo Collecta & Alphab. Flandrico ab eodem authore Il∣lustrata. 8o. L. A. Seneca. Et aliorum tragediae. 8o. —Id. 24o. C. Salustius Crispus, cum veterum Historicorum fragmentis 12o. Sodalis discipulus, containing all the Inter∣preta. of the Hebrew and Greek Bible: By all Authours: By J. Shirley. 8o. —ΕΙΣΑΓΩΓΗ. Sive Introd. Anglo. Lat. Grec. Complectens, colloquia familiaria Aesopi Fab. & Luciani mortuorum Dialogos. 8o. Dialectica. I. Setoni cant. Annota. P. Carterii, ut clariss. ita breviss. Explicata. 8o. J. Sleidani, de quatuor summis Impe∣riis Babilonico, Persico, Greco, & Romano. lib. 3. 24o. J.C. Scaligeri. Episto. & Orat. cum J. Th. Freigii Orat. 8. 12o. Dictionar. Histor. Geogr. Poetic. aucto Car. Stephano, Gentium Ho∣minum, Deorum, Gentilium, Reli∣gionum, Locorum, Civitatum, E∣quorum, Fluviorum, &c. 8o. J. Stockwood. The Treatises of the Fi∣gures at the end of the Rules of Con∣struction in the Lat. Gram. constru∣ed, every example applied and fitted to his Rule. 8o. *Shinlderi lexicon. Pentaglotton. Hebraicum, Chaldaicum, Syriacum, Talmudico. Rabbinicum, & Ara∣bicum, &c. folio. *C. Seidelii. Manuale Graecae Linguae Gnomologicum novum quo omnia Praedictae Linguae primitiva in inte∣gris sententiis, maximam partem, ex Sacris paginis & aliis probatis autoribus collectis, &c. 8o. *The Scholars probation, or Rules and Orders for certain set Exercises to be performed by the Scholars on pro∣bation daies. 8o. T TErentii Dogmata Philosophica item Apothegmata quaedam, Piae, &c. 12o. T. Thoma. Dict. 8o. —Id. 4o. L. Trelcatii. Scholastica & Methodica locorum communium. S. Theolo∣giae Institutio didactice & elentice in Epitome explicata. 12o. M. T. Cicero. Tusculanarum Questionum seu disputationum. lib. 5. 8o. —Epist. ad atticum. lib. 16. Ejusd. Episto. ad Q. fratrem. lib. 3. 16o. —De Officis lib. 3. Item de amicitia. senectute. paradoxa. & de somnio scipionis. 8o. —De Senectute. 12o. —Orationis. Vol. prim. 12o. —Orat. Vol. secund. 12o. —Orat. Vol. tert. 12o. Epith. J.R. Textoris Epitome, ex Hadr. Junii Medici recognitione accesserunt Ejusd. Ravisii Syno∣nima poetica, multò quàm prius locupletiora. 12o. —Episto. I. Rav. Texto. 8o. —J.R. Texto. Dialogi & Epigramma∣ta. 12o. Pub. Terentii Comediae. 8o. & 24o. —Ter. Christianus, sive Comediae duae Terentiano stilo conscriptae. 8o. —Ter. his Comedies in Latin and Eng∣lish. 4o. Sacrarum profanarum{que} poeticarum Thesaurus recens perpolius & nu∣merosior factus. 12o. N. Test. D.N.J. Chr. Interp. T. Beza: in sundry Vol. A. Tallaei Rhetorica. 8o. ΘΕΟΓΝΙΔΟΣ
ΤΟΥ ΜΕΓΑΡΕΩΣ ΓΝΩΜΑΙ. Theognidis Megaren∣sis sententiae, ad usum studiosae Inventutis seorsim Excusae. 8o. ☞M.T.C. Orationum selectarum in usum Scholarum Hollandiae & West-Frisiae. 8o. V VAlerii Maximi dictorum factorum∣que memorabilium. lib. 9. 24o. P. Virgilii M. Opera. variorum aucto-Annota. Illustrat. 12o. —Gram. translated by Brinsley. 4o. F. Vigero. De praecipuis Graecè dictionis Idiotismis. 8o. Ʋdall Hebr. Grammat. 8o. Veneta Historia. 4o. M.F. Wendelini Institutionum Politica∣rum lib. 3. de repub. constit. de repub. administr de rebub. eversi∣one. 12o. —Logicae Institutiones, Tyronum a dolescen tum captui ita accomma∣data & exemplis exemplorum{que} aplicatione, nec non saclllimi judicii. 12o. Willis. Vestibulum Linguae Latinae. A Diction. for Children. 8o. Wallis. Opera Mathematica de An∣gulo contactus & semicirculi dis∣quisitio Geom. de sect. Conicis. tractat. Arthm. infinitorum Ecilip∣seos ob-servatio. 4o. Gram. Lingue Anglicanae, cui praefi∣gitur, de loquela, sive sonorum formaione tractatus Gram. Phisi∣cus. 8o. Wicken. Latinum & Lycaeum, Graeca cum Latinis sive Gram. artis in utraque lingua lucidisima. 8o. ☞Walton. Intro ductio ad Lectionem linguarum Hebr. Chald. Samar. Syr. Arab. Pers. Ethiop. Arme. Copic. consilium de earum studio faeliciter instituendo, & de Libris quos in hunc finem sibi comparare debent studiosi, in usum Tyronum qui linguas istas ad discere deside∣rant, praecipue eorum qui sumptus ad Biblia polyglotta jam subprelo imprimenda contulerunt. 12o. ☞Wardi. Exercitatio in Hobbii phi∣losophiam. 8o. Z ZEnophontis de Cyri Institutione. lib. 8. Gre. mult. quam antè castiga∣tius editi, cum. Lat. interpr. 8o. All sorts of School-Books that's Translated, cum multis aliis, but of Books there is no FINIS.
A SVPPLEMENT OF New Books, Come forth since August the first 1657. till June the first 1658. Which is intended to be continued from Year to Year. BEGINNING At June the first, 1658. where this ends.
DIVINITY. Mrs VEnn. A wise Vir∣gins lamp burn∣ing, or Gods sweet Incomes of Love to a gra∣cious Soul wait∣ing for him, be∣ing her experiences found in her Closet written with her own hand. 8o. T. Haak Esq The dutch Annotations upon the Bible according to their own translation by order of the Synod of Dort, now communicat∣ed to the use of Great-Britain, with an account of the work, two vo. folio. Mr Farrington. 30. Serm. Preached at S. M. Magd. Milkstreet London. with Sr G. Whitmores Fun. Serm. folio. Mr Purnell A Cabinet of Heaven∣ly Treasuries, in an abridgment of Religion; shewing the cause of Salvation, the way, guide, rule, evidence, seales, &c. 8o. D. Guild. Loves intercourse between the Lamb and the Bride, Christ and his Church, or a clear Ex∣plication and application of the Song of Solomon. 8o. The examination of Tilenus before the triers, in order to his intend∣ed settlement in the office of a publick Preacher, in the Common∣wealth of Ʋtopia, &c. 8o. D. Jer. Taylor. A collection of offices, or formes of Prayer in cases, or∣ordinary and extraordinary, ta∣ken out of Scriptures and the an∣tient Liturgies of severall Church∣es, especially the Greek. 8o. M. Pierce. The Divine Philanthropie defended, in answer to M. Barle. 4o. —The Divine purity defended, in answer to D. Reynolds. 4o. Mr Manton. A practicall Commentary, or expos. with Notes on the E∣pistle of Jude. 4o. The judgement of Bp Ʋsher. Of Christs Death and Satisfaction. Of the Sabbath. Of ordination in re∣formed Churches; and of other Subjects. 8o. Mr Stephens. Vindiciae fundamenti. Or a threefold defence of the Doctr. of Originall sin: and other funda∣mentals of Salvation: against Mr Everard. against the examiners of the Assemblies, Confes of Faith, and against Dr Taylors Ʋnum Ne∣cessarium. 4o. M. Holyoke. The doctr. of life, or mans redemption, by the seed of Eve, Abraham, and David, with Daniels Chronology of 77, calling the Jewes, &c. 8o. M. Gurnell. The Christian in compleat Armour, or the Sts war against the Devil. His policie, power, Seat of Empire, wickedness and chief design he hath against the Saints, &c. 2. part. 4o. M. Watson. The Saints delight; with a Treatise
of Meditation, the ne∣cessityand use thereof: Christs loveliness to draw the hearts of sin∣ners. The upright mans Character and Crown. 8o. M. Caryl. An exposition with practical observ. continued upon the 27, 28, & 29, Chapters of Job, in 26 Lectures in London. 4o. M. Lawrance. Min. of Ipswitch. The use and practice of faith, it's quickening influence into every kind and degree of Christian life, the excellent work and reward, converting others to the faith, by way of close. 4o. Dr Hyde. Christ and his Church, or Christianity explained under sea∣ven heads; Christ in his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, coming of the holy Ghost receiv∣ed, of Christian Communion, with a vindica. of the Ch. of Engl. in prin∣ciples and Communion. 4o. D. Goodwin. The state of glory for spi∣rits of just men upon dissolution demonstrated. 4o. S. Wardi. Determinationes theologicae, tractatus de justificatione, praelectio∣nes de peccato Originali. folio. M. Martin. M. Petto. and M. Woodal. The Preacher sent, or a vindica∣tion of the liberty of publick preaching by some men not or∣dained, in answer to Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, and Mr Col∣lings Vindiciae Ministerii Evangelici. 8o. M. Warner. Diatriba fidei justificantis qua justificantis. Or a discourse of the Object and Office of Faith, as justifying, distinct from other Objects, Acts, and Offices of the same Faith, as sanctifying. As∣serting the Lutheran, and Prote∣stant Doctrine against the Pontifi∣cians, Socinians, Arminians, &c. 8o. Confession of Faith of Assem. with Scriptures at large, for the bene∣fit of Masters of Families recom∣mended by severall Eminent Di∣vines. 4o. Mr Lukin. The Practice of Godliness, or rules for ordering a holy con∣versation. 12o. Mr Gaule. Sapientia justificata, or vindication of the 5. of Rom. in answer to Dr Taylers Deus justifi∣catus. 12o. Mr Anthony Burges. A Treatise of self-judging in order to the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper, with a Serm. of a generall day of Judgement. 12o. Sincerity and Hypocrisie, in their lively colours, standing by one another, by W.S. Serjeant at Law. 8o. M. Hall. A confutation of the Millena∣rian opinion, demonstrating that Christ will not reign on earth with his Saints a thousand yeares, either before or after the day of Judge∣ment, against Dr Homes, and the fifth Monarchy men. 12o. Mr Bennet. A Theologicall Concor∣dance, of Synonimous terms in the holy Scriptures, usefull for young Students in Divinity, and such as would search into the hid∣den treasures of the Scripture, with a collection of Promises. 8o. M. Watts. A vindication of the Church and Universities of England, in many Orthodox tenets, and righteous practices. 4o. M. Langly. Suspension reveiwed, sta∣ted, cleared, and setled upon plain Scripture proof, agreeable to the former and late constitutions of the Protestant Church of England, and other reformed Churches. 8o.
The young Divines apologie for his continuance in the University, with his serious meditation on the sacred calling of the ministery. 12o. M. Harrison, Topica Sacra. Spirituall Logick, some brief hints and helps to Faith, Meditation and Prayer, comfort and holiness communica∣ted at Christs Church Dublin in Ireland. 8o. M. Hodges. A Scripture Chatechism towards the confutation of sun∣dry errours, some of them of the present times. 8o. Dr Owen. Eshcol. A cluster of the fruit of Canaan brought to the borders, for the encouragement of the Saints travelling thither∣ward, with their faces toward Sion; or rules of direction for the walking of the Saints in fellow∣ship, according to the order of the Gospel, 2. Ed. 12o. M. Rutherford. A survey of the survey of that Summe of Church Disci∣pline penned by Mr Hooker. wherein the way of the Churches of New England is now reexa∣mined, arguments in favour there∣of winnowed, the principles of that way discussed, and the reasons of most seeming strength and nerves removed. 4o. M. Reyner Considerations concerning Marriage: the honour, duties, be∣nefits, troubles of it; with di∣rections how they that have wives may be as if they had none, how to prepare for parting with a dear yoke-fellow, by death or otherwise. 8o. M. Tombes. Anti-Paedobaptism, or the third part, being a full review of the dispute concerning Infants Baptism, in which the arguments for Infants Baptism, from the Co∣venant, and initiall seale, Infants visible Church-membership, &c. are reselled, and the writings of M. Marshall, M. Baxter, and others examined, and many points a∣bout the Covenants, and Seals, &c. are handled. 4o. D. Reynolds, A Sermon of humane learning, at the Funerall of M. Langly. 4o. —The comfort and crown of great actions. A Sermon to the East In∣dia Company. 4o. M. Cawdry, Independency further prov∣ed a Schism, against D. Owen 8o. M. Norton. The life and death of that famous man of God, Mr J. Cotton, of new England. 4o. Mr Baxter. A Call to the unconverted to turn and live, as they expect mercy in the day of their extre∣mity, to be read to the unconvert∣ed. 12o. —A winding sheet for Popery. 8o. —A sheet for defence of the Ministry, against the wicked of all sorts. 8o. —A second sheet for the Ministry. 8o. —A sheet against the Quakers. 8o. —Of justification, 4 Disputations, amicably defending the truth a∣gainst the unnecessary oppositi∣ons of divers learned and reve∣rend Brethren. 4o. Directions and Perswasions to a sound Conversion. 8o. M. Secker. A Ring fit for the Finger, in a Sermon at a Wedding. 12o. M. Froystel. The gale of opportunity, a Sermon at the Funerall of M Wal∣cot of Walot, Esq 8o. M. Isa. Ambros. Looking unto Jesus, a a view of the everlasting Gospel, in the souls eyeing Jesus, as car∣rying on the great work of Salva∣tion, from first to last. 4o. M. Love. The dejected souls cure, supporting
drooping sinners, with rules, comforts, and cautions,with addition of the ministry of Angels, Gods Omnipresence, Sin∣ners Legacy. 4o. M. Frost. Sermons, viz. A Gospel mi∣nister, light and darkness of na∣ture, spirituall thrift, unprofita∣bleness under meanes, Dei peculi∣um. Worldly mans Portion; Sal∣vation by Christ; Glass for Magi∣strates, Scripture search, with 2. positions for explication and con∣firmation of these Questions, 1. Tota Christi justitia credentibus im∣putatur, 2. Fides justificat sub ra∣tione instrumenti. folio. Preparation to Conversion, in a rare Epistle, writ by a person of quality before his death, to his sur∣viving friends. 8o. M. Brooks. A string of Pearls, in a Sermon at the Funerall of that Triumphant Saint Mrs Blake. 8o. M. Simpson. Lexicon Anglo Gr. Lat. Novi Test. in 3. Tables, with the significat. etymon. derivat. and emphasis of each word; with the divers readings in English, Greek, and Latin; all tending to the increase of Christian know∣ledge, and understanding of the Scripture. folio. M. Ob. Sedgwick. The shephard of Israel, or Gods Pastorall care o∣ver his people, in sundry Sermons upon the whole 23 Psalm, with doctrine of Providence, from Mat. 10.29,30,31. 4o. The mystery of Jesuitisme with large additions. 8o. M. Fermin. Of Schisme. Parochiall congregations in England, and ordina. by impos. of hands; ex∣amining Dr Owens nature of Schism, and Mr Noyes argument against imposition of hands in ordination. 8o. M Young. Roxwell. A sure way to grace and salvation, a discourse of the Creation, fall, and restauration; which learned, may keep milli∣ons from Hell that blindly throng thither. 8o. HISTORY. P. CLuverius. An Introduction to Ge∣ography both antient and modern, with severall incidentall re∣marques, newly added. 8o. M. Cambdens, Remaines the 6. Im∣pression, with additions of rare antiquities, by M. Philpot, Sum∣merset Herald. 4o. M.S. The holy life of Mons. de Renty, late Noble man of France, and Counsellor to Lewis, 13. done into English. 8o. The King of Spains Cabinet counsel divulged, shewing the prevarica∣tions of the Spainyards, with all the Princes and States of Europe, for obtaining the Universall Monarchy. 8o. M. Harrington, The prerogative of po∣pular government, a Pollitical discourse in 2 Books, containing the Commonwealth of the He∣brew Senate, people and Magistra∣cy, &c. 4o. M.H. A discourse of the Nationall excellences of England. 8o. The History of fourfooted Beasts, and serpents, their figures, names, con∣ditions, virtues, love and hatred to mankind; the
wonderfull work ofGod in their Creation, Preserva∣tion and Destruction: with vari∣ety of Historicall narrations from Scriptures, Fathers, Philosophers, Physicians and Poets, with divers Hieroglyphicks and Emblems, col∣lected from C. Gesner, by Mr Topsel: to which is added A The∣atre of Insects, as Bees, Flies, Ca∣terpillars, Spiders, Worms, by Dr Muffet. folio. A compendious History of the Goths Sweeds, and Vandalls, and other Northern Nations; by Olaus Magnus, Arch Bp of Ʋpsal, and Metropolitan of Sweden. folio. M. Nichols. A lapidary, or the History of precious stones. 4o. Naturall Magick by J. Baptista Por∣ta a Neopolitane, in 20 Books, of the causes of wonderfull things, Animals, Plants, Mettals, Gold, Loadstone; of strange cures, of beautifying women, distillation, perfuming, fires, tempering steel, cookery, fishing, fowling, hunt∣ing, invisible writing, strange glasses, statick experiments, and pneumatick; of the Chaos; setting forth all the riches and delights of naturall sciences. folio. The generall History of Women, containing the lives of the most holy and profane, famous and infamous in all ages, not only from poeticall fictions, but from antient, modern, and admired Historians, to this time, by T.H. Gent. 8o. M. Jones. Ovids invective or curse against Ibis, and the History there∣in contained, with Naturall, Mo∣rall, Poeticall, Politicall, and The∣ologicall applications. 8o. M. Purchas. M.A. A theatre of po∣liticall flying-insects; where espe∣cially the nature, worth, work, wonder and manner of the right ordering of the Bee is discoursed and described, with Theologicall, Historicall, and Morall observa. 4o. Sr Fr. Vere's. Comentaries of divers pieces of services, viz. Callis journey, action of Turnholt, bat∣tle of Newport siege, Ostend, &c. published by D. Delingham. folio. The minister of state, shewing the true use of modern policy, by Mons. de Silhon, Secretary to Card. Richeleiu. folio. The accomplished Courtier, consist∣ing of institutions and examples, fitting to square our actions in Method. 8o. M. Sanderson. History of the life and reign of King Charles, from his Cradle to his Grave. folio. A faithfull account of all the receits, &c. money collected, for the di∣stressed Protestants in the vallies of Piemont, with their present condition. folio. M. Dugdale. The History of St Pauls Cathederall in London, from the foundation till now, extracted out of originall Charters, Records, Leiger books, and other Manu∣scripts, beautified with sundry prospects of the Church, figures of Tombes, and Monuments. folio. D. Brown. Vulgar errors, the third edition enlarged and corrected, with a Table and observations. folio. Historicall memories on the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and K. James. 12o. Bp Ʋsher. The Annals of the world, deduced from the Origin of time, to Vespasians reign, and destructi∣on of the Jews and Temple; con∣taining the History of the old and new
Testament, with the Macca∣bees,with the memoriall of af∣fairs in Asia, Egypt, with the rise of Roman Empire, under C. Julius, and Octavianus. folio. Hymens praeludia, or loves Mr Piece. being the 6th part of Cleopatra. 8o. A discourse of the Empire, and of election of a King of the Romans, also the Colledge of Electors their particular interrests. 8o. Philosophicall Essaies, with brief Adviso's, accommodated to the capacity of Ladies and Gentle∣men, sometimes Student in the English Acad. lately of London. 12o. Cloria and Narcissus, the 3d and 4th part. 8o. PHYSICK and CHYRVRGERY. THe expert Physician, learnedly treating of agues and feavers, as well simple as compound, by D. Baude∣ron, made English by B.W. of Ox∣ford. 8o. Sr Theod. Mayern. Excellent and ap∣proved receits, and experiments in Cookery, Preserving, Sugar∣works, the French and English Mode, collected from a choice Manuscript of his. 12o. M. Culpepper. Four Books of D. Laz. Riverius, containing 513 obser. of rare cures, most his own, the rest by 24 famous Physicians, and Chirurgians, with a 5th Book of select Medicinall counsels, of J. Fernelius, chief Physician to the King. —The Idea of practicall Physick, in 12 Books, art of health, art of healing, signs of diseases, me∣dicaments, cures, feavers, diseases of head, belly, of Children, con∣taining the marrow of Synnertus and Fernelius, and twenty five Doctors, being read by Doctors to their Schollars, as the best ex∣tants in their kind, writ by I. Iohnson professor of Physick in Francfort, now englished. folio. A Treatise of Phlebotomy, the neces∣sity, time, with use of cupping-glasses and Leeches, with a tract of the Crisis, by Dde plumy campi∣rurgian. now englished. 12o. L. Lemnius. The secret miracles of na∣ture, learnedly treating of the ge∣neration, the soul, and its im∣mortality, of plants, creatures, diseases, with prudent rules to live in health of body and mind, with many rarities. folio. A physicall discourse of the nature and effects of the couragious pas∣sions. 8o. A discourse of the principles of Chi∣romancy, by Mounseir de la Cham∣bre. 8o.
LAW. D. PAge. Jus fratrum, the power of pa∣rents to dispose of their estates, the prerogative of the eldest and rights of younger. 12o. W. Fleetwood Esq The office of a Justice of Peace, with instructions how and in what manner Statutes should be expounded, with the lae Acts and Ordinances abridg∣ed. 12o. Reports of Sr Edw. Cooke. Lord chief Justice of divers Resoluti∣ons and Judgements given upon solemn Arguments, with great deliberation and conference of the most reverend Judges, of ca∣ses in Law, &c. fully Englished. folio. Reports of Sr G. Croke. Late one of the Justices of the K. Bench, and common Bench, of such select ca∣ses as were adjudged in the said Courts, rendred into English from the French, by Sr Harb. Grim∣stone Baronet, one of the Benchers of Lincoln's Inn. folio. M. Leynard. Reoprts and Cases in Law, argued and adjudged at Westmin. from the 18, to the 33, year of Q. Elizabeths Reign, published by M. Huglid. folio. H. Scobel Esq A Collect. of Acts and Ordin. of Parliament, begun 3d Novemb. 1640. till the Adjournment of the Parliament, Sep. 17th 1656. all done at large with notes, be∣ing a continuation of that work from the end of M. Pultons Col∣lection in two parts, with Tables, exam. by the Originall Records, and now published by order of Parl. folio. Sr T.F. The pract. of the Exchequer Court, its Offices and Officers, their duties, with rules and orders of proceedings by English Bil. 8o. An exact book of entries, of the most judiciall Writs in the Com∣mon Law, translated from the O∣riginall Manuscript collected by R. Moyle Esq by J.H. Gent. The exact Lawgiver, faithfully com∣municating to the skilfull, the firm Basis and Axioms of their profession, to the ignorant their ancient and undoubted rights, be∣ing a light as well to Councellors, as Attornies, Clarks, &c. 8o. POEMS. CLeavelands. With additions never before Printed. 12o. Mr Harrington. An Essay upon two of Virg. Eclogues, and two of his Aeneis towards translat. of the whole. 8o. Mr Teate. Ter Tria, or the Doctrine of the Three Sacred Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, Principall Graces, &c. 12o. M.E. Divine Poetry, with a short de∣scription of Christian magnanimi∣ty. 12o. FINIS.
