L8 09558645 43622
A True and faithful Coppy of a real LETTER, Written by a Friend in UTRECHT, To a Friend in LONDON. Giving an Account of some remarkable Passa∣ges, relating to his Grace JAMES, Duke of MONMOƲTH. SIR, YOurs bearing date the 2d. Instant, came safe to my hands, whereby you were pleased to desire me to give you a particular Account of the Reception of his Grace, James, Duke of Monmouth, together with a particular Relati∣on of such other Accidents as might occasionally happen since his Arrival You know at all times your requests with me have the power of Com∣mands and in compliance to the same, I shall with all possible Care and sincerity, give you both an ample and real account of all such passages as I
dare affirm to be true, which though but few yet I hope may satisfie your curiosity at present, until such times as any Observations permit me to in∣form you more particularly. On the tenth instant, the Duke arrived at the Hague, where he took up his residence at the English Agents House, being resolved with withall expedition to come hither, the next day he dined with the Prince and Princess of Orange; and so with what expedition he could came hither, and resided at the house of one of our principal Burghers, until such time his own house could be decently fitted up beauti∣fied and repaired, being at Rhenen in this Pro∣vince not far distant from this place; he was transported in one of his Majesties Yachts, with a Train of about twenty persons, which he hath now increased to about thirty: this house Prince Rupert was pleased to accommo∣date him withal he hath bestowed, no such cost in beautifiing the same, but what may rather suit with the Quality of a Banished peer, then a Prince of his extraction, this day being the 10 instant (having before took a progress into the Countrey of North-Holland) he entred his said house the next day, being complemented by the Magjestrates, and other persons of quali∣ty here resident, with this assurance, that he should not only be as safe, but as welcome to them as if he were at home, and to speak the
truth, such hath been his Noble deportment, since his arrival, that he hath obtained the hearts of all, as well Gentry, as Commonalty, before his settelment, in his present place of aboad, he was much indispos'd in his health, occasioned as some conceive by a great cold, by what I can inform my self, from some of the most emi∣nent of his retinue, it was no other then a real Quotidian Ague, though (thanks be to God) we hope it has wholly left him, he having not been lately troubled with the same. I have had the Honour to kiss his hand since his Ar∣rival, and although I dare not presume to say I have been Conversant with him, yet by what I have both heard and been a Spectator of (not only I, but many others besides my self, esteem him to be one of the most accomplished Peers in Christendome. You would admire to see how not only our Gentry, but Commonalty respect and honour him: with a sorrow com∣pounded of Love and pitty; had he been their own Native Prince, and spent his Heart Blood in their Defence, on my Conscience, they could not set a greater Vallue or esteem upon him than they have done, and still do. Sir, in a word, I need say no more in his Com∣mendation than only this, I am confident he cannot be more honoured, or better beloved at home, than he is here; such is his noble ob∣liging Carriage, who neither carries himself
Lofty nor low, but with such a becoming Grace, that Commands the very Affections of all. In my next I shall inform you of some o∣ther considerable passages, which at present I am forced to wave, until I am more fully sa∣tisfied of their Truth, what I have now writ∣ten is a reallity in all circumstances, which to confirm your Belief, shall be attested under the hand of SIR, Your humble Servant, B. L. ƲTRECHT, Octob. 19. 1679. FINIS.
