M1787 12678106 65606
Anglorum Gesta; Or, A Brief HISTORY OF England. BEING An Exact Account of the most remarkable Revolutions, and most memorable Oc∣currences, and Transactions in PEACE and WAR; as, Battles, Sieges, Sea-fights Invasions, Leagues, Interviews, Treaties, Solemnities, &c. that have hapned in the several Kings Reigns since the first At∣tempt by Julius Caesar upon this Island, to the Coronation day of his present Ma∣jesty King Charles the Second. WITH Several useful Catalogues of the Bishopricks, Cities, Shires, Colledges and Halls in both Universities: and Tables of the Kings Reigns, and of the Dimensions of England, Scotland and Ireland. By GEORGE MERITON, Gent. LONDON, Printed by T. Dawks, for Tho: Basset, at the George, near Cliffords Inn, in Fleetstreet. 1675.
portrait of Charles the Second CAROL SECVN.D. MAG. BRI. FRAET HIB. REX
PRAESTANTISSIMO ET HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, NON SOLUM NOBILITATE GENERIS, VERUM ETIAM AMPLITUDINE DIGNITATIS, DOMINO CONYERS DARCY BARONI DARCY MEYVILL ET CONYERS: HOC COMPENDIUM DE MEMORIALIBUS ANGLIAE; (EX GRATITUDINE PRAEFATO PRENOBILI DOMINO E SINGU∣LARIBUS CAUSIS) HUMILIME DEDICAT GEORGIUS MERITONUS.
TO THE Reader, Courteous Reader, I Am not so conceited of my self, or my own en∣deavours, as not to think that this Breif History of England, will fall under very many hard and sharp censures; especially from those who sit in Cathedra Derisionis, and lavish so much time away in carping at other Mens Endeavours, that they cannot allow themselves so much Liber∣ty as to gratify the World with any thing of their own. I am afraid also
the Virtuofi of our days will object and say, What need was there to obtrude this useless Pamphlet into the World? when so many persons, such as Beda, Gi∣raldus, Geoffry of Monmouth, Hig∣den, Ranulph of Chester, Malms∣bury, Simon Dunelm, Caxton, Matthew Westminster, Gyldas, Henry Huntington, Hollinshed, Matthew Paris, Daniel, Martin, Sir Thomas Moor, Pollidore Virgil, Speed, Hist. Brit. Sir Fran. Bacon, Sir Richard Baker, and several others have so learnedly and volluminously be∣stowed their pains herein already; so that this small Taper among so many bright Torches were as good out, as see∣ming to give no light at all. I confess to such as make this Objection, this small Treatise at first sight may seem useless; yet, if they consider that none of the per∣sons before named have begun so high in point of time, and continued the some so low as our own time, even till the Coronation day of our most Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles the Se∣cond,
Anno 1661, and Perhaps they may then partly be of another mind. However with the generality of People, for whom this Collection is principally intended) I hope it will receive a more Candid Acceptance; considering that several of the Authors before men∣tioned have written in Latin, and so every man not capacitated to read them, or understand them being read; and besides some of them have only collected the affairs of an hundred or two hundred years▪ and some more, and some less, ohrs of them have only writ the Lfe, perhaps of one particular King, &c. so that none of them can give the Rea∣der such a general account of Englands Memorable Accidents, for such a long continued course of time (with so little expence of time to the Reader in the per∣usal) as this small Treatise will: and in case any of them could, yet, as rare and curious stamps upon Coins, for their variety and strangeness, are daily enqui∣red after, and bought though the Silver be all one with ours; even so it
fares with Books, which (as Meddals) bear the Pictures and Devices of our various Invention, though the matter be the same, yet for variety sake, they are often read: and it is often found that the same Dishes of Meat, drest af∣ter a new fashion, do beget a fresh Ap∣petite, and gratifie the tasts of many better; nay, there is no Book so bad, even Sir Bevise himself, Fryer Ba∣con, or Tom Thumb, but some Ad∣vantage may be gotten by it: for▪ as in the same Field, the Ox findeth Fodder, the Hound a Hare, the Stork a Li∣zard, the Hawk a Partridg, the fair maid Flowers; so we cannot, except we list our selves (saith Seneca) but de∣part the better from any Book whatsoe∣ver. So I hope, Reader, Thou maist find something here to Content, at least nothing to Distaste thee, and them I shall think my time well bestowed: if neither, but out of a Malignant humour, thou disdainest what I have done, I care not, I have pleased my self: and learned
long since that Envy, with her Sister Ig∣norance, do harbour only in the basest and most degenerate Breast. Vale George Meriton.
A Brief HISTORY OF England. CHAP. I. Of the Scituation of Britain, with its Ly∣mits, together with some of the old Cu∣stoms practised amongst the Britains, the several names of the Island, and when first Inhabited, &c. THIS Island of Britain is bounded on the East with Germany and Denmark; on the West with Ireland, and the Atlantick Occan; on the North with the Deucalidon Seas, and on the South with Normandy and France.
It contains in length from the Strathy∣head in Scotland, to the Lisard-point in Cornwal 624 miles; and in breadth from the Lands end in Cornwal, to the Island Tennet in the East of Kent, 340 miles; and is in the eight Clymate for Latitude, and for Longitude, placed between the paralells 14 and 16. The Limits of it in times past, was from the Orcades, to the Pyrean Mountains. And in former times this noble Island of Britain sustained Eleven Kings, all commanding great powers: several other Islands belong to it, amongst which the Isle of Man, is not of the least account, for to it belongs a King with a Leaden Crown, whose King is now the Noble Earl of Dar∣by, whose Ancestors have been Lords of Man about two hundred and seventy years. The Division of this Island is into three Kingdomes. 1. Scotland, whose Partition South∣ward was from Carlile to Newcastle. 2. Cambria or Wales, whose Partition was from Basiagwark to Wye: and 3. England, which was coasted with the French and Germain Seas, on the one side, and with the other two Kingdoms on the other side.
It is verily supposed that this Island was Peopled before the Flood. Jeffery of Monmouth affirmeth that this Island was Peopled by Brute with his Trojans, in the 2887 year of the World's Creation; and after the universal Deluge 1231 years. And in the year of Elie's Priesthood. But several antient Historians writing before his time, make no mention of King Brute: and some have affirmed that there was ne∣ver any such Man. The Inhabitants were called Britains from the word Brith, which signifieth painting or staining of the Skin, which they had formerly in use amongst them. Some Authors have affirmed that the English did proceed from Cimbria Cher∣sonesus, which came from Italy; but o∣thers assure us that they came from the antient Gauls in France. But certain it is, that the first Inhabi∣tants of this Island being merely barba∣rous, they never troubled themselves to transmit their Original to Posteri∣ty. And if they had writ any thing of their Original, yet the opinion of Guil∣das is, that it must needs have perish∣ed: our own Historiographers afford us nothing of the first affairs of our Island,
all we can gather is from forein Writers. The Druides were accounted among the first Inhabitants, for their only wise Men: in antient times the Britains used to die themselves blew with Woad, to make themselves seem more terrible to their Enemies; and about their Wasts and Necks they used to wear chains of I∣ron, supposing them a brave Ornament; on their middle Fingers they wore their Rings, and used no Garments that their painted Skins might be seen; yet some of them, but very few, were clad in Lea∣ther: The Pickts also a branch of the Brittish race, were so called of the Romans, from their painted Skins. The antient Britains are reported by Plutarch to have lived long, as 120 years; and those of Kent in former times were accounted for the most civil persons among them, their fortified Woods they called Towns; their custom was to have ten or twelve Wives apiece, which were in common amongst Brothers and Pa∣rents; yet the Issue was always reputed his, who first married the Mother when she was a Maid: their Diet was very spare: They would neither eat Hen, Hare, Goose, Fish, nor milk; They
manured their grounds with marl in∣stead of dung, and their usual drink was made of Barly. In their sacrifices they used Man's Flesh, and their Idols exceeded in number those of Egypt: Art-Magick was had in great esteem amongst them: but most of their controversies were determined by the Druides: These had no Primate or Chief amongst them: and Excommunication was amongst them of great force: Their Theologie was, that the Soul dieth not, but passeth from one to another; And their Traffick or Merchandize was of very small use or profit to them; For Cesar reports that the Ribs and Keels of their Ships, were of light wood, and covered over with Leather, and they did not eat during the time they sailed at Sea. Their Coins at first were either of Brass, or Iron Rings, sized at a certain weight, which they used instead of Money; but afterwards they stamped Silver and Gold, Julius Cesar was the first that stamped his own Image on the Roman Coin: but the Brittish Coin is easily known from other; for they commonly imbossed their Coin outward and Shield like, where∣on the Inscription or Face is seen; and the
Reverse hollow wherein the Device is pla∣ced: They used not to fight in great Companies, for they had ever fresh Men to come in to supply the vacancies of those that retired and were weary; and their usual fightings was in Chariots, as the use was in the world's first Age; but their chiefest Strength consisted in Foot men, who were very swift, whose Armor was Shields and short Spears; in the nether end whereof was fastned a round Bell of Brass, with the sound whereof they were wont to affright their Enemies: And it was usual with them to Fight under the conduct of their Women, who were second Amazons. Cesar (the first Roman Discoverer of Britain) when he first made Discovery thereof, thought verily that he had found another World: It is called the great Island by some, it was formerly called Samothea, from Samothes, sixth Son of Japheth, the first Inhabiter 252 years af∣ter the Flood: it was also called Albion; some say, from Albion a Gyant the Son of Neptune, who conquered the Samothe∣ans, and seated himself here about 335 years after the Flood; but others say it was called Albion, ab Albis Rupibus, from
the white Rocks, appearing on the South Coast next to France, and this is the more likely to Truth: But by the Grecians this Island was called Britain, but why so called, several Authors have given several Reasons; some will have it from King Brute the Son of Silvius; others will have it derived from the Greek word , which doth signify Mettalls; for the Gre∣cians finding the Island full of Brass, Tin, Iron, Gold, Silver and Lead, gave name to it accordingly, and called it Pritania. It was called England from a place in Denmark called Engloen. And this Name was not changed either by the Danish or Norman Conquerors. It hath the fifth place in all general Counsels, and retained the name of England 873 years: But since King James came to the English Crown, in the year 1602: Scot∣land and England were both united un∣der one Crown; it is sometimes called Great Britain. Britain hath been taken for the fortu∣nate Island, as is reported by some Au∣thors: And Pope Innocent was so in love with it, that he made suit to Henry the Third King of England, to come and see
it, but could not prevail. It is observed that the nights in the furthest part North of Britain are so short in Summer, as the space between the days going and coming is not desernable. And Cesar did observe that France was colder than Britain. Such plenty of all kind of Grain abounds in it, That by Charles the Great, it was called the Granary or Store-house of the western World; here the Romans used yearly to lade 800 Vessels bigger than Bar∣ges with Corn, for the Releif of their Ar∣mies elsewhere. This Island is thought to have received the Christian Faith in or about the midst of Nero's Reign, in the year of Christ's Incarnation 63: and that Joseph of Ari∣mathea was one of the Disciples sent hither by Philip the Apostle out of France, and that this Joseph lyeth Buried at the Abby of Glastenbury, if we believe Guildas and Malmesbury, who have written so: It is thought that Saint Paul did Preach here in Brittain, and some affirin that Si∣mon Zelotes was here in Britain: but these things being but conjectural, I shall con∣clude this Chapter, and proceed to the next.
CHAP. II. Of the antient Inhabitants of Britain, and the Cities of their possessions, as they were called by Ptolomy, and of∣ten since mentioned in the Roman Wri∣ters, together with the names of such Brittish Princes as opposed the Romans Conquest. THese seventeen sorts of People here∣after mentioned were the Inhabi∣tants of England and Wales, and were branched up and down in the Country, as followeth. 1. Cantii; These had only Kent in possession. 2. Regni; To these People was alotted the Counties of Sussex and Surry. 3. Durotriges; These had Dorcet∣shire. 4. Damnonii; These possessed Devon∣shire and Cornwal. 5. Belgae; Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and Southamptonshire was their parts.
6. Atrebatii; To them belonged Berk∣shire only. 7. Dobuni; These injoyed Oxford∣shire, and Gloucester-shire. 8. Catieuclani; Their Possessions were Warwick-shire, Buckingham-shire, and Bedford-shire. 9. Trinobantes; To them was Hart∣ford-shire, Essex, and Middlesex as∣signed. 10. Iceni; These were Masters of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridg-shire, and Huntington-shire. 11. Coritani; These men claimed Rutlandshire, Lincoln-shire, Northampton∣shire, Leicester-shire, Darby-shire, and Nottinghamshire. 12. Cornabii; Stafford-shire, Worce∣ster-shire, Cheshire, and Shropshire, was theirs. 13. Ordovices; They challenged Flint∣shire, Denby-shire, Caenervon-shire, Mountgomery-shire, and Merioneth∣shire. 14. Brigantes Parisi; Amongst them was distributed Lancashire, York-shire, Richmond-shire, Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland. 15. Silures; Herefordshire, Radnor∣shire, Brecknock-shire, Monmouth-shire,
and Glamorgan-shire, was their part or share. 16. Dimetae; These Inhabitants were Lords of Caermeraen-shire, Pembrok∣shire, and Cardigan-shire. 17. Ottodini; They kept Northum∣berland, Teifidale, Twedale, March, and Louthien. These 14 sorts of People following were dispersed up and down in Scotland, namely; 1. Selgovae. 2. Novantes. 3. Damnii. 4. Calledonii Gadini. 5. E∣pidii. 6. Vicemagi. 7. Vennicones, 8. Tezali. 9. Cantae. 10. Creones Ce∣rontes. 11. Carnonacae. 12. Carini. 13. Cornabii. 14. Simertaae Logi. Now I shall proceed to give a brief hint at some Remarkable Passages, which happe∣ned within the times of these thirteen British Princes following, who opposed the Romans Conquest, and so conclude this Chapter. 1. Cassibelan. This Prince was Gover∣nour of the Trinobants, and was Brother to King Lud, who at his Death had left behind two Sons, Andragius and Temanti∣us, and they being young, this Man took upon him the Government of the Bri∣tains; and when his Nephews came at Age, he gave to Andragius, Trinovant,
(now called London) and the Dukedom of Kent; and to Temantius he gave the Dukedom of Cornwal. But Andragius and his Vncle falling at odds, he thereupon sent for Julius Cesar, and begged his Assistance against his Vn∣cle, who fought Cassibelan and overcame him, and caused the Island for his Rebel∣lion to pay three hundred pounds yearly by way of Tribute to Rome. Andragius went along at this time with Julius Cesar to Rome, and after Cassibe∣lan's Death at York, Temantius was King: Their Father King Lud built the West-Gate of the City Trinovant, and called it Ludgate, and the City after his own Name Caerlud, which is now the famous City of London. 2. Cingitorix, Carvil, Taximagul, and Segonax; These were Kings of Kent, and withstanding Julius Cesar at the same time Cassibelan stood out, they were to∣tally routed, their Men slain, Cingitorix taken, and the other three forced to fly and shift for themselves. 3. Senimagues, Cegontians, Ancalits, Bibroses, and Cassians, These were the States of the Icenians; who seeing Cesars Valour and Progress in the Wars against
their Neighbouring Princes, they there∣upon grew faint hearted, laid down their Arms and submitted. 4. Cunobeline, he was King of the Britains, and the first man that stamped his Image on his Coin; he was Knighted by Cesar, and had his Princely seat at Malden in Essex, then a famous City: in the twenty third year of his Reign, our Saviour Christ was born; Augustus Ce∣sar in this King's time was three times prepared for War against the Britains, but was every time diverted by other bu∣siness, and came not. 5. Guiderus, This man was Son to Cunobeline, and being of an haughty Spi∣rit, he denied the Tribute to the Romans, at which Caligula the Emperour was much inraged, and made a great show of coming into Britain; but took up at the Belgieve-Shore, and there causes his Ar∣my to gather Cockle-shells, and redicu∣lously returned Triumphantly with the Spoils (as he accounted it) of the Oce∣an: but Claudius Drusius, the succeding Emperor by his Deputy here in Britain, fought Guiderus, and overthrew his Bri∣tains▪ the King being slain by Hamo, as the Story goes (who siding with the Romans,
put on Brittish formalities, and by that means got near to the King and slew him; whereupon Hamo was pursued by Auvi∣ragus the King's Brother to the Sea side, and there was slain, whence the place took the name of Hamo's haven, which is now called Southampton. 6. Catacratus, Second Son to Cunobe∣line, standing in opposition to Aulus Plautinus Deputy to Drusius the Empe∣rour, he was at length overcome with a great slaughter of his Men, himself taken and bound and carried to Rome, and there led thorow the City in honour of Plautinus. 7. Togodumnus, This was Third Son to Cunobeline, he was slain in Battel a∣gainst the Romans, but had put them into such Fear, That Plautius sent for Drusius the Emperour to come over, who accord∣ingly came here into Britain. 8. Arviragus, he was King of the Bri∣tains, and so stoutly withstood Drusius the Emperour in several Conflicts, till at length Drusius concluded a Marriage between Arviragus and Genissa, Drusius his Daughter. 9. Cogidunus, This Man was Ruler over certain Cities, bestowed upon him by the Romans.
10. Caractacus. He was Prince of the Silures, and after several Conflicts with the Romus, he was at length brought to shelter himself under the Wings of Car∣tismandua, the faithless Queen of the Britains, who delivered him to the Ro∣mans, and being conveyed to Rome, when he beheld the Riches and Glory of the Ci∣ty; he reproved the Romans, that being Masters of such glorious things, they should nevertheless be greedy after the Possessions of the poor Britains. 11. Prasutagus. This Man being King of the Icenians, made the Emperor Ne∣ro his Heir, leaving his noble Queen Boduo and his two Daughters to the Em∣peror's Protection, who abusing his Trust, had 80000 of his Romans slain by the valour of Queen Boduo. 12. Venutius, King of the Brigantes, he was Ruined and overthrown by rea∣son of his Adulterous Queen Cartisman∣dua joining with the Romans. 13. Galgacus, He was Prince of the Calledonians, and was the last that held out against the Romans, for with him the whole Island became subject to the Ro∣mans, about a hundred thirty six years af∣ter Cesars first entrance into Brittain:
And so many years it was before the Ro∣mans came to understand that Britain was an Island. CHAP. III. Of the Roman Emperors, and their Depu∣ties who ruled over, and continued the Britains under their Subjection. 1. JƲlius Cesar, first Emperor of Rome, after he had made himself Lord of Germany, came from thence into Eng∣land: his first Entrance was at Barham∣down, in the year of the World 3873. He made the Britains submit three times before his Departure. He made Comius his Deputy, and at his next coming into Britain he laid on the Tribute of 300 l. per annum on them. II. Augustus Cesar. This Emperor perpared three times for Britain, and still upon their Submission deferred his intended Voyage. In the 42 year of his Reign our Saviour JESƲS CHRIST was born, Anno Mundi 3970▪ accord∣ing
to some Authors. In  mperor's time, and in the two succeeding Empe∣ror's Reigns, Cunobeline was Deputy here in Brita▪ III. Tiberius Cesar. He began his Reign in the year of CHRIST, the Sixteenth, and in the Eighteenth year of his Reign CHRIST was crucified at Jerusalem: And Dionisius Areopagita, who lived at this time, seeing the strange Eclipse of the Sun and Moon at the in∣stant hour of our Saviour's Passion, said, Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut Mundi machina dissolvitur. IV. Caius Caligula. This Emperor ba∣nished Pontius Pilate, who was CHRIST's Judge, who afterwards in Dispair slew himself, Anno Domini 41. in the 39 year of CHRIST this Emperor began his Reign, and reigned three years and about 10 months: he playned Mountains, made Valleys of Hills, and built Towers in the deep Sea: and all this he did with such Impurity and Cruelty, that many would rather Murther themselves than come or stay for the Rigour of his Sentence. V. Claudius Drusius began his Reign Anno Domini 43. and reigned about 14 years; in the sixth year of his Reign the Virgin Mary departed this life at her
age of . This Emperor sent Aulus Platius Deputy into Britain to subdue those that had denied the Tribute to Rome: but he after many kirmishes with Caractacus, and after he had taken him, was still in such fear of the Britains, that he sent for the Emperor Drusius, who was the second after Julius Cesar that came hither in person. VI. Nero. This Emperor appointed Suetonius Deputy in Britain, in whose time the Britains, under the Command of Queen Boduo Wife to Patrusagus, rebel∣led and slew 80000 Romans before they could be quieted again: And she, when she saw her Party fail (rather than fall into the hands of her Enemies) poisoned herself: This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 57. and reigned about 14 years. He put the Apostle St. Peter and St. Paul to death: and raised great Per∣secutions against the Christians. He cau∣sed his own Mother's Belly to be ripp'd open, that he might see where he lay: and he slew his wife Poppaea with a spurn or kick. VII. Sergius Galba, He began his Reign An. Do. 70. reign'd 7 months, following the wickedness of his Predecessor Nero: he had his head struck off by a Soldier: in his
time  no War with Britain, M¦xim Deputy both in this and the succeeding Emperors time. VIII. Marcus Silvius Otho. This Em∣peror's Reign being very short, he had no War with the Britains. He began his Reign An. Dom. 70. and reigned 3 months, and 5. dayes. IX. Aulus Vitellius. This Emperor had Peace with Britain, and appointed Ve∣ctius Bolanus his Deputy. This Emperor was a great Glutton. He began his Reign Anno Domini 71. and after 8 Months Reign, he was slain by Vespasian's Soldiers, and thrown into the River Tiber. X. Flavius Vespasian. In his time the Brigants and Sileurs rebelled here in Bri∣tain, but were quickly quieted again by Julius Frontius, and several of them slain, Petilius being Deputy: The famous City of Jerusalem was utterly destroyed by this Emperor. He began his Reign Anno Do∣mini 72. and reigned about 9 years. XI. Titus Vespasian. He had peace with Britain; and in the Second year of his Reign, being forty years after our Savi∣our's Passion, this Emperor after a streight and hard Siege, won the City of Jerusalem, and destroyed it, leaving not one stone upon a stone unthrown down:
he began his Reign Anno  1▪ and reigned 2 years and about 3 months: in his time Frontius was Deputy in Bri∣tain. XII. Domitian. This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini, 83. and reigned about 15 years. In his time began the se∣cond cruel Persecution against the Chri∣stians: Julius Agricola the Deputy in Britain slew in Battel about 10 000 Bri∣tains, who had rebelled and slain 340 Ro∣mans. This Agricola was the first of the Romans that found out the Limits of Bri∣tain 136 years after Julius Cesar's first co∣ming into Britain. XIII. Cocceius Nerva. The Britains were quiet during this Emperor's time, which was of no long continuance, for he began his Reign Anno Domini 99. and rei∣gned about 10 months: he was so charita∣bly disposed, That he was called Paupe∣rum Patronus. XIV. Trajanus; In his time was the third Persecution against the poor Christi∣ans: The Britains, rebelling in his time, were quickly overthrown by Spartianus: This Emperor began his Reign Anno Do∣mini 100. he reigned 21 years, and about 6 months.
XV. Adrianus. He began his Reign Anno Domini 121. and Reigned 22 years: He had no War with the Britains, Tre∣bellius being then Deputy, but he continu∣ed the Persecution against the Christi∣ans. XVI. Antonius Pius. In his time the Brigants rebelling in Britain; (they were overthrown by Lollius Ʋrbicus the Depu∣ty: This Emperor by special Edict restrai∣ned the Persecution against the Christi∣ans: he was a good man, and is reported to be called Pater Virtutum; he began his Reign Anno Domini 139. and reigned 23 years. XVII. Marcus Aurelius. Now began another Persecution against the Christians, but he had no War with Britain. Agri∣cola was his Deputy. This Emperor be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini. 162. and reigned 19 years. XVIII. Comodus. In this Emperor's time reigned King Lucius in Britain, who is the first King, that out Histories makes mention of, that embraced Christaini∣ty: he was tributary to the Romans, and was Son to King Coilus who built Colche∣ster, and was great grand Child to King Arviragus, who married the Emperor Drusius's Daughter. This King Lucius
sent to Elutherus, then Bishop of Rome, Elvanus and Medvinus, learned men of his own, to receive some further Instru∣structions from him in his Religion. The Bishop sent him Faganus and Damianus with his Letter, in these words: YOu have received in the Kingdom of Bri∣tain, by GOD's Mer∣cy, both the Law and Faith of CHRIST, ye have both the Old and New TESTAMENT, out of the same through GOD's Grace, by the Advice of your Realm, take a Law, and by the same through GOD's Sufferance, Rule
you your Kingdom of Britain, for in that King∣dom you are GOD's Vi∣car. What could be more full than this? where was then the Popes Supremacy? but the Title was afterwards altered in this Sea; but how, the World both felt and la∣mented. Vpon Receipt of these Instru∣ctions the King altered the three Arch-Flamins, and twenty eight Flamins, in∣to so many Arch-Bishopricks and Bi∣shopricks, the Arch-Bishopricks were London, York and Gloucester; and now Idol Temples were destroyed, and Pri∣viledges and means were granted for ho∣nouring of sacred places then errected: This Emperor began his Reign Anno Domini 182: and reigned thirteen years, he had no War with Britain. XIX. Helvius Pertinax, his Reign be∣gan Anno Domini 194, and he Reigned about eight Months, he had Peace with the Britains, Albinus being then De∣puty. XX. Didius Julianus, This Emperors
Reign being but of small continuance, he had no War with Britain; his Reign be∣gan Anno Domini 194. and continued a∣bout two Months, his Deputy in Britain was Julius Severus. XXI. Septimus Severus, In this Empe∣ror's time the Calledonians Rebelled in Britain, Heraclianus being Deputy: so the Emperor came over in Person to quiet them, and with cutting down of Woods building of Bridges, and draining of Moors to follow the Enemy, he lost a∣bout fifty thousand of his Romans, not∣withstanding he gave not over until he had conquered his Enemies: and coming a second time into Britain, Death Conque∣red him at York, after he had Reigned eighteen years: he began his Reign Anno Domini one hundred ninety five, in his time the fifth Persecution against the Church did begin. XXII. Bassianus Caracalla; This Em∣peror slew his Brother Geta, who was co∣emperor with him; he began his Reign Anno Domini 212, and reigned about six years, he had no War with Britain. XXIII. Opilius Macrinus; he had peace with Britain, and began his reign Anno Domini 218, and reigned about one year and two Months.
XXIV. Heliogabilus; This Emperour began his Reign Anno Domini 219, and reigned about four years, he had no Wars with Britain, but he was a great Whore∣master, and incestuoussy lay with his own Mother. XXV. Alexander Severus, he tolle∣rated the Christians to live peaceably, had no War with Britain; he was slain by the Almain Souldiers, having his eyes put out, after he had Regned about thir∣teen years and six Months and seven days. XXVI. Maximinus; This Emperour's Reign began Anno Domini 237. and con∣tinued three years; he had no Wars with Britain: The sixth Persecution of the Church of Chirst began in his time. XXVII. Julius Verus Maximus; This Emperour was slain at the same time his Father was slain; he was a beautiful per∣son, and his Company much desired by the Ladies, whose suits he easily condescended to, he had peace with the Britains. XXVIII. Gordianus, This Emperour's Reign was short, not exceeding forty days as some Authors affirm; No War with Britain in his time. XXIX. Claudius Puppienus, and Ce∣lius Balbinus; These Emperours Reign∣ed about a year: They began their Reign
Anno Domini 239. And had no Wars with Britain. XXX. Antonius Gordianus; He had Peace with Britain: he began his Reign Anno Domini 240, and reigned four years. XXXI. Julius Philippus; In his time there was no War with Britain; he reign∣ed five years; and begun his Reign Anno Domini 245, he was a Christian, and the first Emperour that received Baptism, as some Authors do affirm: in his time the famous Cyprian flourished. XXXII. Decius; The seventh Perse∣cution of the Church began in this Empe∣rour's time: he began his Reign Anno Domini 250, and reigned about two years; he had no war with Britain. XXXIII. Trebonianus and Volusianus, These Emperours had Peace with Bri∣tain; They begun their Reigns Anno Domini 252: and reigned two years. XXXIV. Aemelianus; This Emperour Reigned but about three months: he be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini 254. he had no War with Britain. XXXV. Valerianus; His Reign was but short, lasting about a year, yet much Christian blood spilt in that time, for now begun the ninth Persecution of the Church,
under him Lawrence and Cyprian suffered Martyrdom; but Britain had Peace with him. XXXVI. Galienus; This Emperour Reigned fifteen years: he began his Reign Anno Domini 254. and had no War with Britain. XXXVII. Flavius Claudius, he be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini 269. and reigned two years; he had peace with Britain, and was a great Hater of the Christians, but had not time to put in Ex∣ecution his intended Torments against them. XXXVIII. Quintilius, This Empe∣rour shortly after he had taken the Go∣vernment upon him, opened his own Veins and so died: he had no War with Britain; he began his Reign Anno Domini two hundred seventy one. XXXIX. Aurelianus; he began his Reign Anno Domini 271. and reigned five years, he had no War with Britain, but was a great Persecutor of the Chri∣stians. XL. Tacitus, He had no War with Britain, Reigning about six Months only: he began his Reign Anno Domini two hundred seventy and six. XLI. Florianus, He began his Reign
Anno Domini 278: and Reigned about three months: he had Peace with Britain. XLII. Probus; He was a lover of the Christians, and had no War with Britain, his Reign began Anno Domini 278. and he reigned about five years. XLIII. Marcus Aurelius Carus; The Britains in his time fell afresh into Re∣bellion, after they had been quiet above 80 years, and Carancius, being sent Deputy, he fell also in Rebellion with them, but af∣ter the Emperour's Death Carancius was slain by Alectus, the succeeding Deputy. This Emperour began his Reign Anno Domini 282: and Reigned something more than a year. XLIV. Dioclesian; This Emperour sent Alectus to quiet the Britains, who then Rebelled under Carancius, and pur∣suing the Rebels with a continued hatred, he himself was at length slain in London, by Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornwal, and many thousand Romans with him; and a∣mong the rest one Gallus who was Ale∣ctus's Companion, was slain in London, at a certain Brook, which was afterwards called by his Name, Gallbrook, or Wal∣brook; but at long-run Asclepiodotus himself was slain by Coilus Duke of Col∣chester: This Emperour Dioclesian was a
great Persecutor of the Christians: he be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini 284. and reigned about three years, and Maximi∣nianus who was co-emperour with him a∣bout 4 years. XLV. Constantius Clorus; This Em∣perour coming into Britain to subdue the Calledonians, and Picts, under the com∣mand of Coilus, who had made himself King, at his coming found Coilus dead, he married his fair Daughter the Princess Helena, and begot on her Constantine, the Great: This Emperour was a favorer of the Christians, though his Predecessor Dioclesian had much oppressed them, for in his time was Albine the Protomartyr of England beheaded at Holmehurst, now St. Albans: and Aaron and Julius suf∣fered at Leicester, and about a thousand Christians suffered at Litchfield; This Constantius began his Reign Anno Domi∣ni 291, and reigned about thirteen years▪ he died at York. XLVI. Constantius▪ Galerius, Ma∣ximianus, Severus, Maxentius, Licinius, and Martinianus, for the space of eight years the Empire was Ruled by these Men, sometimes one, sometimes another, and sometimes all of them ruling, till at length they were all vanquished by Con∣stantine
the great; in these Emperours times were very cruel Torments put in practise against the Christians; Maxen∣tius used to join the living bodies of the Christians with other dead Carcases, and being chained Mouth to Mouth, he caused them to be tumbled up and down: Some think this was the reason why St. Paul u∣sed that expression in his Epistle to the Romans, 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? In these Emperors times were some petty Wars with Britain; These Empe∣rours began their Rule Anno Domini three hundred and four, and Reigned about eight years. XLVII. Constantinus Magnus, This Emperour was a Britain by Nation, his Father was Constantius Florus, and his Mother Hellena the Daughter of Coilus, he did associate with him in the Empire his Sons Crispus, Constantinus, Constan∣tius, and Constance, each of them ru∣ling in some part of the Empire: The Government continued under these Em∣perours from the year 312, to the year 350. Some petty Wars they had with Britain; some Authors affirm that this Constantine the Great, beginning to perse∣cute the Christians, he was smitten with a
Leprosie that the Physitians left him as incurable; and being asleep one Night he saw a Vision, telling him that if he desired to recover his health, he should recall from Exile Silvester the Bishop, and all the Clergy; which things he performed; and being Converted and Baptized, he was immediately cured; and increasing in Devotion, he built many Churches, and among the rest that of St. Peters in Rome, himself digging the Foundation, and car∣rying away twelve Baskets full of Earth, in honour of the twelve Apostles: he built also the City Constantinple, and made a Decree for celebrating the Lord's day in∣stead of the Jewish Sabbath: in his time was the first famous general Council of Nice, against Arius the Heretick: This Emperour was wont to say, That Age ap∣peared best in four things; Old Wood best to burn; Old Wine to Drink; Old Friends to trust; Old Authors to Read: also he said, There was but this difference between the Death of old Men and young Men, for old Men go to Death, and Death comes to young Men: he appoint∣ed Silvester the Bishop of Rome to wear a Crown of Gold, but he contented himself with a Phrygian Miter; now a tripple Di∣adem, is thought scarce stately enough for
his Successors: This Constantine is said to be the first Christian Emperor, as Lu∣cius was the first Christian King: the ho∣nour of both whose Birth-rights England doth glory in. XLVIII. Julius Apostata; he began his Reign Anno Domini 356: and reigned about seven years; he had no War with Britain, he denied the Faith of Christ and turned Apostate; and Writ a Book against Christianity: being wounded in the Wars with a poisoned Dart in his left Arm, he took a handful of his Blood, and throwing it into the Air, he blasphemous∣ly said, Vicisti Galilaee. XLIX. Jovinianus, This Emperour had Peace with Britain, he began his Reign Anno Domini 363: and Reigned about a year; he became a Christian, was Baptized, and caused his whole Army to follow his Example; his common speech was this, O that I might govern wise Men, and wise Men govern me. L. Valentinianus; In his time the Picts began to invade Britain, but were van∣quished by Theodosius the Deputy; This Emperour was highly esteemed of all the Christians; being a great favourer of them, he forbad Idolatrous Sacrifices by Night, and restored to the Churches their for∣mer
Priviledges, Liberties and Possessions which the other Emperours had sold: his usual saying was, That Gold was tried with the Touchstone, and Men with Gold. LI. Gratianus and Vallens, This Val∣lens was Vncle to Gracianus and Ruled with him four years: beginning his Reign Anno Domini 365: he at first recalled Nazianzen and Basill from Banishment, and was Baptized by Eudoxius, but turn∣ed Arrian afterwards, and persecuted the Orthodox Bishops of the East, as Eusebius, Pelagius, Gregorius, Nissenus, &c. he caused also 80 of the Christian Embassadors that were then in Constanti∣nople, to be all sent to Sea in one ship, and then the ship to be set on Fire: But as the Emperor Vallens was very impious, so on the contrary Gratianus was very good, for he expelled out of Italy all sorts of Hereticks, and all the People being re∣duced to the Faith of JESVS CHRIST, he caused all the ruined Churches to be repaired: he began his Reign Anno Do∣mini 367: and reigned 6 years. These Emperours had no War with Britain. LII. Maximus, and Valentinianus junior, These Emperours Ruled about six years, and began to Reign Anno Domini 73: as some Authors affirm, but Ma∣ximus
his Reign was so short, that some Historians take no notice of him: They had no War with Britain. LIII. Theodosius, This Emperour be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini 379: and Reigned about four years, according to some Authors, he had no War with Bri∣tain, Fla. Stillicoe being the Deputy: in this Emperours time, Damasus being Pope, was the second general Council, and the first at Constantinople: in his time al∣so were great losses by Earthquakes in se∣veral places both by Sea and Land, which continued about six Months. LIV. Arcadius and Honorius, The Reign of these two Copartners began in the year 384: and ended Anno Domini 402. They had no War with Britain: in their time, at noon-day a strange Fire from Heaven, penetrating the great Church of Constantinople, fastned upon the Bishops seat in the Church, and consumed it, af∣terwards growing up like a Tree, fastned upon the Roof and devoured it; and lastly passing the midst of the people with∣out hurting any, to the great amaze∣ment of all, seized upon the Senate-house and burnt it to ashes. LV. Theodosius junior, and Valentini∣anus▪ The Reign of these two Emperours
began Anno Domini 402. They reigned till the year 450. of which time Theodosi∣us Reigned only twenty two years: in their time was the third general Council held at Ephesus, which was the first held at that place, Caelestinus being Pope: in these Emperours time the Romans left Britain of their own accord, after they had possessed the same about 597 years, and then shortly after, the Saxons made themselves Soveraign Lords and Masters thereof. CHAP. IV. Of the Conquest of Britain by the Saxons, as also of the Commencement and Conti∣nuance of their several Kingdoms there∣in during the Heptarchy, with the Names of the Kings Ruling in each Kingdom. THE Pickts and Scots after the Ro∣mans had left Britain, did much annoy the poor Britains, and the Romans
sent them aid against them several times, and at their last coming, helped them to build a Wall from Sea to Sea between Eng∣land and Scotland, and bidding them farewell, desired them to look to them∣selves, for they would no more undertake such long and hazardous journeys for their sakes. And now the Saxons (after the Ro∣mans had quit left the Island) under the Command of Hengist and Horsa, land∣ed at Ebsfleet in the Island of Thanet in Kent, about the year of Christ 448: as some Authors affirm, for they differ a∣mongst themselves in this point. These Saxons were sent for by the Britains (the Romans refusing to come) to aid them against the Pickts and Scots who were got into their Land as far as Stanford: and the Britains intending them the Isle of Thanet to live in, that they might be near at hand to afford them help as of∣ten as occasion required: but the Saxons not contented with the Island of Thanet which the Britains had assigned them for their good service: they having now got good footing in the Land, they began to display themselves in their colours, and made it appear that they intended the best part for themselves, and that the Britains should be at their Disposals.
Whereupon the Britains Petitioned them, and had good Answers: but after∣wards had all their goods spoiled and plun∣dered by them. And Hengist, at a cer∣tain time, causing the British Nobles to meet him on Salisbury-Plain, under pre∣tence of a Treaty, did there treacherous∣ly cause them to be slain, giving this Watch word to his Soldiers; New cout Se∣axes, that is, Take your Swords: at which words, They fell on the Nobles and slew them. It is not certainly known from whence these Saxons originally descended; but it is probably thought from Sacae a People in Asia; and it is said by so some Authors, That Hengist and Horsa were Nephews to Woden and Fria, the Saxon Dieties: in Honour of Woden they called the Fourth day of the Week Wodensday, and the Sixth day Friday, in Honour of his wife Fria. The Saxons used to go singing to the Wars, and their Manner was to kill eve∣ry Tenth Captain, and to accept of no Ransom: Their Garments were only a Cassock clasped or (for want thereof) fast∣ned with a Thorn, and their Weapons were long Swords and Battle Axes, and they are reported to be the first that used to try
by single Combat: great Punishers they were of Adultery, and their Maids were married but once; the men also were re∣strained from plurality of Wives, except it were the greater sort, for Procreation sake; for it was accounted a great Disgrace a∣mong them to have no Children. Three of the strongest people of Ger∣many were said to come into Britain, to wit, Saxons, Angles and Jutes: of the Jutes came the Kentish men, and the men of the Isle of Wight, and those over a∣gainst it: of the Saxons came the East, West, and South Saxons; and of the An∣gles came the East and middle Angles, that is, the Marches, and had Middle-England, that stretcheth West-ward to∣wards the River Dee besides Che∣ster; and to Severn besides Shrewsbury, and so to Bristow: and Eastward, towards the Sea; and Southward, to Thames, and so forth to London: and Northward, to Humber, and so down Westward to the River Mercee, and so to the West-Sea: also of the Angles come the men of Northumberland, and Hengist and Hor∣sa were Leaders of them all. This Hengist got Possession of Kent, by the gift of Vortigern King of the Britains: The Saxons were driven by the Britains,
after several Skirmishes with them, back to their Ships again in the Isle of Thanet; but through Treacherous fair words, Hen∣gist got footing again amongst the Bri∣tains; and by Degrees the Saxons erect∣ed an Heptarchy here in Britain; and divided it into Seven Kingdoms; as fol∣loweth; viz. 1 Kent, 2 South-Saxons, 3 West-Saxons, 4 East-Saxons, 5 Northumber∣land, 6 Mercia, 7 East-Angles. Each of which Kingdoms had a continu∣ed Succession of several KINGS: but Authors do somewhat differ in their Names, and in the Commencement and Continuance of their Reigns: as also in the Commencement and Continuance of the said KINGDOMS, some making them to begin at one time, and some at another: but that which is most common∣ly received as the truest Relation, is as fol∣loweth: but notwithstanding, this is with Submission to those who are better able to discover the Truth with more certainty.
And now of the KINGDOMS in order: and First, of the Kingdom of KENT; this contained only Kent: it began Anno 455, continued 372 years, and ended 827. whose Succession of Kings take as follow∣eth; they be accounted Seventeen in number. 1. Hengist; This was the first Saxon Invader, as is before declared: and he made himself first King of Kent; he be∣gan his Reign over it, Anno 455. and rei∣ned 34 years. 2. Eske or Osca, After him the Inha∣bitants were called Eskins: his Reign be∣gan the year 490: he reigned twenty four years. 3. Octa; He began his Reign Anno 513. and reigned 20 years. 4. Imerick; his Reign over this King∣dom began Anno 533. and ended 562. in his time was the second General Council held at Constantinople, Anno 553. 5. Ethelbert; This was the first Chri∣stian King of this Kingdom of Kent: see for his Remarkable Actions amongst the petty Monarks, Chap. VI. This King be∣gan
his Reign in the year 562. and reigned 56 years King. 6. Edbald; This King was converted by Laurence Archbishop of Canterbury: he had married his Mother in Law, after his Fathers Death: after his Conversion he sent again for Melitus and Justus to their Bishopricks, who had fled out of the Land during his Idolatry. He began his Reign 618. and reigned 24 years. 7. Ercombert, his Reign began Anno 642. and he reigned 24 years: he suppres∣sed the Temples of Idols, and Comman∣ded the Feast of Lent to be kept. 8. Egbert, He murthered his two Ne∣phews, Ethelred and Ethelbert, casting their Bodies into a River; he began Anno 666. and reigned 9 years. 9. Lothaire, This King was shot through with a Dart in the bloody Battel which Ethelred the Mercian, and Edrick the South-Saxon fought against him; his Reign began the year 675. and lasted 11 years: in his time was the third General Council held at Constantinople; being the Sixt General Council for all Christendom, Agatho being then Bishop of Rome. 10. Edrick, He being slain in the Civil War against the Subjects, left the King∣dom so torn with Dissentions, that after
his Death, it was 6 years without a King: He began his Reign Anno 686. and reign'd 2 years. 11. Withred. Six years after his Bro∣ther's Death, Anno 694. this man was made King; paying a great sum of Mo∣ney to Iuas for it: he reigned thirty three years. 12. Edbert; He began his Reign 727. and reigned 23 years, in the fourth year whereof there appeared two fearful Co∣mets. 13. Ethelbert. This King's Reign began in the year 750. and continued eleven years. 14. Alrick, He was slain in the Bat∣tel again Offa, at Otteford; his Reign began Anno 761. and he reigned 34 years; in his time was the second General Council held at Nice, being the seventh General Coun∣cil of Christendom. 15. Ethelbert; This man usurped the Kingdom, but was afterwards taken Pri∣soner by Kenwolf, and carried captive in∣to Mercia, where afterwards Kenwolf at the Dedication of his Church founded at Winchcomb, at the High Altar, in the pre∣sence of 10 Dukes and 13 Bishops, cleared him: his Reign began 795. and he reigned 3 years.
16. Cuthred; He was made King by Kenwolf, Anno 798. and reigned three years. 17. Baldred; This man began his Reign in the year 806. and after 18 years space was forced to fly his Kingdom, and leave it to Kenwolf King of Mercia, who about the year 827. annexed it to his King∣dom of Mercia. Now come I to the Second King∣dom, which was the Kingdom of South-Saxons. And this contained Sussex and Surry: and had the Successions of 4 Kings: the Kingdom began Ann. 488. continued 133 years, and ended Anno Domini 621. the Kings follow. 1. Ella; This man brought a fresh Supply of Germans to the Relief of his Countrymen, and landed at Shoreham in Sussex, about 34 years after the first co∣ming of the Saxons; and brought his three Sons, Cymen, Plettinger and Cissa with him, but at length was inforced to send for more Aid, to fight the Britains; and then he totally routed them, forcing them into a Wood on the South of Kent, called Andresleger, near the Haven-Lyme, which was 40 miles in length, and 30 in
breadth: and so he made himself first King of the South-Saxon Kingdom: He began his Reign Anno 488. and reigned thirty two years. 2. Cissa; He founded Chichester and Chisbury, and yielded a certain Tribute to Cherdick King of the West-Saxons for the maintenance of his Wars against the Bri∣tains: his Reign began 520, and he reign∣ed, as some account, 76 years. 3. Ethelwolf; This Prince began his Reign Anno 596. and reigned 25 years, he was slain in Battel by Ceadwell, a banish∣ed Prince of the West-Saxons: his Con∣version was by Bishop Wilfride, if we give credite to Bede: but the History of Saint Swithin saith, it was by Berinus Bishop of Dorchester. 4. Barthun and Authun: These two Dukes banishing Ceadwell after Ethel∣wolf's death, were afterwards overcome by him, and Barthun slain, with whom died the Kingdom. And now we proceed to the West-Saxon Kingdom: within whose Limits were reckoned Cornwall, Devon-shire, Dorcet-shire, Somerset-shire, Wilt∣shire, Southampton-shire and Bark∣shire. It began about the year 501, con∣tinued
about 515 years, and ended An∣no 116. and boasted in the Succession of Seventeen Kings, as followeth: to wit, 1. Cherdick; This man was a valiant Ca∣ptain of the Low Country-Germans; and entred this Island about the year 495. he fought a great Battel against the Britains, and slew Natauleon one of their great Princes: This Cherdick was the first West-Saxon King: and began his Reign over that Kingdom, Anno 501. and reigned 33 years. 2. Kenrick; He began to Reign Anno 534. and reigned 26 years: he gave the Britains two great Overthrows, the one at Sheresbury in Wiltshire, and the other at Banbury in Oxford-shire: he was with his Father Cherdick also in several of the Bat∣tels against the Britains. 3. Chewlin; See for what memorable Accidents happened in his time, in the VI. Chapter among the Petty Monarcks; He began his Reign Anno 560. and reigned 33 years. 4. Cearlick; He overthrew his Vncle Chewlin at Wannes-Ditch in Wilt-shire, and so obtained the Kingdom, Anno 593. and reigned 6 years.
5. Chelwolf; He began his Reign the year 598: and being assaulted by the Bri∣tains, Scots and Pickts, after 14 years Reign he died in the Wars. 6. Kingills; This Prince at Beandune fought the Britains, and slew 1046 of them: he made Peace with Penda King of Mercia: and was the first Christian King of the West-Saxons: he was Converted by Berinus, to whom he gave Dorchester; his Reign began Anno 612. and continued about 31 years. 7. Kenwald; He conquered the Bri∣tains at Pennum, but was afterwards dri∣ven out of his Kingdom by Penda King of Mercia, whose Sister he had married and turn'd her away, but being Baptized by Bishop Felix, and receiving his wife again, he received with her his Kingdom also: he began his Reign 643. and reign'd 31 years. 8. Eskwin; His Reign began Anno 675. and continued about 2 years: He fought a great Battel with Wolfere King of Mercia at Bidamheaford, where many Saxons were slain on both sides. 9. Kentwin; This King was a great Scurge to the poor Britains causing them to flye into Rcks and Mountains for Safe∣gard: he began his Reign Anno 677. and reigned 9 years.
10. Ceadwald; He slew Ethelwolf King of the South-Saxons in Battel, and after him Barthun another Prince thereof: he spilt much Christian blood in Kent also; but at length was baptized by Pope Sergi∣us at Rome, and was named Peter: he began his Reign Anno 686: and reigned about two years. 11. Ine. This King began his Reign Anno 688. and reigned 37 years: he gave a great overthrow to the Britains, and fought Cheolred King of Mercia, bring∣ing the South-Saxons Kingdom also into a Province, and annexing it to the West-Saxons Kingdom. He made several good Laws, translated by Mr. Lambert out of the Saxon Language: he founded the Abby of Glastenbury and after went to Rome on Pilgrimage where he died: He caused every housholder that had goods of one kind in his house to the value of twen∣ty pence, to pay the Pope yearly a penny, on Lammas-day, which afterwards was called Peter-pence. 12. Ethellard; In this Kings time ap∣peared two blasing-Stars; he was much emulated by Oswald a Norman; his Reign began Anno Domini 726: and continued fourteen years. 13. Cuthred, He began his Reign An∣no
740: and Reigned fourteen years: he made Peace with Ethelbald King of Mer∣cia, and they both joined in War against the Britains, and gave them a great o∣verthrow: at length Earl Adelm one of his Subjects Rebelled against him. 14. Sigesbert; He caused Earl Cum∣bra to be slain, for telling him of his Vi∣ces and Cruelties towards his Subjects, up∣on which occasion his Subjects Rebelled a∣gainst him, and drove him into the Woods, where he was slain by a Swine∣heard, Ser∣vant to Earl Cumbra; he Reigned about one year, and began his Rule 754. 15. Kenwolf, He began his Govern∣ment 755, and Ruled twenty nine years, he several times overthrew the Britains, but was at length overthrown himself by Offa King of Mercia as he was going to Merton to visit his Paramour; by one Clyto, who for his pains, the next day was rewarded with Death by one Osricus the King's Captain, and all Clyto's followers being 80 men, received the same Doom, and then Osricus took the King's body and buried it at Winchester. 16. Brithrick, This King was unwit∣tingly poisoned by the Queen, he taking the Poison which she had prepared for one of his Minions, whereupon she fled
into France, and there died miserably: se∣veral strange Prodigies appeared in this King's Reign; he began his Reign Anno 784. and reigned 16 years. 17. Egbert; He was the first sole Mo∣narch of England: See more of him in the Seventh Chapter: his Reign began Anno 800. over this Kingdom, and continu∣ed 36 years: after which he reigned 17 years as sole Monarch, having reduced England into a Monarchy, Anno 827. The next Kingdom we come unto, is the East-Saxons, which contained Es∣sex and Middlesex; whose beginning was Anno 522. Continuance 305 years: and its Expiration An. Dom. 827. The Succession of Kings were 14. as fol∣loweth. 1. Erchenwine; He began to Rule over this Kingdom Anno 527. and reigned sixty years. 2. Sledda; This King reigned nine years. 3. Sebert; He was converted by Mile∣tus, the first Bishop of Saint Pauls in Lon∣don, which Church was founded by Sebert, and Ethelbert King of Kent: here for∣merly had stood a Temple dedicated to Di∣ana:
This King began his Reign Anno 596. and reigned 21 years: he was the first Chri∣stian King, of this Kingdom. 4. Sered; He began his Reign Anno 617. and reigned 6 years: he banished Miletus for prohibiting his Prophanation of the Lord's Table: and was afterwards slain by Kingills the West-Saxon King. 5. Sigesbert; This King began his Reign Anno 623. and reigned 23 years. 6. Sigebert; He was Baptized by Bi∣shop Finnan, through the Perswasion of Oswye King of Northumberland: and ha∣ving too much Clemency, two of his Bre∣thren murthered him, after he had reig∣ned 15 years: he began his Reign Anno 646. 7. Swithelm; He began his Reign Anno 661. and reigned 3 years: he was bapti∣zed by Bishop Cedda; Edelwald King of the East-Angles being his Godfather. 8. Sighere; He turn'd Apostate, but being brought to the Faith again by the In∣dustry of Wolfere King of the Mercias, he afterwards caused Idolatrous Temples and Altars to be demoloshed: in his time was a great Plague: he began his Reign An∣no 664: and reigned 5 years. 9. Sebba; He changed his Princely Robes into a Religious Habit in the Mona∣stery
of St. Paul's in London; leaving his Kingdom to Sigherd, after he had reigned thirty years: his Reign began Anno 669. 10. Sigherd; he began his Reign Anno 699. and reigned 7 years. 11. Seofrid; his Reign began 706. and he reigned 7 years. 12. Offa; he abandoned his Kingdom, and went to Rome, and was there shorn a Monk, and died: he began his Reign 714. and reigned 8. years. 13. Selred; He began his Reign Anno 722. and reigned 38 years. 14. Suthred; This King was expulsed from the Kingdom, when he had reigned a∣bout 5 years, by Egbert King of the West-Saxons, who made it a Province substitute to his own Kingdom, about the year 827. The Kingdom of Northumberland comes next in order, whose Limits were York-shire, Durham, Lancashire, West∣merland, Cumberland and Northum∣berland: It began 547. continued 379. and ended 926. as it is reckoned by some, though it doth not challenge a Succession of Kings so long: for I finde only the 25 Kings following.
1. Ida and Ella; Their Reign began Anno 547. and continued 42 years; but after the first 15 years thereof were past, then were these five Copartners following all admitted to reign with Ella. They all 5 began their Reigns Anno 562. and reign'd as followeth. 2. Adda, 7 years. 3. Elappea, 5 years. 4. Theodwald, 1 year. 5. Frethulf, 7 years. 6. Theodrick, 7 years. 7. Ethelrick, He began his Reign Anno 589. and reigned 4 years. 8. Ethelfride; He miserably oppressed the Britains, and conquered Edanaden King of the Scots at Degsaston: and the same year Saint Augustine in the midst of Winter, after he had Christned ten thou∣sand English men in the River Swale in York-shire, perceiving his Death to ap∣proach, he thereupon named one Laurence for his Successor. And now Ethelfride marching to West-chester slew there both the British Soldiers, and harmless Monks, and at the Monastery of Bangor he slew between eleven and twelve hundred Monks, and overthrew the British Hoast: he bani∣shed Prince Edwin, who flying to Redwald King of the East-Angles: They two joined
against Ethelfride, and slew him, when he had reigned 33 years. He began his Reign Anno 593. 9. Edwine; After Ethelfride's Death Anno 626. began his Reign, and Reigned about seven years; In his banishment a Vision appeared to him, and he was assu∣red of the Kingdom, if he would turn Christian, which he promised to do; so the Vision left him, laying his hand on Edwines head, bid him remember that sign; but Edwine after he had obtained the Kingdom, forgot his Promise, and could not be drawn to turn Christian, in∣somuch that Paulinus, who had much sollicited him to it, began to dispair of it: so the Vision appeared to Paulinus, and bid him lay his hand on the King's head, and ask him, if he remembred that sign; as soon as Paulinus did this to the King; he was ready to fall down at his Feet; and was presently Baptized by Paulinus at York▪ with many of his Nobles. He cau∣sed Brazen-Dishes to be chained at eve∣ry Fountain, for Passengers to serve them∣selves with Water. 10. Osrick; He began his Reign An∣no 633: and Reigned one year: he was slain by Cadwal a King of the Britains. 11. Oswald; See for the Actions of
this King and the next, chap. the sixt: he began his Reign Anno Domini 634, and reigned 9 years. 12. Oswye; He Reigned 28 years, and began his Reign Anno 643. 13. Egfride; He warred against Ethel∣red King of Mercia, but not without great loss to himself; and invading the I∣rish also, his fortune being worse there, he was slain in the Mountains, when he had Reigned fifteen years, beginning his Rule from the year 671. 14. Alfrid; He began his Reign six hundred eighty six, and Reigned twenty years. 15. Osred; He being a great Whore∣master, not forbearing vailed Nuns, no person being secure from his Lust, he was at length Murthered by his two kins∣men Kenred and Oswick the two suc∣ceeding Kings; his Reign began Anno 706, and lasted 9 years. 16. Kenred; his Reign began 716, he reigned two years. 17. Oswick, he began his Reign An∣no 718, and reigned 11 years. 18. Ceolnulfe, he, after he had Reign∣ed eight years, became a Monk in Holly I∣sland: in his time, the last year of his Reign, appeared two great blazing Stars,
one before Sun-set, and the other after Sun-rising, which continued a Fort∣night. 19. Egbert; He began his Reign An∣no 738, and after twenty years Reign turn∣ed Monk. 20. Osxulph; He began his Reign 758, and was Murthered by his Servants at Micklewoughton, when he had Reigned 1 year. 21. Edilwald; He was slain by Alured his Successor: in the sixth year of his Reign: he began his Reign Anno seven hundred fifty nine. 22. Alured; He began his Reign 765, and when he had reigned nine years was expulsed the Kingdom by his Subjects. 23. Ethelred, He was banished the Kingdom by two of his Nobles Edilbald and Herebert, about the fifth year of his Reign: and about sixteen years after re∣turning again, his Government being mis∣liked, he was after seven years second reign slain by his Subjects, after whose Death the Inhabitants for thirty years were ruled by Vsurpers; He began his Reign Anno 774. 24. Alfwald; He began his Reign 778, and was murthered by the Conspiracy of Siga, in the 11 year of his Reign.
25. Osred, He began his Reign An∣no 789, and when he had reigned 1 year, he was expulsed the Kingdom by his Sub∣jects. And now we come to Mercia, which large Kingdom contained the Counties of Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln, Northampton, Leicester, Derby, Not∣tingham, Oxford, Cheshire, Shrop∣shire, Gloucester-shire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Warwick-shire, Bucking∣hamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartford∣shire; It began in the year 582: it continued about 292 years, and ended 874. the Succession of Kings, were these 20 following. 1. Crida, This King began his Reign Anno 582, and reigned 12 years: he first framed this large Kingdom. 2. Wibba, He began his Reign 594, and reigned twenty years, he thinking the Kingdom too little, inlarged it, incroach∣ing upon his Neighbours the Britains. 3. Ceorle, His Reign Commenced Anno 614, and continued ten years. 4. Penda, He fe in Battel Edwine and Oswald Kings of Northumberland, Sigesbert, Egfrid, and Anna Kings of the East-angles, and forced Redwald King of
the West-Saxons out of his Country, but at length he was slain in Battel by Oswye King of Northumberland, after he had reigned about thirty two years: he began his Reign Anno 624. 5. Peada or Wedda; He was the first Christian King of Mercia, and about the third year of his Reign he was Murthered either by the Treachery of his Wife or Mo∣ther: his Reign began Anno six hundred fifty six. 6. Wolfere: See the Actions of this King and the seven succeding Kings, among the petty Monarchs, chap. 6. He began his Reign Anno 659, and Reigned seventeen years. 7. Ethelred, Began 675, reigned 29 years. 8. Kenred, Began 704, and reigned 4 years. 9. Chelred, Began 709, reigned 7 years. 10. Ethelbald, Began 716, reigned 42 years. 11. Offa, Began 758, reigned 39 years. 12. Egfrid, Began 797, reigned 4▪ Months. 13. Kenwolfe, Began 797, reigned 22 years.
14. Kenelm; He was Murthered by Askbert this Teacher, through the insti∣gation of Quendride the Kings own Sister; he began his Reign Anno 819, and reigned about 5 months. 15. Ceolwolfe; By the Instigation of Bernulfe, after one year's Rule, he was ex∣pulsed by his Subjects. 16. Bernulfe, Having gotten the King∣dom, had but little comfort in the injoy∣ment, first fighting Egbert the West-Sax∣on, and afterwards the East-Angles, by whom he was slain in the third year of his Reign; he began to Rule Anno 821. 17. Ludecan; He began his Reign 824, and in his second year was slain by Egbert and the East-Angles. 18. Witlafe; He was also overcome by King Egbert the West-Saxon in the thir∣teenth year of his Reign, which began Anno 826. 19. Berthulf; He began his Reign An∣no 839, and reigned 13 years; And then was forced to leave his Country by the cru∣el usage of the Danes. 20. Burdred; He, after several fights with the Danes, at length became Victor, but fresh supplies landing again, he was then forced to fly out of the Land: he be∣gan
to Reign 852, and reigned about twen∣ty two years. Now we come to the last of the se∣ven Kingdoms, which was called the East-Angles: This contained Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge and Ely Island: It began Anno 575, continued 353 years, and ended Anno 914, and had a Succession of 15 Kings as followeth. 1. Ʋffa; He began to Rule 575, and reigned 7 years. 2. Titulus; He began his Reign, Anno five hundred eighty three, and reigned a∣bout thirty two years. 3. Redwald; See his Actions among the petty Monarchs, chap. 6. his Reign be∣gan in the year 616, and he reigned 8 years. 4. Erpenwald, He began his Reign 624, and Reigned twelve years, he was brought to the Faith of Christ, through the perswa∣sions of Edwine King of Northumberland, for which cause he was murthered by one Richebert: he was the second Christian King of this Kingdom, and Redwald the first. 5. Sigebert; He began his Rule 636, and Reigned two years, he abandoned the Court and Country during his Father Redwald's Reign; and afterwards return∣ing
out of France, he brought the light of the Gospel into his Dominions, and after two years Reign, shore himself a Monck, and resigned his Kingdom; he was after∣wards slain in Battel by wicked Penda. 6. Egrick; He began to Reign 638, and reigned four years: he was slain by Penda, and so was his Successor Anna. 7. Anna, Begun 642, Reigned 12 years. 8. Ethelbert, He was slain in Battel, by Oswine King of Northumberland, for siding with Penda: he began his Reign 654, and reigned about two years. 9. Edelwald, Began 656, reigned 8 years. 10. Aldulfe, Began 664, reigned 19 years. 11. Elswolfe, Began 683, reigned 7 years. 12. Beorne, Began 690, reigned 24 years. 13. Ethelred, Began 714, reigned 35 years. 14. Ethelbert, He was sent for by Offa the Mercian King, who promised him his Daughter, but instead thereof he gave him Death to Imbrace: he being murthered at the instigation of Quindride the Queen:
He began his Reign 749, and reigned 45 years. 15. Edmund, He was besieged in Framingham Castle by the Danes, and being taken Prisoner by them, he was bea∣ten with cudgels and scourged, but Ed∣mund still calling on the name of the Lord Jesus, it so inraged them, that they took him and tied him to a stake and shot him to Death with their Arrows, and after∣wards they cut off his head, and threw it in a Bush: he began his Reign Anno 794. And though Authors agree not how long he Reigned, yet I shall agree with the end∣ing of him to end this 4 Chapter. CHAP. V. Of the British Princes, who withstood the Saxons Conquest, being accounted 13, as followeth. 1. VOrtigern, This man being cho∣sen King of the Britains (af∣ter he had first treacheroufly made away Constantius his Predecessor) he intended the like to Au∣relius,
Ambrosius, Ʋter Pendragon, who were the Brother of Constantius, whereupon they were conveyed to their Friends in Lit∣tle-Britain for their safety against his Ty∣ranny: And now Vortigern being sadly pestered with the Picts and Scots, he sends for the Saxons to his Aide, and having through their assistance overcome his Ene∣mies: Hengist the Saxon Leader, getting into favour with the King, begged of him so much ground as an Ox-hide would com∣pass which was easily granted: so the same being cut into thongs; it incircled so much ground that a Fort was built upon it called Thong-Castle, where Hengist settled him∣self. And now Hengist hath more of his Friends waiting upon him, and amongst the rest comes Rowena his Daughter, with whom Vortigern was much taken, turns away his lawful Christian Wife, and takes Rowena; and afterwards his own Daugh∣ter begotten on her, becomes his Bedfellow, on whom he begot a Son called Faustus, who is said, did weep himself blind for the Abo∣mination of his Parents: for those things, and his too much kindness to the Saxons, after sixteen years Reign he was deposed by his Subjects, and his Son Vortigern made
King: after whose Death, he was restored again, but falling again into his wicked courses after six years second Reign, he with his incestuous Wife were both consu∣med to▪ Ashes in a Castle of his own found∣ing in Wales, which was set on fire by Au∣relius Ambrosius his Successour: This King began his Reign Anno 438, and reigned in all 22 years. 2. Vortimer; He reigned prudently 4 years, and won four Set-Battels against the Saxons, and put them to such a strait, that they were forced to betake themselves into the Isle of Thanet, the place of their first landing, and then petitioned to return in∣to their own Country, leaving their Fa∣milies and Possessions behind them: but least this King should prove the utter van∣quisher of the Saxons, he was by Rowena their favourite poysoned: And now Vor∣tigern enters upon his second government; and Hengist now returning again, the King with his British Nobles makes head against him, and a Treaty being agreed up∣on, and Salisbury plain the place appointed, there the British Nobles were treache∣rously slain by Hengist's Souldiers. And now the King with his incestuous Wife are taken and immured up in a Castle in Wales, as is shewed before.
3. Aurelius Ambrosius; This Man overcame Hengist the Saxon in York-shire, and cut of his head, and took his Son Octa Prisoner; but afterwards falling sick at Winchster, Passentius the yongest Son of Vortigern, sent one Eopa in shew of a Physitian, who gave him Poyson instead of Physick, of which he died, and was buri∣ed in Coria Gigantum, or Stone-henge in Salisbury-plain, which he by the help of Merlin's inchantment (as it is said) brought out of Ireland and placed here in memory of the British Nobles here slain; Ʋter-Pendragon was here buried also: Aurelius Ambrosius gave name to the adjacent Town calling it Ambrose-bury now Amesbury. This King began his Reign Anno 466, and reigned thirty two years. 4. Ʋter Pendragon, He was Brother to Aurelius Ambrosius, and encountred the Saxons, taking Ebusa and Octa two of Hengest's Sons Prisoners, but afterwards falling into unlawful Love with Lady I∣gren the Duke of Cornwall's Wife, in the mean time the two Prisoners escaped from their Keepers, and advanced into the Field again, where they were met again by the King, and Ebusa, and Octa slain, and their Saxons put to the Rout; and short∣ly
after Ʋter died of Poyson put into a Well of which he used to drink, having reigned 18 years: his Reign began Anno 498. 5. Arthur; He was Son to Vter Pen∣dragon begotten on Lady Igren; this is him of whom so many Incredible things are re∣ported in the Monkish Legendaries, that they make his true Atchievements questio∣nable: He warred against the Saxons and chased Colgerne their Captain, from his Camp in Northumberland, to York, from whence he escaped into Germany: and re∣turned with 70 Sail of Ships into Scotland: Whereupon Arthur sent for his Nephew Howel, King of Little Britain, who came in person to his Aid. He fought twelve Battels with the Sax∣ons: the 1. at the Mouth of the River Gleyn, the 2, 3, 4, and 5, on Dougla's Banks: the 6, on the River Bassus; the 7, in the Wood Callidon or Celidon near Lin∣coln: the 8, near the Castle Guinion: the 9, in Wales: the 10, at Rithowood: the 11, on the Hill Agned Castergonion: and 12, at Baden-hills, where he slew 140 Saxons with his own hands, some say 800. The Reliques of this Arthur's Round Table are shown at Winchester: and of the twenty four Seats thereof amongst the
Welsh, Lancelot, Tristram and Gawen, were of his chiefest Knights; which Names are commonly still given with us in Bap∣tism: he began his Reign Anno 516, and reigned 26 years: he was buried, as some Authors affirm, in the Vale of Avelon, be∣sides Glastenbury; and about 600 years af∣ter, in King Henry the II. time, his body was taken up and translated into the Church. 6. Constantine; He was son to Cador Duke of Cornwall, and Cosin to Arthur: He slew the two Sons of Mordred King of the Picts, the one at the Altar in St. Paul's London; the other at Winchester, to which places they were fled for Sanctuary: but himself was afterwards slain by Aure∣lius Conatus his Successor: he began his Reign Anno 542. and reigned 3 years. 7. Aurelius Conatus; This man put se∣veral of his Subjects to death, imprisoned his Vncle, and slew his two Sons; for no cause at all, but because they were lawful Heirs between him and the Crown: he be∣gan his Reign Anno 545. and reigned 33 years. 8. Vortiporus; He is recorded by some to have fought several Battels with the Sa∣xons, and to be a Valiant Defender of his Country: but Guildas accuses him of
Murthers on his own Kin, and Adulteries; He began his Reign Anno 578. and reign'd 3 years. 9. Malgo Canonus, Nephew to the last King: he is branded with the sin of Sodo∣my, and the murder of his Vncle: And Guildas calls him a Tawny Butcher, a Bear, a Contemner of Religion, and an Oppressor of the Clergy: words as unfit for a Clergy-man to give, as a King to bear. Some say, That hereupon he out of Re∣morse of Conscience betook himself to a Monastery; but quickly threw off his Cowl again, and ended his life in his former de∣sperate Courses: He was a comely person, and began his Reign Anno 581. and reign'd 5 years. 10. Careticus; He was forced to fly in∣to Chichester for his safety, to which place the Saxons and one Gurmund a great Pi∣rate followed him, and by a Stratagem of tying fire to the feet of Sparrows (they lighting amongst some dry Straw) set the City on fire and consumed it: But Careti∣cus escaping hence, ended his Life in the Mountains in Wales, whither he was fled: He began his Reign Anno 586. and reign∣ed 3 years. 11. Cadwan; This Man, after 24 years Civil Dissention, was made King: during
which Stirs, Augustine the Monk sent hi∣ther by Pope Gregory, to convert the Sax∣ons, carrying himself too high at a Meet∣ing with the British Bishops, at a place thereupon called Austin's-Oak in Worce∣ster-shire, no Agreement could be made amongst them; upon which Account (through Austin's means, as is thought) a Massacre was executed upon the harmless Monks at Bangor, 2000 of them being slain by the wicked Ethelfride King of Northumberland: Whereupon Cadwan and Ethelfride met in the Field for Bat∣tel, but a Peace was concluded on, and A∣mity continued during these King's lives: This King began his Reign Anno 613. and reigned 22 years. 12. Cadwallo; He was Son to Cadwan, he warred strongly against the Saxons, and joined with Penda the Pagan King of the Mercians, who together slew good King Edwine of Northumberland, and his Son Prince Offride: the two Apostates also Os∣rick and Eaufride Kings of Deira and Ber∣nicia were slain by Cadwallo: He began his Reign Anno 635. and reigned 48 years. 13. Cadwallader, Son to Cadwallo: In his time there was such a Famine and Pe∣stilence, that the Living were scarce able to
bury the Dead, which continued the space of 11 years, so that the Land became de∣solate: and the King left the Land, and went to his Cosin Allan King of Little Bri∣tain in France. The Saxons taking Ad∣vantage of these Miseries, lamentably op∣pressed the poor Britains; to whose Aid Cadwallader was intended once to return, but afterwards being over-swayed by con∣trary thoughts, and diverted by a Dream, he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and recei∣ving the Habit of Religion from Pope Ser∣gius, he there died and was interred: with whom died all the Hopes of the Britains: and so the Saxons became Soveraign Lords and Masters of this Island: This King be∣gan his Reign Anno 685. and reigned about 4 years.
CHAP. VI. Of the Saxon Princes who incroached upon one anothers Territories, and so became Petty Monarcks of some certain Coun∣tries only in Britain: They are accoun∣ted to be about 14, as followeth. 1. CHeuline; He fought against Ethel∣bert King of Kent: and at Wim∣bledon defeated his Army: and flew two of his Dukes, and this is said to be the first Battel that was among the Saxons them∣selves: he gave a great Overthrow also to the Britains shortly after at Bedford, and surprised four of their Towns, Ligan∣burgh, Ailsbury, Bensington and Evesham. And about six years after he fought the Britains again at Deorham, and slew Coinmagil, Candigan and Farmnagil three of the British Kings, surprising also three of their Cities, Gloucester, Bath, and Ci∣rencester. And not long after this, encoun∣tring the Britains again at Wodnesbeoth,
he was there put to flight, and his Son Prince Cuth slain: this Victory was obtained a∣agaist him by the help of the Saxons under the Command of Cealrick, Chewline's Ne∣phew. This King began his Reign Anno 561, reigned 33 years, to whom we give the place of the first petty Monarch. 2. Ethelbert; In this King's time it was that Gregory Arch-Deacon of Rome, did see some Youths of this Island there to be sold, and seeing them very fair, he demanded from whence they came? it was told him from Britain, out of the Province De Ira; Ah! said he, It is great pity but their Country should be de∣livered de Ira Dei, from the wrath of God: And afterwards, Gregory being made Pope, he sent Augustine the Monk, and forty others in his company to this Island, about the year 596. And their first Address was to this King Ethelbert, who allowed them Canterbury for their part, with Liberty to convert as many of his Subjects as they could; so here they Preached, and it is reported that ten thousand were Baptized by them in one day. And the King seeing their holy Lives and Doctrine, was also converted and Baptized, Anno 596, and about the 36 year of his Age and fourth
year of his Reign, and afterwards he be∣stowed Canterbury on Austine. After this Austine calls a Synod, and 7 British Bishops came to the Synod, bu re∣fused to associate themselves with Austine, they disgusting his Pride; so shortly after this a great contention arose between Au∣gustine and these British Bishops, about the Feast of Easter, but at length they were reconciled, and it was agreed that the Feast should be kept the first Sabbath after the first full Moon in the first month, which was afterwards Ratified by the Nicene Council: This King was the only means of the Conversion of Sebert King of the East-Angles, and assisted him in the building of St. Pauls Church in London; this Ethelbert built also the Church of St. Andrews in Rochester. And, at his instigation, a Citizen of London built the Church of St. Peter on the West-side of London, in a place called the Island of Thorns, now called Westmin∣ster: and it was so called, because this Min∣ster stood Westward of St. Pauls: some say this St. Peters was built by King Sebert, and being grown ruinous in tract of time, Edward the Confessor Rebuilt it, and li∣berally endowed it. This Ethelbert, was the fift King of Kent, and second petty Monarch, he be∣gan
his Reign Anno 595, as Monarch, and reigned 23 years, having reigned thirty three years before this, King of Kent. 3. Redwald, This King turned an Apo∣state after he had received Baptism; and Edwine King of Northumberland flying to him for succour, he intended to Murther him, but was with-held by his Wife; And afterwards giving his Assistance to Edwine against Ethelfride of Northumberland, they gave him Battel and slew him; and Ed∣wine gained thereby the Kingdom and Crown. This Redwald was third King of the East-Angles, and 3 Monarch, he began his Reign Anno 616, and reigned eight years. 4. Edwine, This King subdued all the Costs of Britain, and added the Islands of the Hebrides to his Dominions, but the then West-Saxons King envying Edwine's success sent one Eumerus to murther him, who being with the King on Easter day, and intending to run him thorow, he was pre∣vented by one Lilla, who interposing his body was there slain; this gave occasion to Edwine afterwards to march against the West-Saxons, and to destroy all those who had a hand in this Conspiracy. And now the King causes all the Idol
Temples to be destroyed, and received Baptism from Paulinus, at York, in the Cathedral there, which was then of Wood, but he caused it to be built of fair stone Anno Domini 627, and made Paulinus Bishop thereof: but at length this King was slain in Battel by Penda King of Mer∣cia, and Cadwallo King of the Britains; at which time Prince Ofride, Edwin's Son, was also slain. This Edwine was 9 King of Northum∣berland, and the fourth petty Monarch; he began his Reign Anno 626, and reigned 7 years. 5. Oswald, He slew Cadwallo King of the Britains, and the greatest part of his Army at Deniseburn. And through this King's means, and Adian a Scotch Bishop, abundance of his Subjects received Baptism in Landisfarn or Holly-Island, where the Bishop Preached in Scotch, and the King did interpret to the People. But the King af∣terwards going against Penda the Mercian King, he was slain in Battel at Oswaltree in Shrop-shire, and Penda, after he was slain, (malice raging after Death) caused him to be torn in pieces. This Oswald was the eleventh King of Northumberland, and fifth petty Monarch,
he began his Reign Anno 634, and reign∣ed nine years. 6. Oswye, He fought with Oswine of Deira, at Wilfairs-Down, and made him fly the Field, and repairing to one Earl Hundwald for safety, he was by him be∣trayed into the hands of Oswye, who flew him: he also joined Battel with Ethelbald Son of Oswald, and Egbert King of the East-Angles, who had united their forces with Penda King of Mercia, and all these he encountred near Leeds in York-shire, where he gave them a great Overthrow, slaying Penda and Ethelbert, and thirty Dukes and Leaders, causing also Ethelbald to make use of his heels for his safety, being put to flight. It was this King that decided the long Controversy for the celebration of Easter, and founded the Cathedral Church in Litchfield for a Bishop's Sea. This Oswye was the twelfth King of Nor∣thumberland, and sixth petty Monarch; he began his Reign Anno 643, and reign∣ed 28 years. 7. Wolfere, he conquer'd the West-Saxons and won the Isle of Wight from King Re∣mald, and gave it to Edilwach King of the South-Saxons, whose God-Father he was when he was Baptized. Some say, He gave it to Sigesbert King of the East-Angles, up∣on
Condition that he should be Baptized, This Wolfere before his Conversion slew his own two Sons, because they were Bapti∣zed contrary to his knowledg; but re∣penting afterwards, he caused all Heathe∣nish Temples to be converted into Church∣es for the true Worship of God. It is said that he first founded the Abby-Church in Peterburgh. This Wolfere was the sixth King of Mercia, and seventh petty Monarch, he began his Reign as Monarch Anno 671, and reigned 4 years. 8. Ethelred; Much Blood was spilt in his Wars against Kent, and neither Church∣es nor Abbies escaped his Fury, for he destroyed that Kingdom. In his time were two blazing Stars seen for three Months together; at that time, he, at the instance of his Wife, put Wilfridus out of his Bishoprick of Northumberland; and at last resigned his Crown to his Nephew Ken∣red being lawful heir to it, from whom he had usurped it: and being strucken with remorse of Conscience for the Blood he had spilt, he turned Monk, and died. This Ethelred was the 7 King of Mercia, and 8 petty Monarch: He began his Reign Anno 675, and reigned twenty nine years.
9. Kenred, After four years peaceable Reign, he assigned his Crown to his Cosin Ethelred, and took his journy to Rome, with Offa King of the East-Saxons, and Ed∣wine Bishop of Winchester, where he was shorn Monk, and died. This Kenred was the eight King of Mer∣cia, and ninth petty Monarch, his Reign began Anno 704, and he reigned four years. 10. Chelred, He had a troublesome Reign, being constantly in War against Inas the West-Saxon, who was a great emula∣tor of his Glory. This Chelred was 9 King of Mercia, and tenth petty Monarch. He began his Reign Anno 709, and reigned 7 years. 11. Ethelbald, He besieged Somerton, and won it, and invading the Northumbers, brought away great spoil, which gave oc∣casion to Cuthred the West-Saxon to fight him, giving him the foyl at Burford; and afterwards encountring Cuthred a second time, he was treacherously slain by his own Subjects near Tanworth in Warwick-shire, at the procurement of one Bernred one of their Leaders, who thought thereby to gain the Crown to himself. This King founded the Monastery of Crowland, as some Authors affirm.
This Ethelbald was the tenth King of Mercia, and eleventh petty Monarch: he began to Reign Anno 716, and reigned 42 years. 12. Offa, His first War was with Al∣rick King of Kent, whom he slew at Otte∣ford; and afterwards marching from South to North, he made Havock of all be∣fore him to Humber, and at his return overthrew Kenwolf and his West-Saxons, near Merton, whither he was going to visit his Paramour: he caused a great Ditch to be cast between England and Wales, which is still called Offa's ditch, and the Welsh pre∣suming to throw down some part thereof, he thereupon entred their Territories with an Army, and slew Marmodius their King, and all his Associates. His last Wars were against the Danes, who had invaded England, and were by him with their no small loss forced back to their Ships: to this King was sent a Book of the Decrees of the Second Council of Nice, for a present, from Charles King of France; And now growing weary of his Government, he made his Son Egfride King, and gave the Pope Peter-pence out of his Dominions, after the example of Inas: And so going to Rome, he gave Pope Ha∣drian the first ample and Rich Gifts for ca∣nonizing
Albane the Protomartyr of England for a Saint. At his return he built the Monastery of St. Abane, and in Testimony of Repentance for the Blood he had spilt, he gave the tenth part of his goods to Church-men and the poor. This Offa was the eleventh Mercian King, and twelfth petty Monarch; his Reign began Anno 758. and he ruled 39 years. 13. Egfride, He restored the Church to all her antient Priviledges, which his Fa∣ther had deprived her of. This Egfride was twelfth King of Mer∣cia, and 13 petty Monarch: his Reign was short, about four Months, only he be∣gan his Reign Anno Domini 797. 14. Kenwolfe, He warred against Kent, and took Ethelbert (the third King of Kent of that name) Prisoner, giving the King∣dom to Cuthred: but afterwards build∣ing a goodly Church at Winchcomb in Glucestershire, upon the day of the De∣dication, he led Pren to the high Altar, and there in the presence of 13 Bishops, and ten Dukes, and many other Nobles, he released him, and set him at liberty. And now each of these petty Monarchs having striven which of them could extend and inlarge his Limits furthest, at length
this succeeding Egbert brought the seven headed Fountain of their Heptarchy, to run in one Channel of an intire Mo∣narchy. This Kenwolf was the thirteenth King of Mercia, and last of the petty Monarchs. He began his Reign Anno Domini seven hundred ninety seven, and reigned twenty two years. CHAP. VII. Of those 15 Saxon Princes, who were ac∣counted sole Monarchs of this King∣dom of ENGLAND. 1. EGbert, He gained Rule over all the seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, and so became sole Monarch of England, which none of them before him ever was: he had fourteen years War with the Cornish and Welsh, and took West-Chester their chief Hold from them, making a strict Law a∣gainst all those should dare to enter over Offa's Ditch, or set one Foot within his English Dominions; He slew Bernulf
King of Mercia in Battel, and drove the King of Kent out of his Kingdom, the East∣angles, and East-Saxons also submitted to him, with the South-Saxons also, where∣upon he caused himself to be Crowned ab∣solute Monarch at Winchester. And this Monarchy continued in the Saxons, till the Danes first got, and then lost it again, and the Saxon's issue upon the next en∣trance thereof failing, it then fell to the Normans. This Egbert first gave the name of ENGLAND to this Country, and named the Inhabitants English. In the fourteenth year of his Monarchy, the Danes with 33 Ships landed in England, to whom he gave Battel but had the worst of the day, loosing two of his chief Captains and two Bishops, hardly escaping himself. And the second year after they landed in Wales, with whom joined the Welsh, but at this time (fortune not always frowning) he overcame both parties; and in the last of his Reign, the Danes sacked the Island of Shippy near Kent, and with much ado were expelled. This Egbert was the 17 King of the West-Saxons, and first sole Monarch of England; He began his Reign as Monarch Anno 819, and reigned 17 years.
2. Ethelwolf; This King was made Bishop of Winchester before his Father Eg∣bert's Death, and was in a manner constrai∣ned by his Clergy to take upon him the Government. And so he bestowed his Bishoprick on Swithin his Tutor: after several Bickerings with the Danes, at length, he gave them a great overthrow at Ocley; he freed Church Lands from all Tribute, and regal Services. And going to Rome, he there confirmed Peter-Pence, and at his return he gave yearly to Rome 300 Marks, for a requital of his kind re∣ception there. This Ethelwolf was eldest Son to Egbert, and the 2 sole Monarch of England. He be∣gan his Reign Anno 837, and reigned about 20 years. 3. Ethelbald, He was eldest Son to E∣thelwolf, by his first Wife Osburga his Butler's Daughter: he was with his Father in several of the Battels against the Danes; but all his good and valiant Actions were blasted by his taking of Judith his Stepmo∣ther (the King of France his Daughter, and his Fathers second Wife) to his Im∣braces; for he was suddenly snatch away by the hand of Providence, for this ince∣stuous Marriage: after whose Death, Lady Judith returning to her Father, was in∣tercepted
by the way, and forced by Bald∣wine Forrester of Ardema, who at length appeasing her Father, was by him made Earl of Flanders: from whom, and this Judith descended Maud the Wife of our William the Conqueror. This Ethelbald was the third sole Mo∣narch of England. He began his Reign Anno Domini 857, and reigned two years. 4. Ethelbert, He was never out of Wars, but constantly pestered with those devouring Locusts the Danes. And land∣ing one time they destroyed Winchester, but a great part of them were slain before they could recover their Ships again. This Ethelbert was second Son of Ethel∣wolf, and fourth sole Monarch of England: he began to Rule Anno 860, and Ruled 5 years. 5. Ethelred; The Danes in his time began to over-run the whole Country, and being Pagans spoiled all before them, pul∣ling down Monasteries and Abbyes, and defiling the Virgins, to evade which Dis∣grace the Virgins of Coldingham cut off their own Noses and upper lips, to make themselves appear distastful to these lea∣cherous Pagans. These cruel Fellows under the Command of Hungar and Hub∣ba
their two Dukes, in their savage Rage fired the City of York, and martyr'd St. Ed∣mund King of the East-angles: but Ethel∣red at length gave them a great overthrow, slaying one of their Kings, nine Earls, and an infinite number of common Soldiers: but about fourteen days after the Danes put the King to Flight at Basing; and gi∣ving him Battel again at Merton, about 2 Months after, they obtained the Victory, wounding the King also, of which after∣wards he died. In the third year of this Kings Rule was the fourth general Coun∣cil of Constantinople, under Pope Hadrian the Second. This was the eighth general Council of Christendom. This Ethelred was the Third Son of E∣thelwolf, and fifth Sole Monarch of Eng∣land: and began his Reign Anno 866. and reigned 6 years. 6. Elfride; He fought 7 Battels with the Danes in one year, and his Predecessor 9: These Danes so sore oppressed the King, that he was forced to fle into the Woods and Desart Places, where righting of his Bow and Arrows in a poor Cottage, he was sharply blamed by the House-wife for letting a Cake burn on the Hearth for want of turning: But after this putting himself into the habit of a Musitian, he
went playing up and down in the Danes Tents, and taking notice of their sluggish Security; he returned and gathered toge∣ther his scattered forces; and entring the Danes Tents before they were aware, he made a great slaughter of them, and took Rafan their Danish Banner, which had a Raven of Needle-Work in it, that had good Fortune ever attendant. And now Hal∣den a Danish Commander landing in Wales was by the Devonshire Men slain, at a place near Exeter bearing his name, and 818 of his followers: after this the Danes sued to the King for Peace, which was grant∣ed, but not long continued. This King caused all thieves to be bani∣shed, and divided his Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds, and Tythings: It is said, That Gold-Bracelets were fastned to the Posts in Cross-wayes, and that none were so bold as to take them away: He is repor∣ted to have divided the Natural Day into three parts: Eight hours whereof he spent in Prayers and Contemplation; Eight hours in the Affairs of the Kingdom; and Eight hours in Provision for himself. He founded the first Common School in Ox∣ford, as Authors affirm, which is now cal∣led Ʋniversity Colledge. This Elfride was fourth Son of Ethel∣wolf,
and the Sixth Sole Monarch of Eng∣land. He began his Reign Anno 872. and reigned 29 years. 7. Edward; A Rebellion was raised against this King by his Nephew Ethel∣wald: in this King's time, one John Patrick Erigena, a Britain, writ a Book about the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which was afterwards condemned by the Pope, and he received Martyrdom for his Reward. This King built the Castle of Hartford, and at St. Edmund's Ditch he fought the Danes, and was overcome: but they lost two of their Kings Ethelwald and Crochricus: and encountring again at Wodnesfield, there the fortune of the day fell to the King, and he slew the two Pagan Kings Cowilfus and Healadin and the two Earls Ʋter and Scurfa, and many thousands of the Danes besides: Edrick King of the East-Angles was also slain by his own Subjects, after this King had vanquished his Army. This Edward was the eldest Son of El∣fride, and the Seventh Sole Monarch of England: He began to rule Anno 901. and ruled 24 years. 8. Ethelstane: He is said to be the first annointed King  this Island: Elfred a Norman rebelling  and sent to Rome to  Edwin
the King's Brother was slain, the King through some Jealousies consenting there∣unto, but afterwards Repenting the Fact, caused the Procurer thereof to suffer Death. And now Anlafe the Dane dis∣guising himself like an Harper, entred the King's Tent, and returning, thought to have surprized the King, but getting Intelli∣hence hereof, he removed his Tent: and a Bishop, new come to the Camp, pitched there: so Anlafe coming at night to sur∣prize the Tent, the Bishop hearing, start∣ed up, and so manfully laid about him, that he slew five Petty Kings, twelve Dukes, and a great number of Soldiers: but at last (pity it was so) was slain himself: And the King afterwards passing into Scotland, he Offers his Knife, for good Luck's sake, to John of Beverlye: Subdues the whole Kingdom of Scotland, makes a miraculous Dint in a Stone at Dun-bar, with one stroak of his Sword, of an Ell deep, to testifie his Right to that Kingdom: Near Win∣chester, as the Story goes, The King was challenged, by the insulting Danes, to pro∣vide a Champion to encounter one COL∣BRON a Danish Gyant, whom they held invincible: and none of the King's men daring to fight him; he got a Pilgrim from among the Beggars (as he was directed in
his Sleep) that entred the Lists, and slew the Gyant: and this proved to be Guy of Warwick, of whose Vallor, and the Faith∣fulness of his Wife Felice, Tradition hath been very prodigal. At Long-run the King became Victor of his Enemies, and several Kings sent him Presents, Hugh, King of France, sent him the Sword of Constantine the Great, which had in the Hilt thereof one of the Nails that fastned CHRIST to the Cross; he sent also Constantine's Spear, be∣ing the same that Longinus pierced CHRIST's side with, when he hung on the Cross; and with it, a piece of the Thor∣ny Crown also: And Otho the Emperor sent the King a Lanskip richly set with precious Stones: The King of Norway sent him a great Ship richly gilt, with pur∣ple Sails: This King caused the BIBLE to be turned into English. This Ethelstane was the eldest Son to Edward, and the Eighth sole Monarch of England: He began his Reign anno 925. and reign'd 15 years. 9. Edmund; He was much imployed in warring against the Danes, and fought several Battels with them: He caused the Eyes of the two Sons of Dunmail to be put out for their Rebellion: He was Author
of several of those Laws translated by Ma∣ster Lambert: he was Crown'd at King∣stone near London, and made King there∣of, and so were Edwye, Edred and Ethel∣red his Successors. But on a time, un∣happily interposing his Body between two Duellists, he was run thorow: He be∣stowed Northumberland on Malcom King of Scotland. This Edmund was fifth Son to King Ed∣ward, and ninth Sole Monarch of England: He began his Reign Anno 940, and reign∣ed 6 years. 10. Edred; In his time Anlafe began to invade England again (being animated under hand by Wolstan Arch-Bishop of York) and was made King of Northum∣berland by the Subjects there: but after se∣veral Skirmishes between Edred and him, at length he grew distasteful to the People, and so they dis-robed him of his borrow'd Honour, and left him in statu quo prius. The King in his March to Northumber∣land against Anlafe, spoiled all with Fire and Sword, and burnt the Abby of Rippon: But at his Return, he was basely set upon in the Rear of his Army, and several of his Men slain before the rest could face-about; which Plot was devised against him by Wol∣stan Arch-Bishop of York. This King
made St. Germans in Cornwall a Bishop's Sea, which was afterwards translated to Cridington, by Canutus the Dane, and at last setled at Exceter by Edward the Con∣fessor. This Edred was the 10 Sole Monarch of England: his Reign began Anno 946. and he reigned 9 years. 11. Edwye; He is reported to have a∣bused a Ladie's Chastity in the face of his Council: Monks were expelled from their places by him, and married Priests put in their Rooms. He also banished Dunstan into Flanders. This Edwye was eldest Son of Edmund, and eleventh Sole Monarch of England: He began to rule Anno 955. and ruled 4 4 years. 12. Edgar; He had Peace with the Danes: and in his time some Divines in Oxford were branded in the face and bani∣shed, for affirming That the Church of Rome was the whore of Babylon: Monkery a stink∣ing Carrion, their Vows Nurses of Sodo∣my, &c. Dunstan was recalled from Ba∣nishment by the King. And the sin of Drunkenness being very rife in his time, he thereupon caused Cups to be made with certain Pins or Marks, with a Penalty to such as should drink deeper than the
Mark: He also caused the Princes of Wales to render him yearly, by way of Tribute 300 Wolves heads; by which means Wolves were destroyed in this Nation. And eve∣ry year he rid his Circuit, to take Notice of the Abuses and Corruption of his Judges, if any were in the Administration of his Laws. He is said to be very lascivious, not for∣bearing the very Nuns, for he begot St. Edith on Wolfchild the Nun; and at An∣dover plotting to lye with a Western Duke's Daughter, he was fitted by the Mother with a Substituted waiting-Crea∣ture, whom he afterwards retained for his Concubine. And now the Fame of the Incomparable Features and Beauty of Duke Orgarus's fair Daughter being spread as far as the Court, and ringing in the King's Ears, he forthwith longs for the Injoyment of her Company; and so Ethel∣wold a principal Courtier was sent for her; but he overcome in Love with her, con∣cealed the King's Message, and marries her himself. And then returning told the King, Fame was a Lyar, for the Lady was far Inferior in every respect to that which she was reported to be: But the King go∣ing to hunt afterwards in that part of the Country, and going to Ethelwold's house,
and seeing the Lady's Beauty, he perciev'd the Cheat, so he slew Ethelwold her Hus∣band with a Javeline, as they were hunting, and married her himself: For these and the like prancks, he was injoyned by Bishop Dunstan not to wear his Crown for seven years, which he patiently submitted unto, but held on his lascivious courses still. Vpon the River Dee he had 7 Petty Kings to row his Barge, to shew his Greatness. This Edgar was the Second Son of Ed∣mund, and the 12 sole Monarch of En∣gland: he began his Reign Anno 959. and reigned 16 years. 13. Edward; At his Entrance to the Crown was a great Famine, and a bla∣sing Star, and great Contentions were in his time between the Monks and Married Priests, Dunstan being for the Monks, and Duke Alfarus for the Priests; and the meeting for disputation in an high Room, the Prease was so great that the Chamber fell, and several were slain and hurt: but Dunstan's chair being seated on a post, fell not, but he continued in his Seat: which being taken for a Miracle, manifested in behalf of the Monks, they thereupon car∣ried the day, and the Priests were left to in∣joy their Wives, and lose their places. And afterwards, the King going a hunt∣ing
not far from the Castle where his Mo∣ther in Law was, being dry with pursuing his Game, he calls here to take a Glass of Wine, she dissembling her Malice with out∣ward Joy to see him, caused the Wine to brought, which was no sooner at his Mouth, but a two-edged Dagger was struck into Back, by a Servant appointed for that pur∣pose by her: He feeling himself wound∣ed, put spurs to his horse and rid away, but presently fell from his Horse, and was dragg'd about the Fields till he died. This Edward was the Eldest Son of Ed∣gar, and the 13 Sole Monarch of England; he began to reign Anno 975. and reign'd 4 years. 14. Ethelred; When he was about 10 years old, being informed how his Brother Edward was slain by his Mother's means; he wept and took on so heavily, that his Mother beat him, almost to Death, with wax Candles, nothing else being near at hand: This so distasted the King, that he could never after endure Wax Candles to be burnt before him. He was grievously pestered with the Danes, compounding for his quiet with them at 10000 pounds first; then they raised him afterwards from 10, to 16, and so to 20, 24, 30, and lastly to 40000 pounds, the Danes never
giving over digging in this Golden Myne till they had quite exhausted it: Elfrick Earl of Mercia turning Traytor, he and his Son Algarus had both their Eyes put out by the King's Command. And now the King considering the mi∣sery of his People, and seeing himself not able to withstand the Danes by force, he sought to vanquish them by policy; and so gave notice to all his Cities every where, on St. Brices day, to fall upon the Danes and murther them, which was according∣ly put in Execution; but this News flying into Denmark (for all the King's Council was betrayed at all times by Edricus one of his own Councellors) there came again fresh Supplies: and Swanus the Dane so grievously oppressed the Countrie, burn∣ing and destroying all before them, that he gave them thirty thousand pounds for Peace: Not long after they slew 900 Monks and Men of Religion in Canter∣bury, and having wrested a great sum of Money from the Arch Bishop Alphegus, they then stoned him to Death at Green∣wich. The King seeing those proceedings, sends his Wife Emma, and her two Sons in∣to Normandy, to her Brother Richard Duke thereof, and shortly after followed himself: But at length Swanus the Dane
being stabbed by his own Men, they make Canutus his Son their King: so not long after King Ethelred returns again in∣to England, and perceiving the several Treasons against him, and seeing himself not able to withstand their Fury; he short∣ly after died. In his time was St. Dunstan very famous amongst the Saxons: he did use to exercise several Mysteries and Trades, at several times, to avoid Idleness: and one time being working in the Gold-Smiths Trade in a Cell near Glastenbury, and making of a Gold Chalice: The Devil (as the Story goes) did there appear un∣to him in the likeness of a handsome Wo∣man, intending to tempt him to lewdness: but he by inspiration understood the cheat, and so immediately he got the Devil by the nose with the hot Tongs he had in his hands, which made the Devil cry out and roar so terribly that People came to see what the matter was: who will may be∣lieve. This Ethelred was third Son of Edgar, and the fourteenth sole Monarch of Eng∣land: He began his Reign Anno 979, and reigned 37 years. 15. Edmund, He was Sirnamed Iron∣side: He gave the Danes several Battel, o∣verthrew them and raised the Siege at
London; he worsted Canutus 4 times at least in the plain Field, and had in all likelihood rid England of him, if the Traitor Edrick and others of the Perfidi∣ous Clergy and Nobility, had not secret∣ly assisted him. Edmund fought a single Duel with Canutus the Dane, and dan∣gerously wounded him, whereupon Canu∣tus desisted, and cried out to King Edmund, saying, What need is there for us thus to indanger our Lives? if thou consent to di∣vide the Kingdom between us, we shall then be at peace, and like two Brothers: which thing Edmund consented unto, and did accept of Canute for his Co-partner in the Kingdom. But not long after Edmund being easing of himself, he was by Duke Edrick (that Grand Traytor) thrust into the Funda∣ment with a sharp Spear, and his head cut off and presented to Canute, as an accep∣table Sacrifice, as was hoped; but he de∣testing such Traiterous Villany, caused Edricks head to be chopt off, and to be advanced upon a Pole above the rest of his Fellows, as it was promised him, an ad∣vancement fit for the betrayers of their King and Country. And now the Saxons Monarchy, by the Death of Edmund, being drawn to a Period, and the Standard of
their Government overthrown; The Danes began to Advance the Banner of their Conquest, and after King Edmund's Death displayed it in open Field, none being able to withstand them, so they made them∣selves sole Masters of the Island, after it had been in Possession of the Saxons about 566 years, it was a long time after the Danes first entrance before they became sole Monarchs thereof. This Edmund was third Son of Ethelfrid, and the fifteenth sole Monarch of England; his Reign began Anno 1016, and he reign∣ed about 1 year. CHAP. VIII. Of the Danes and their Conquest of Britain, with the memorable Accidents happen∣ing during the time of those three Danish Monarchs who ruled here. THE Original of these Danes is thought by some to be from the Scy∣thians, but others rather think to come
from Scandia an Island scituate Northward, not far from the Continent of Denmark. As to their Religion it was much alike to that of the Saxons: Their first Invasion was about the year 787, and about 230 years after they became sole Masters of Eng∣land, which Sovereignty continued but a∣bout twenty four years, which they had struggled for above two hundred years: Their Succession of Monarchs were these three following. 1. Canutus, He was Son to Swanus, and was Crowned at London, by Livingus Arch-Bishop of Canterbury: he sent Ed∣ward and Edmund, the two Sons of Ed∣mund Ironside, the last Saxon Monarch, to his Brother the King of Sweeden, to be made away, but he abhorring the Fact, transfer∣red them to the King of Hungary: And now he marries Emma King Ethelreds Widdow, by whose Counsel he wrested 82000 Pounds out of his Subjects, to give those lazy Danes, that were sent packing to Denmark, there being then no more need for them here, He called a Parlia∣ment at Oxford, and enacted several good Lawes, which are to be seen in several old Chronicles, and too large here to be in∣certed. He is said to be an Enemy to Dissem∣blers,
Traytors and Flatterers: for on a time he caused himself to be placed in a Chair, where the Sea ebbs and flows at Southampton, and commanded the Sea, that it should not swell so as to wet his Feet; but the disobedient Sea (the Tide then co∣ming out) presently dashed up to his Thighs; whereupon he started up, and said to the Flatterers (who had extoll'd his great∣ness to be unmatchable,) You see all the might and power of Kings is but vanity, for none is worthy to have the name of King, but he that hath all things subject to his Laws. And so after that time (as some Authors affirm) he would never suffer the Crown to come on his head, but set it on the Crucifix head at Winchester: In the third year of his Reign he went into Denmark, and chased from thence the Vandalls who had invaded that Kingdom: And at length he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and is Recorded for a very good Man, setting aside his intention to have murthered King Edmunds two Sons. This Canutus was the 16 sole Monarch of England: He began his Reign Anno 1017. and reigned eighteen years. he was buri∣ed in the old Monastery at Winchester. 2. Harrold, He was so swift, that he was called Harefoot: Earl Goodwine was a∣gainst
his coming to the Crown, but the Londoners, and Lords on the North side of Thames were for him▪ and prevailed; he, by Treachery of Goodwine, afterwards got the two Sons of Emma, Edward and Al∣fride, the last of which had his eyes put out, and his Belly opened, and one end of his Bowels drawn out and fastned to a Stake, and then he was pricked with sharp poini∣ards and forced round about the Stake, till all his Intralls were wound out: He caused also Queen Emma to be banished and her goods to be confiscate, but the Earl of Flan∣drs received her honourably. This Harrold was the Second Son of Ca∣nutus, and the seventeen sole Monarch of England: he began his Reign Anno 1036, he reigned four years, and was buried at Westminster, as Mr. Stow affirms. 3. Hardicanute, He was Crowned at London by Elnothus Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury; He caused the body of his half Brother Harrold to be digged out of his Grave, and thrown into the Thames, after he had first cut off his Head; but some Fish∣ers finding the body buried it decently in St. Clements without Temple Bar: this Hardicanute was a great Epicure, and had his Tables spread four time dayly, and furnished with Dainties, for the satisfying of
his greedy Appetite; through the Per∣swasions of Earl Goodwine he raised the Sum of 32147 pounds in England for the payment of his Fleet, which greatly distast∣ed his Subjects; the thing desired by Earl Goodwine; two of the Collectors of this Money were slain at Worcester, for which offence their City was set on Fire. The King Drinking freely at a Wedding in Lambeth, got a Surfeit and died; some say, he was choaked at Dinner there; but certain it is he died, and with him dyed the Danes Monarchy over England; and it fell again to the Saxons, for Edward the Se∣venth Son of Ethelred by Emma his Queen, was sent for out of Normandy by the Eng∣lish, and was made King, which thing was brought about by Earl Goodwines means, and Leofrick Earl of Chester. This Hardicanute was third Son of Ca∣nutus, and eighteenth sole Monarch of England. He began to Reign Anno 1040, And reigned about two years: he was bu∣ried at Winchester.
CHAP. IX. Of the Saxons Re-entry again to the Monar∣chy of England, after the Danes Con∣quest. THis new Possession of the Saxons was but of short Continuance, till Willi∣am the Norman Duke came and made a Forceable Entry upon them: and though his Entry were unlawful, yet all the force and Law they then had could never obtain a Writ of Restitution: the continuance of this new Saxon Monarchy was but during the times of these two Kings following. 1. Edward the Confessour, He was Crowned at Winchester by Edsine Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; in the beginning of his Reign, the Danes, Irish and Welsh en∣tered England, and destroyed all in their passage with Fire and Sword; but they were withstood in their proceeding by Al∣fred the Warlike Bishop of Worcester. In the fifth year of the King's Reign there fell so great a Snow in January, that covered the Ground till the middle of March; and much Cattel and Fowl died; and in Janu∣ary
after happened such an Earthquake, that it seemed to rend the ground in sunder and withal such fearful Lightnings were then, that the Corn in the Felds was burnt up, which caused a great Dearth. And now Goodwine Earl of Kent, who was the main Instrument in setting up King Edward, for his Favour to the Burgesses of Can∣terbury, falls into dislike with the King, and after several thwartings he and his five were banished: but about two years after was received again into favour: and being one day at the King's Table at Dinner, the Cup-bearer, coming in, got a slip, and had like to have spilt the Wine, but as one Foot▪ slipped, the other recovered it, whereupon the Earl said, I see one Brother hath help∣ed the other. Yes, said the King, and so would my Brother Alured have helpen me, if Goodwine had not been. The Earl, percei∣ving the King's Anger, he took a piece of Bread, and wished it might choak him, if he were guilty of betraying the King's Brother, so putting the Bread into his Mouth, he was choaked therewith, and fell down dead. After this, the King caused his Mother Emma to be tried, whether she were guilty of Adultery or no, by causing her to go blindfold over the place where nine Plow∣shares lay glowing hot, and she being clear
of the Accusation laid to her charge, went over the place where they lay, and mist them every one, stepping betwixt still all the way as she went: when she was past them, she not knowing so much, cryed out, saying, Oh Lord, When shall I come to the place of my Purgation? And ha∣ving her eyes opened, and seeing herself past the Danger, she fell on her knees and gave Thanks to her Deliverer; this kind of Tryal was called Ordalium. It is re∣ported also that his Dealings with his own Beautiful Queen Edith, a Daughter to Earl Goodwine, were little better; she being like∣wise accused of Adultery, and kept in Pri∣son during her Father's Banishment: In this King's time was a blasing Star seen for sev'n dayes space all the World over. The Abby of St. Peters at Westminster was enlarged by this King, and he built the Church of St. Margarets at Westminster, and removed the Bishop's Sea from Cri∣dington in Devon-shire to Exeter, and made Leofrick first Bishop thereof: and he was the first of our Kings that cured the Disease called Struma, now the King's Evil: and that first used to Seal his Patents with the Stately Seal, now called The KING'S Great Seal: and he remitted the Tax of Dane-Guilt, so grievous to his
Subjects, and Collected all the Laws of his Predecessors into one Body, which some say, is the Ground or Foundation of our Common Law. This King Edward was seventh Son to King Ethelred, and first, by his Second wife Queen Emma: he was born at I slip in Ox∣ford-shire: and was the 19 Sole Monarch of England: he began his Reign Anno. Dom. 1042. and reigned 20 years, 6 months and 27 daies. He died the 4 of January, and was buried at Westminster. 2. Harrold; This King at his Entrance freed his Subjects from those grievous Tri∣butes, his Predecessors had afflicted them withall; he was crowned by Aldredus Archbishop of York: Now there were three several Reports of Edward's disposing of the Crown, some said, to the Norman Duke, who made that the Anchor-hold of his Claims: others, to young Edgar to whom he was great Vncle: and lastly, to this Harrold; who, in King Edwards days, being at Sea in a Fisher-boat upon Plea∣sure, was driven into Normandy, where Duke William caused him to swear, that if Edward died without Issue, the Crown of England should be reserved for the Nor∣mans. And hereupon after Edward's Death, and Harrold's assuming of the
Crown: Duke William sent his Embassa∣dours to him, to put him in minde of his Oath: but he returned Answer, That it was extorted from him in his Imprisonment, and so not obliging: At this Answer the Duke was much inraged: and prepared for an Invasion: and at Harrold's Prepa∣ration to Encounter the Duke, a fearful Comet appeared, which was look'd upon (as after it proved) a bad Omen. And now Harrold's Misery approach∣ing, Tosto Brother to Harrold, and Har∣rold Harfagar King of Denmark; invaded England, and landed at Richal upon Owse, in York-shire, and spoiling the Country round about, marched straitway to York: News being brought to the King, he with his Army marched Northwards to suppress these Danish Forces; and at Stamford Bridg built over the River Derwent, he was stopt by a single Dane, who slew 40 of his men, but at length the valiant Dane was slain by a Soldier who got a Boat and rowed under the Bridge, and thrust his Spear up through a hole in the Bridge, and so slew the fa∣mous valiant Dane: Some say, He was slain with a Dart thrown at him: And the King now getting the Bridge, he fell upon the Norwegians, and made great slaughter of them, and among the rest he
slew Harfagar the King of Denmark and Tosto his own Brother; and Olave the Son of Harfagar, and Paul Earl of Orkny were taken Prisoners, who begging their Lives of the King were suffered to depart with the rest of the Prisoners, having 20 small Vessels of their great Fleet of three hundred Ships, wherewith they invaded the Realm, allowed them to carry away their slain and hurt, with the heavy news to Den∣mark of the loss of their King, and over∣throw of their whole Army. These Troubles were no sooner over, but William Duke of Normandy landed at Pe∣vensey in Sussex, upon the eighth day of September, Anno Domini 1066, who after his landing set his own Fleet on Fire, that his Soldiers might have no hopes of flying back thither for succour. When he first came on shoar his Foot stuck fast in the Sand, and the Knight that was next to him said, Now, Sir Earl, England sticks fast to thee, Doubt not but presently to be King thereof: after some small stirs he sent a Messenger to the King at London, to de∣mand the Kingdom, but the Messenger was dismissed with Threats, and Harrold now seeing no way but one, either to fight or yield the Kingdom, which was too sweet a Morsel to part with without Blows, He
therefore advances with his Army into Sus∣sex, and pitched his Tents in a fair plain within seven miles of the Enemy, and send∣ing forth his spies they were taken and pre∣sented to the Duke, who caused them to be sent from Tent to Tent and Feasted, and then released them. And now the Duke entring the plain where the King was, sent a Monk to him, to demand the Kingdom; or otherwise for the avoiding the effusion of much blood, to try it by single Combate, or else to hold the Kingdom under him: Harrold's An∣swer was, It should be tried by more Swords than one; So the next day being the 14 of October 1066, on a Saturday, They marshalled their Armies, and Trumpets sounding to Battel, at the first encounter the Normans had the worst of it, and the English thinking they had run, dis-ranked themselves for persuit; which as soon as the Duke perceived he rallied his men, and sell in desperately again, and then slew the dis-ranked English on heaps; among which King Harrold paid his last Breath to the fury of the Conqueror, having an Arrow shot into his Brains; and with him died Girth and Leofine his two Brothers, and most of the English Nobles, and 97974 Sol∣diers; the Duke had three Horses slain un∣der
him, yet received no harm himself. In this same place the Conqueror after∣wards built an Abby and called it Battel-Abby. And now Aldrede Archbishop of York▪ counselled the People to chuse young Edgar Atheling King, being the true law∣ful Heir to the Crown, but it came to no∣thing; for with the determination of Har∣rold's Reign, ceased the Royal blood of the Saxons, whose Kings made England an Heptarchy, and afterwards had reduced it to a glorious Monarchy: and had been Kings and Monarchs thereof from Hen∣gists first Possession of the Kingdom of Kent, till Harrold's Deaths, about 587 years; but Authors agree not in the Com∣putation, some accounting more and some less. This King Harrold was the Son of Good∣wine Earl of Kent, by his Wife Sitha Sister to Swain the younger, King of Denmark, he was the 20 sole Monarch of England; And began his Reign Anno 1065, and Reigned about 9 Months and nine days; he was slain the 14 of October 1066, at Bat∣tel-Field in Sussex, and was buried at Wal∣tham in Essex.
CHAP. X. Of England's Conquest by the Normans; and first of William the Conqueror. THese Normans, who by the Sword gained the Diadem of Eng∣land, and were the last Conque∣rors thereof, in whose Line the Monarchy of England is still continu'd, were antiently a mixt Nation with the Warlike Norwegians, Swedens, and Danes; and took their Name from that Northern Cli∣mate, antiently called Cimbrica Chersone∣sus, and Norway: but the Country being thought to be too little for these People: Rollo, a Famous Noble Norman, with many others in his Company, betook them∣selves to Sea, to seek Fortunes Court: and having practised some Piracies upon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, England and Ireland, at length they became so fearful to the French, that Charles the Simple, King of France, gave to Rollo his Daugh∣ter Gilla in Marriage with the Dutchy of
Normandy: And this Duke Rollo was Proavus or Great Grandfather to Richard the Fifth Duke of Normandy, which Ri∣chard was Elder Brother to Robert, Father to this WILLIAM the Famous Conque∣ror of England, whose Famous Actions and Memorable Things we shall now pro∣ceed to Treat of. After the Fight at Battle-Field, Duke William hasted towards London, wasting as he went the Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surry, Hampshire, and Bark-shire; he crost Thames at Wallingford, and so mar∣ched thorow the Counties of Oxford, Buck∣ingham, and Hartford. And at Bark∣hampstead, he made a Stop: to which place repaired Aldred Archbishop of York▪ Wolstan Bishop of Winchester, Walter Bi∣shop of Hereford, the Earls Edwin and Morcar, and Edgar Atheling the Heir to the Crown; and here did their Allegiance to the Duke. And so marching for Lon∣don, he was stopt at St. Albans by Fre∣drick Abbot thereof: On Christmas-day following he was Crowned at Westminster by Aldred Arch-bishop of York: And now considering how to secure the Realm from Invasions, he thought it expedient first to fortifie the Cinque Ports, and so taking his
March towards Dover, at the Instigation of Stigand Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Eglesine Abbot of Saint Austines, he was surprized by the Kentish men, who carry∣ing Boughs and Branches of Trees in their hands, they seemed like a Walking Wood, which sight so afrighted the Conqueror, that he granted their Requests, to have all their Ancient Customs: whereupon they yielded up to him their Earldom of Kent, and Castle of Dover. The Conqueror was kind also to the Londoners, suffering them to injoy their Priviledges they had in Ed∣ward the Confessor's time. Shortly after this the Conqueror sailed to Normandy to settle his Affairs there, ta∣king with him several English Nobles (whose greatness he feared in his Absence) for Pledges, and making his half Brother Otho, Bishop of Bayeux, Earl of Kent, and William Fitz-Osburne Earl of Hereford, to whose Trust he left the Government of the Kingdom till his Return: In whose Ab∣sence the Welsh rebelled and wasted all to the Mouth of Wye▪ these Stirs called the Conqueror back again, who at his Return gave the Lands of the English to his Nor∣mans; And the English thus turned out of their Estates, fell so to Rob and Pillage that the High-wayes between one Town
and another lay unfrequented: The Earls Edwin and Morcar, and Edgar Atheling with his Mother and Sister and several o∣ther English Nobles fled into Scotland to King Malcolm, to whom the Conqueror sent, desiring him to send back for England Edgar Atheling, but Malcolm having married his Sister, denied him, and kept him notwithstanding all King William's Threats. And now the Conqueror still go∣ing on in his Oppressions of the English, he caused every House-houlder to put out both Fire and Candle at eight a Clock at Night, to which purpose there was a Bell rung in every City, Town or Village, by the French called Cover few, that is, Cover Fire. In the Second year of his Reign, Good∣wine and Edmund two of King Harrold's Sons invaded the Realm out of Ireland: and took away great Bootys. And the year after, the English in the North slew 700 Normans, but some of the Authors of the Rebellion, being taken, had some of them their Heads cut off, and other their hands: And now Swain, King of Denmark, assisted the English with 300 Sail of Ships fraught with Soldiers, who under Command of Osburne, Swaine's Brother, and his own two Sons Harrold and Canute, arriv'd in
Humber and marched for York: at whose Approach the Yorkists were so dismay'd that they set their own City on fire, and the Minster of St. Peters being then consum'd, Aldred their Archbishop died with greif. At his time were 3000 Normans slain, but the King hearing of these Stirs, took his March into the North, and after he had overthrown the Enemy, he was so inra∣ged at the Northern Disturbers that he spoil'd their Country, lying all level with the ground for Threescore miles, between York and Durham, which lying untilled for nine years space, caused such a Famine among them, That the People there eat Horses, Dogs, Cats, yea and Man's Flesh. Not long after this, there was a Decree made by him, That no English Scholar should come to any Promotion, depriving Stigand Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Eglewine Bi∣shop of the East-angles, and several other Bishops, for no evident Cause, but only to give Place to his Normans. He also abro∣gated the English Laws, and set up his own in the Norman Tongue, to the great Dam∣mage of the English: Hereupon the Earls Edwine and Morcar with Frederick Abbot of St. Albans, set up Edgar Atheling a∣gain for their General, and rebelled against the Conqueror, who, seeing their daily in∣crease
of Forces, concluded a Peace with them, and Swore To keep inviolable the Antient LAWS of the Land, and those of St. Edward. But not long after he took from the Ab∣by of St. Albans, all the Lands between Barnet and London-Stone, and bereaved all the Abbies and Monasteries of England of all their Treasure, sparing neither Chal∣lices nor Shrines. And now Malcolm King of Scots, who sided with the English, and King William made a League, and reared a Stone-Cross on Stain-Moor in Westmerland, called the Roy-Cross, for a Meer Mark to the Bounds of both Kingdoms. And shortly after this, the King took his Voyage for Normandy again, the People being there in Rebellion, but by the Prowess of the English they were quickly brought again to their Obedience. Now, during this Stay in Normandy, the Nobles in England rebell again, but at his Return were quickly dismaied. So he cau∣sed the Eyes of some of them to be put out, the hands of others tope cut off, and some were hang'd upon Gibbets, and those who esceped the best, were Banished. No sooner were these Troubles over, but Swain King of Denmark had manned 200 Sail of Ships for England's Invasion,
but hearing of the Nobles Overthrow, they turned Sail for Flanders. In the Year 1075. Walcher Bishop of Durham purchased the Earldom of Nor∣thumberland of the King, but being an usurping cruel Fellow, the Inhabitants slew him: the year ensuing the Earth was hard Frozen from the midst of November to the midst of Aprill. And the next year after, upon Palm Sunday a blazing Star was seen near the Sun: and this year Robert King William's Son, seized on the Dukedom of Normandy by force. And his Father Sai∣ling for Normandy again, at Archenbray in Normandy, entred Battel with his Son, who ran his Father through the Arm, bear∣ing him off his Horse, and so the King was forced to leave the Honour of the Field with the loss of many men to his Son. And returning for England, he built the Tower of London, Anno 1078. And this year Thur∣stan Abbot of Glastenbury caused 3 Monks to be slain in his Church, and 18 Men to be wounded, so that their Blood run down from the Altar to the Steps. And this very year also he caused a Survey to be ta∣ken of England, which is still to be seen in the Book called Dooms day Book, kept in the King's Exchecquer, of every Hide of Land he exacted the sum of six shillings,
upon this occasion the English incited Mal∣colm the Scotch King to invade England, who wasted all as far as Monk-chester upon Tine; The King sent his Son Robert with an Army against him, who at that time laid the Foundation of a Castle at Monk∣chester, calling it New-Castle, and from this the Town there took its Name. The King now perceiving himself well Seated in his Throne, began to provide for his Pastime, and caused, in the South from Salisbury to the Sea, Towns and Vil∣lages and 36 Parish Churches to be pulled down and laid level with the Ground, and here he laied the Bounds of his New For∣rest for hunting in: But this Offence esca∣ped not unpunished, for in this Forrest Ri∣chard, the Kings second Son, was goared by a Dear and died: and William Rufus his Third Son was slain by Sir Walter Tyrrel by accident, and his Grand Child Robert Curtoyse, being in pursuit of the Game, was strucken by a Bough into the Jaws, and died. After this Pauls Church was set on Fire, and many strange Judgments happe∣ned in the Realm; In the Twentieth year of the King's Reign, such a great Flood happened, that the Hills were hereby made soft, and consumed, and with their fall
overwhelmed many Villages to the great a∣mazement of all the people: And not long after this, some displeasure arising between the King and Phillip King of France, he took ship for Normandy; and falling sick there, hearing of some scoffs put upon him by the French King; at his recovery he was so inraged, that he spoyled all the West parts of France, and set the City Meux, or Nauntz on fire. By his last will he gave great Riches to the Church of St. Stephens in Normandy, which was of his own Founding, and among other things, he be∣queathed his Crown and Regal Ornaments to it: He put the distinction between the two Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and York; making York Primate of England, and Canterbury Primate of all England; also he made the Churches of Scotland, to be under the Primate of York, as the Church∣es of England were under the Primate of Canterbury. At the performance of his Funeral Rights in the Church of St. Ste∣phens, in Cane in Normandy, being of his own Foundation; his Body was denyed Burial, by a Gentleman called Ascelinus Fitz-Arther, who said that it was the ve∣ry place of his Fathers house Floor, which the Duke in his lifetime violently took from him, and upon his Inheritance Founded
the said Church: Therefore, saith he, I Challeng this Ground, and in God's behalf, forbid that the Body of any Dispoiler be co∣ver'd in my Earth, neither shall it be inter'd i'th Precincts of my Right; Hereupon Hen∣ry the Dukes 4th Son; gave the Gentleman a hundred pounds weight of Silver to suffer his Fathers Body to be interred. Though the Art of Conveyance be much improved since the Conquerors time, yet there was then more honesty comprised, in a small Charter of an hand breadth than there is now in a Deed of a whole Skin of Parchment; This following was one of the Kings Charters. I William, the third year of my Reign, give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that art both Leef and Dear, The Hop, and the Hopton, And all the bounds up and down, Under the Earth to Hell, above the Earth to Heaven; From me and mine, To thee and thine,
As Good and as fair, As ever they were, To witness that this is South, I bite the white Max with my Touth, Before Jug, Maud, and Margery, And my youngest Son Henry, For a Bow and a broad Arrow, When I come to Hunt upon Yarrow. In the last year of the King's Reign, there was found in Wales, in the Province cal∣led Rose, the Sepulcher of Gawen on the Sea-shore, who was Sisters Son of Arthur the Great, King of the Britains, it was in length 14 Foot. This William was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, He was Son to Ro∣bert the Sixth Duke of Normandy, begot∣ten on a Beautiful Damosel, called Arlet, the Daughter to a Tanner, as some report: He began his Reign on Saturday the 14 day of October Anno 1066, he reigned twen∣ty years, ten Months, and twenty six dayes, and was the twenty one sole Monarch of England: he got his Sickness by an over∣heat, and died on Thursday the 9 day of
September in the 56 year of his Dutchy, 21 of his Kingdom, and sixty fourth year of his Age, Anno Domini 1087. CHAP. XI. Of King William the second, commonly cal∣led Rufus. WILLIAM Posting to Lon∣don, after the Death of his Fa∣ther, he carried with him Earl Morcar, and Wilnoth Son to Harrold, being both released from their Imprisonment in Nor∣manay; but most of the States stood for Robert his elder Brother, and had tried their Titles by the Sword, had not Lan∣franck and Wolstan two Learned Prelates stayed their hands. On Sunday the twenty six of September, Anno 1087, William was Crowned at Westminster by Lanfranck Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. And now Odo the King's Vncle having been rough∣ly dealt withal by William the Father, for Revenge thereof begins to draw the No∣bles into sedition against William the Son,
and further to accomplish his desires, he sent Letters to Robert Curtoise the King's elder Brother and Duke of Normandy, to invade England, to which Request Robert sent answer according to Odoe's expecta∣tion: so Odo and the Nobles expecting daily Robert's assistance fell into open Re∣bellion, and made a great spoil in several parts of the Kingdom; but Robert, not so hasty as was expected: in the mean time Bishop Odo is taken and banished: not long after Duke Robert enters England with his Normans, whereupon the King agreed with him to depart again, paying him three thousand marks yearly: about this time Langfranck Archbishop of Can∣terbury dying, the King kept the Bishop∣rick in his hands four years. And the year after the King invaded Normandy and forced his Brother Robert to composition with him; after the Peace concluded be∣tween these two Brothers, they both took part against their younger Brother Henry, but at length were all reconciled. And now Malcolm King of Scots ente∣red England, doing much harm: and the King marching to oppose him, at their meeting a Peace was concluded, and he gave Malcolm twelve Villages, which he had formerly held under William the
querour, for twelve marks yearly in Gold. At that time the King built Carlisle in Cumberland, having been demolished two hundred years before by the Danes. And now he makes Anselm, a Norman Abbot, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Anno 1093. About this time King Malcolm came to Gloucester, to treat with the King again a∣bout the Peace of the Nations, and taking some distaste at his Reception, he returned in a Rage, and raising an Army, he spoy∣led all before him as far as Alnewick; presently after this Robert Mowbray and William of Ancho with some others conspi∣red to take the King's Life and Crown, and to set up Stephen de Albemarle, but they were prevented. This same year, viz. 1093, the King Conquered Wales, since which time the English Monarchs have been accounted the chief Governours thereof. The next year the King and his Brother Robert fell at odds again, but were quickly reconciled. And Robert intending for the Holy War, did Mortgage his Dukedom to William for 6666 pound of Silver, to fur∣nish him with necessaries for the War. And now to raise this Sum of Money, the King laied heavy Taxes on his Subjects, and neither Churches nor Monasteries were Priviledged from this payment. This
Voyage for the Holy War was taken in the year of our Lord 1099. And the same year the King built new Walls about the Tower, and likewise built Westminster∣hall being ninety yards long, twenty four yards and two Foot broad; and yet when he first see it, he said, It was too little by half, and so he would reserve it for a Chamber. About this time began the Cestersian Order in Burgandy, as some old Authors affirm; and it was brought into England about the year 1135, and an Abby built for the Monks of that Order at Ri∣vaulx. Now the King going for Normandy to relieve his Subjects there, the Winds pro∣ving very cross, the Pilate desired the King to stay a while for a better Gale, but the King, no whit daunted, commanded to hoise up Sailes with these words, Hast thou ever heard that any King was drowned? He denied that the Pope had any Authori∣ty over any Bishop within his Realm, and also denied the Popes power of binding and loosing, but paied him Peter-pence grant∣ed by his Father: he also held it bootless to invocate Saints, curbed Anselm Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Taxed the swel∣ling Clergy, for their Pride, Luxury, Idleness, and Avarice. In the Second
year of his Reign a great Earthquake hap∣pened, and in the fourth year a great Lightning which burnt the Steeple of the Abby of Winchester, and rent the Beams of the Roof, casting down the Image of our Lady and Crucifix, breaking one of the Legs thereof. And not long after, so great a Wind happened at London that it blew down 60, some say 606 houses, and took off the Roof of Bow-Church, bearing it a great height into the Air, and six of the Beams being twenty seven foot long, with the fall ran twenty three foot into the Ground, the Streets being then unpaved: in the sixth year of the King's Reign was so great a Famine and Mortality, that the Quick were scarce able to bury the Dead: and in the ninth year of his Reign two bla∣sing Stars with two Bushes appeared, and other Stars seemed to shoot Darts one at the other. And the last year of his Reign the Sea overflowed its Banks, and drow∣ned a great number of People in Kent, and overwhelm'd a great deal of Lands which had been Earl Goodwins, whose Name they retain to this day, being called Goodwin's Sands. There was also a Well of Blood, which rose up out of the ground for the space of 15 dayes, at Fincham∣stead near Abbington in Bark-shire.
This William Rufus was King of Eng∣land, but not Duke of Normandy: he was Third Son of William the Conquerour, by Maud his Wife, Daughter to Baldwine, the fifth Earl of Flanders. He began his Reign on Thursday the ninth of September, Anno Dom. one thousand eighty seven, and reigned twelve years, ten months and twenty three dayes: he was the twenty second sole Monarch of England. He was shot by Accident in New Forrest, by Sir Walter Tyrrel, on Wednesday the first day of August, Anno Domini, 1100. be∣ing the thirteenth year of his Reign, and the Forty fourth year of his Age: he was buried in the Quire of Saint Swythine, being the Cathedral Church of Winche∣ster. CHAP. XII. Of King Henry the first, commonly called Beauclark, for his Learning. KING Henry was Crowned at Westminster by Maurice Bishop of
London, in the absence of Anselm Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, on Sunday the fifth day of August Anno 1100; But before his Coronation the Nobles constrained him to swear, To ease the People of their Taxes, and many other Oppressions, which he afterwards performed: And he restored to the English the use of Lights again, which his Father forbad by ringing of a Bell, and had continued about the space of 33 years. He also ordained several good Laws, and annexed his Great Seal to them, and his Name, with the subscription of seve∣ral Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and caused Copies of them to be sent into eve∣ry County to be safely kept, the heads of them take as followeth in these Seven Branches. I. That the Church should be free from Oppressions, and Reservation of their Possessions upon vacancy. II. That the Heirs of the Nobilty should possess the Lands of their Fathers without Redemption from the King; which Favour also should be granted by the Nobles to their Tenants. III. That the Gentry might give in Marriage, their Daughters and Kins∣women,
without the King's Licence, so it were not to the King's Enemies. IV. That the Widow should have her Jointure, and not be compelled to mar∣ry against her own Will. V. That the Mother, or next of kind∣red, should be Guardian of the Lands of their Children. VI. That Coiners of False Money should be punished: and a Measure to the length of the KING'S Arm, to be a Standard for Commerce among the Peo∣ple: And VII. That all Debts to the Crown be∣fore his own Time should be forgiven, and all Murthers before the Day of his Coronation to be pardoned. With other such like Indulgencies: And he also at this time confirmed King Ed∣ward's Laws. And now he made Suit to Edgar King of Scotland, to have Maud his Sister to Wise. This Year 1100, his Brother Ro∣bert Duke of Normandy, was elected King of Jerusalem, but he hearing of his Bro∣ther Rufus's Death, refused it, in hopes of getting England's Crown. And at his re∣turn from Jerusalem invaded England, landed at Portsmouth: Henry to be quit of him, and to keep the Crown, granted
him 3000 Marks yearly, and gave him royal Entertainment for six Moneths at Court. After this Belasm Earl of Shrewsbury, and Roger Mountgomery rebelled, but they were overthrown by the King, and forced to abjure the Realm for ever. And now, the Pope's Imp, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury begins to stir, and calling a Council at London, Excommunicated all Married Priests, and deprived many lear∣ned Prelates, because they were invested by the King, and not by the Pope. And now Duke Robert returned for England again, to congratulate his Brother's For∣tune, and was so royally entertained, that at the Request of his Sister Queen Maud, he remitted the Annual payment of 3000▪ marks. But afterwards Henry picking a Quarrel with him, he sailed into Norman∣dy, and made himself Master thereof. Af∣terwards Robert seeking to regain his own, the King took another Voyage for Nor∣mandy, where a bloody Battel was fought between them, and Duke Robert and Wil∣liam Earl of Mortmain were taken Prison∣ers, and the rest flying, Henry return'd Conqueror, having made Normandy sub∣ject to England, just that day 40 years that England became subdued to Nor∣mandy:
And the Duke seeking to escape his Imprisonment, had both his Eyes put out by the King's Order. And now the King, begins to shew himself in his Co∣lors, making no Bones of breaking his Oath made to his Peers; he banished the Flemmings out of England. And about this time, to wit, Anno▪ 1109. the Empe∣ror Henry the IV. took to Wife Maud King Henry's Daughter. And, now the Affairs of Normandy being disturbed, the King hasted thither, and after the Sup∣pression of the Rebells, he created his El∣dest Son Duke thereof, by which a Custom grew that thenceforth the Kings eldest Sons were Dukes of Normandy: after this An∣selm Bishop of Canterbury died Anno Do∣mini 1114. The High Court of Parliament, as some Authors affirm, was first ordained in this King's Reign, Anno 1116. in which year was exceeding great Lightning in March, and Thunder and Hail in December, and the Moon at both times seemed to be tur∣ned into Blood. And in October the same year, the River of Thames was so dried up, that one might have gone between London-Bridge and the Tower, on foot: This year also King Lewis of France, and the Earls of Flanders and Anjou sought
to restore William, Duke Robert's eldest Son, to the Dukedom of Normandy; but were frustrated of their hopes by Henry: about this time Maud King Henry's Queen died. After this Anno 1119. King Lewis enters Normandy again, and between him and the King was a bloody Battel fought, and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and many thousands besides were slain, and the ho∣nour of the day fell to King Henry, who returned Victoriously into Roan: And shortly after the Earl of Anjou, to curry the King's Favour, gave his Daughter to William, the King's eldest Son, in Marri∣age; of which Marriage the King concei∣ved no little Comfort, but the budding Hopes of the conceived future Happiness were quickly cropped by the hand of Fate, for at the King's Return for England, this new marri'd couple, with Richard and Mary other two of the King's Children, and Ri∣chard Earl of Chester, his Lady, and other Lords and Ladies were all cast away at Sea. The King after this, Anno 1121. took to his Second Wife Adilicia, Daughter of Jeffery first Duke of Lovain. And now Pope Calixtus the II. met the King in Norman∣dy, to see if his Threats would work the King's Submission to him, that he might
have the Packing and Dealing of the Cards for the Game of Spiritual Promotions in England: but neither Flatterings nor Threats would work upon him: At this Meeting, two Youths, Sons to the Earl of Mellent, and Servants to the King, dispu∣ting with two of the Popes Cardinals, with Logical Syllogisms put the two Rabbies to the Non-plus. In this Pope's time Anno 1122. was the first Lateran Council held, being the ninth General Council. About 3 years after this, Anno 1125. Pope Honorius the second, sent Cardinal Cremensis to certifie the Abuses of the Married Clergy; and to that purpose he made a Set Oration in Praise of CHA-STITY, and Dispraise of ƲNLAW-FƲLL LƲST, for so he termed the Priests Marriage: and yet himself was ta∣ken that Night with a WHORE, and so he returned to his Master the Pope without Success. Anno 1126. The King's Son in Law, the Emperor died, and his Wife return∣ed into England, whereupon the King cal∣led a Parliament, and caused them to swear Fealty to the Empress his only Heir. This same year one, Arnold an English Preacher of Oxford was cruelly Butche∣red, for preaching against the Pride of
Prelates, and Priest's wicked Lives. The next year after the King married his Daughter the Empress again to Jeffery Plant aginet, Son to Foulk Earl of Anjou. And about six years after, in the 33 year of this King, happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that at Noon-day one might have seen the Stars in the Firmament, and about two dayes after this, there was a ter∣rible Earthquake. And the same year happened such a Raging Fire in London, that it consumed a great part of the City from West-Cheap to Algate. The next year after, being the 34 of the King, Duke Robert the King's Brother after 26 years Imprisonment and the put∣ting out of his Eyes, died in Prison. And this year Worcester and Rochester were burnt. This Henry the First was King of Eng∣land, and Duke of Normandy; he was the 4th Son of William the Conqueror, by Maud his Wife Daughter to Baldwine the Fifth Earl of Flanders. He began his Reign on Wednesday the first day of Au∣gust, Anno 1100. and reigned 35 years 4 moneths, and 1 day: and was 23 Sole Monarch of England. He died of a Sur∣feit with eating Lampreys at the Town of St. Dennis in Normandy, on Munday the
Second day of December, Anno 1135. being the 36 of his Reign, 21 of his Duke∣dom, and 65 of his Age. His Body was buried at Redding in Bark-shire, in an Abby of his own Founding. CHAP. XIII. Of King Stephen, sometimes called Ste∣phen of Bloyce. THis Stephen at his first coming for England landed at Whitsand-Bay, with whom came a won∣derful Tempest of Thunder: His endea∣vours for the Crown were aided by Henry his younger Brotherthen Bishop of Winche∣ster, William Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and Hugh Big∣got late Steward to King Henry; all which swore him Fealty; although they had sworn it before to the Empress, King Henry's Daughter, who is now by them rejected: And crown'd Stephen King at Westminster, on the 26 day of December, Anno 1135 by William Corbell Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury;
After which he granted his Sub∣jects a Charter of some Immuities, Dated under his hand at Oxford, Anno Domini 1136, whose Tenour was, as followeth, That all Liberties, Customes and Pos∣sessions granted to the Church should stand firm. That all Persons and causes Ecclesiasti∣cal should appertain only to Ecclesiastical Judges. That none but Clergy men should med∣dle with the vacancies of Churches or any Church mens goods. That all bad usages in the Land touching Forrests, Exactions, &c. should be ut∣terly extirpated. And lastly, That the antient Laws should be restored. This year a Fire began at London Stone in the City of London, and consumed all before it, from thence East-ward to Ald∣gate, and West-ward to St. Pauls Church. Not long after this the King caused several Castles to be built in England, but by the advice of Henry Fitz Empress shortly af∣ter 1115 of them were demolished again. And now Baldwine de Redvers Rebelling again, the King was taken and banished, and a great Battel was shortly after fought against the Welsh; but the English
lost the day, and many of them were led away Captives by the Welsh Women, and such a number of them drowned by the fall of a Bridge over Temd, that a passage was made over the Water with their dead Carcasses: in the year eleven hundred thirty seven Rochester was destroyed with Fire. After this David King of Scots invaded England, and took Carlisle and New-Castle, and the King marching to oppose his fur∣ther Progress, a Peace was concluded be∣tween them. Afterwards the King, in the Third year of his Reign, Created Eustance his eldest Son Duke of Normandy; This year the Arch-Bishop's Seat in York, St. Martyns Church without the Walls, and the Hospital with thirty nine Houses, and much Riches were burnt. The King now paied his elder Brother Theobald two thou∣sand marks yearly for his Right of Nor∣mandy and England, and to Jeffery Plan∣taginet, Husband to Maud the Empress, he paid five thousand Marks yearly for his Right to the Crown. Whilest he was in Normandy setling his affairs: the Scots a∣gain invaded England; committing most barbarous Cruelties, as ripping up Wo∣men with Child, and tossing their Infants on their Spear points: several of the Peers
likewise Revolted, and did Fortifie most of the strong Castles in the Realm against the King, intending to bring Maud the Empress to the Crown: But the King, be∣ing no sluggard, did so hotly pursue his Bar∣rons, that he won most of the Castles from them, and put them to a stand: And with like success did Ralph Bishop of Dur∣ham (appointed General by Thurstan Arch-Bishop of York the King's Lieute∣nant of the North) go against the Scots, who were come as far as Northumberland, and manfully forced them to fly the Coun∣try. And shortly after, the King in Person marched into Scotland, and a Peace was a∣gain concluded between the two Kings. And Stephen brought with him into England Henry, David's eldest Son, and made him Earl of Huntington. And now the King began to quarrel with several of his Prelates, as Salisbury, Lincoln, and Ely, and demanding the keys of their Castles, exacting likewise great summs of money from them. About this time Maud the Empress landed in England, and was carried into Arrundel-castle by William de Albeny who married the Queen Dowager King Henry's Widdow, the King having intelligence thereof hasted to Arundel, at whose co∣ming
(a Woman's Wit being best at a pinch) she perswaded him, That none, to her knowledge or with her consent, were come with her, but those who did and would owe him Allegiance: Hereupon he honou∣rably conveyed her to Bristol, from which place she got to Wallingford-Castle, and in the mean while Earl Robert, her Bro∣ther divulged the News of her Arrivage, whereupon he got such a number of People together for her cause, that they were hard to be numbred. The King hereupon forthwith besieges Wallingford-Castle, but not able to accom∣plish his desires, he removed his Siege to Malmesbury, and in the mean time the Empress got to Lincoln, and stored the City with Provision and other Necessaries: Hereupon the King withdrew to Lincoln, and so straitly begirt the City with his Siege, that if the Empress had not made a shift to escape, she had been here taken. The King possessing himself of Lincoln, Earl Robert, and Ranulph Earl of Che∣ster went against him with a mighty Army, and making over the River pitched their Tents in the King's sight; the King ordering his Army, Trumpets sounded to Battel, and the Armies joined in Fight; but the Kings party being overpowred, they began
to faint and run away, leaving the King al∣most alone, who behaved himself so Cham∣pion-like, that he drove down whole Troops before him, until his Battel-Ax broke, and his Sword flew into pieces in his hand; and then being Weaponless he was struck down with a Stone which was thrown at him, and so was seized on, but preserved from Violence by Earl Robert's Command, and from thence he was car∣ried Prisoner to the Empress to Gloucester, from which place he was sent bound to Bri∣stoll. And now the Empress Triumphed as sole Sovereign of England; all the People, save those of Kent, doing her Allegiance; to Winchester she marched in State, and there received the Regal Crown, from thence she went to London, where she was received with Royal procession. And now the reports of Stephen's Im∣prisonment being got into Normandy, his Subjects there began to incline to Jeffery the Husband of the Empress: shortly af∣ter this, Earl Robert the Empress Brother was taken Prisoner, by some of the King's party, who had escaped from Lincoln, who carrying him to Gloucester there impriso∣ned him, and growing at length weary of his Irons, and hard Lodging, he and the King
were released one in Liew of the other: The Earl after his Releasment went for Normandy to raise more aid, but in the mean while King Stephen besieged the Empress in Oxford, where she was brought to such a straight, that she was forced to fly by Night, with some of her Company, Disguised, getting over the Thames on the Ice, it being then Winter, from which place they ran on Foot through Snow and Ditches to Abbington, being about five miles; and here they took Horse, and got to Wallingford-Castle. And by this time Earl Robert and Prince Henry the Empress Son, were landed at Warran-haven from whence they got to the Empress; but she at length being wearied with the various success of War and never out of Troubles, left England, and returned to her Husband into Normandy, having sent her Son Hen∣ry thither before her. At Lincoln the King (after the Empress Departure) caused all the Barrons to swear Allegiance to Prince Eustace, Ste∣phen's Son; And Theobald Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, refusing to consecrate Eustace King, was forced to fly into Normandy for his safety, and the King seized all his Possessions, no King before Stephen's time
durst enter Lincoln, being frighted with the Foolish Prophesies of some Wizards. After this Henry the Empress's Son en∣tered England again, and was met by the King, whose Armies had joined in Battel, but that the Winter Storms prevented them, and so a Truce was concluded, which thing was very displeasing to Prince Eustace, who not long after died of a Frenzy. After his Death, a Peace was concluded, and the King adopted Prince Henry the Empress's Son for his Heir and Successor: In the last year of the King's Reign, a little before his Death, was seen the Sign of the Cross in the Moon. This Stephen was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, he was the Third Son of Stephen Earl of Bloyce by his Wife A∣dilicia or Alice, third Daughter to Wil∣liam the Conquerour; His Reign began on Munday the second day of December, Anno Domini eleven hundred thirty five, and he reign'd eighteen years, ten moneths, and twenty dayes: and was the twenty fourth sole Monarch of England: He died of the Illiack-Passion mixed with his old Disease the Emmeroyds, in the Monastery of the Monks at Dover, on Munday the twenty fifth day of October, Anno Domini
eleven hundred fifty four: his Body was buried at Feaversham in Kent, in an Ab∣by of his own founding. In the fourth year of this King's Reign was the second Lateran Council, Innocent the II. Pope. CHAP. XIV. Of King Henry the Second, sometimes called Henry Fitz-Empress. THis Henry was three times crowned: first, by Theobald Archbishop of Can∣terbury, at Westminster: then at Lincoln: and lastly, at Worcester. His Privy Coun∣cil he chose of the gravest Peers, and Tho∣mas Becket his Chancellor. About the 5 of his Reign, 30 Waldenses, or there∣abouts, being come into England; were persecuted by a Council of Bishops held at Oxford, and by the King's Command all persons were prohibited to give them any Food, whereby they miserably perished: And now the King, and Malcolm King of
Scots entered Amity upon the same Con∣ditions as were agreed upon in Henry the first's time. And in Token of his Subje∣ction, the King of Scots, offered his Hat and Saddle upon St. Peters Altar in York, and there left them. About this time the Jews crucified a Child at Gloucester. And now Theobald dying, Becket the Chancellor was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and he denied to take the Oath, for observation of the Articles, administred to the Clergy, which the rest of the Bishops had taken, and were clearly against the Pope's Authority. Hereupon the Contention between the King and Becket grew so hot, that the Pope sent Philip his Almoner to perswade the Bishop to swear, who, at his Request, took the Oath, Anno 1163. London-Bridge was made a new of Timber, by one Peter the Priest of Cole-church. And now Becket standing several times in Oppositi∣on against the King, at length was condem∣ned of Perjury, and being called to hear his Sentence as a Traytor, he made shift to escape in Disguise into Flanders by the Name of Deerman. Now the King sends his Embassadors to the Pope, requesting him to send two of his Cardinals to judge the Case, the Pope
returned Answer, That he would Judg him himself, when he saw Cause: upon the Receit of this Answer, the King made an Order that all the Clergy that were with the Pope, or did Appeal to Rome, should have their Livings sequestred; and bani∣shed all the Kinred of Becket, Man, Wo∣man, Child and Suckling. And now the King stoutly withstood all the Popes Threats, Edicts and Bulls, deny∣ing also the payment of Peter-pence. And Roger Archbishop of York, at the King's Command, in Contempt of Becket, crow∣ned Henry the King's Son. But Becket after 7 years Banishment, was again re∣conciled to the King, and restored to his former Dignity. During these Stirs, there was one Gil∣bert Foliott, Doctor of Divinity in Ox∣ford, who perswaded the King to curb the Pride of the Clergy, and this Doctor often reprooved proud Becket to his Face, for which he was much hated and persecuted: Now Becket, at his second Entrance on his Bishoprick, excommunicated several Pre∣lates: And King Henry, being in Nor∣mandy, and hearing hereof, chanced to speak some words against the Bishop; which moved four of his Courtiers to sale for England, where in the Church of Can∣terbury
they murthered Bishop Becket, Anno 1170. He was afterwards cano∣nized by the Pope, and is reputed amongst those of the Romish perswasion, for a great Saint. He was, by Birth, a Londoner, his Mother a Sarazen, and by Profession he was a Civilian. After the King returned for England, Robert Fitz-Stephen a valliant man (with∣out the King's Knowledg) sailed for Ire∣land, where he became Conqueror of se∣veral Strong-holds. But the King him∣self, who had it in his Thoughts long be∣fore to make a Conquest thereof, sailed thither, and imprisoned Fitz-Stephen, who had made way for the King's Con∣quest. After some Skirmishes, the King conquered Ireland, and established Reli∣gion there; and built also a Magnificent Castle at Dublin, and so returned for England. About this time it was or∣dained, That Men should make their Testa∣ments in presence of their Neighbours: And if the Man that died had Wife and Children, he was to cast up what he owed to other men, and to Servants for their Wages: And then the rest of his Goods were to be divided into Three Parts, one part to his Children, another part to his
Wife, and the third part, for his Burial, and to Pious Vses. After this the King sailed to Norman∣dy, whither the Pope had sent two Cardi∣nals to take the King's Purgation for Bec∣ket's Death: His Pennance was, I. That he should, at his own proper Charges, maintain 200 Soldiers one year, for Defence of the Holy Land. II. That he should freely suffer Ap∣peals to Rome. III. That he should revoke all Cu∣stoms against the Churches Liberties. IV. That he should restore the Possessi∣ons of Canterbury. And V. Receive all the banished Friends of Becket into England again. About this time Silvester Girald a learned Man, wrote a Book against the Wickedness of the Monks, whereby he stirred up those Hornets against him. And now the young King, by the Instigation of his Mother, sought to depose his Father. But after several Battels, fought between them, and much Blood spilt, for the space of Three years, at length they were recon∣ciled. And after this the King called a Parli∣ment at Northampton, and divided En∣gland into six Crcuits. And appointed
three Justices itinerants for every Circuit. To this Parliament came the King of Scot∣land and his Peers. Shortly after the cal∣ling of this Paiament the young King Henry died: And Hraclius, the Patri∣arch of Jrsalem, came to the King to de∣sire his Aid in the Holy Land: but was de∣nyed. In the 20 of the King's Reign, the City of Leicester was burnt, by the King's Com∣mand, the Walls and Castle rased, and the Inhabitants dispersed into other Cities, for their Disobedience to the King. And this year Christ's Church in Canterbury was burnt: and about six years after the City of York was burned: and in the year 1185. The King bestowed Irelad upon his Son John: And this year the Abby of Glastenbury was consumed with fire: and the next year after was a great Earthquake that threw down many Buildings, and rent in Pieces the Cathedral Church of Lincoln: Chichester also was burnt. After this Richard the King's Son, by the help of Philip King of France, rebel∣led against his Father, and drove him out of the City Mentz in Main, which he dearly loved, being his Birth-place. In the 33 of the King, near Oxfrd, in Saffolk, was taken a Fish, having the shape
of a Man: which Fish was kept by the Go∣vernour of Orford-castle six months and above, for a Wonder; but was never heard to speak a word: he would eat all manner of meat gladly, but was most gready after raw Flesh or Fish: at length he stole away from his Keeper, and ran to the Sea again. The King had a fair Concubine, called Rosamond, whom Elianor the Queen poi∣soned, for which Cause, and for stirring up his Son against him, the King imprison∣ed her: and caused Rosamond to be bu∣rien at Godstow, near Oxford, with this Epitaph over her; Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi, non Ro∣sa munda, Non Redolet, sed Olet, quae Redolere solot. Within this Tomb lies the World's chiefest Rose, She who was sweet, will now offend your Nose. Anno 1188. The Town of Beverly with the Church of St. Johns there was burnt. This Henry the Second was King of England, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen and Aquitain. He was the eldest Son to
Jffery Plantaginet Earl of Anjou (son to Fulk King of Jerusalem) by Maud his Wife, eldest Daughter to Henry the first: He began his Reign on Munday the 25 of October, Anno 1154. and reigned 34 years, 8 months, and 11 dayes: and was the 25 sole Monarch of England. He died at Chinon, on Thursday the 6 of July, Anno 1189. and was buried at Font-Everad in Normandy, the 25 of the King's Reign. Anno 1179. was the third Lateran Council, Alexander the III was Pope: this was the Eleventh General Council. CHAP. XV. Of King Richard the first, commonly called Richard Courdelion. KING Richard at his Coronation by Balwine Arch-Bishop of Canterbu∣ry, swore to keep several Articles Admi∣nistred to him by the Peers, which were for the benefit of the Realm, in his time were those famous Robbers and Out-Laws called
Robin-Hood and Little-John. The King's first attempts were for the Holy War, for performance of which Voyage he sold and mortgaged several parcells of his Revenue, scarce sparing his City of London from Sale, and scruzed eleven hundred pounds Sterling out of Stephen de Turnham, his late Fathers Treasurer; but before his Expe∣dition, William King of Scots came into Eng∣land, and made a League with the King; and snt his Brother David and ten thou∣sand Scots with him for the holy War. The King before he took his Journey; gave his Brother John six Earldoms, Cornwal, Dorset, Somerset, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster, he also made William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, Governour of the Realm till his return, joining with him Hugh Bishop of Durham for his Assist∣ance in the North parts. And now having settled his affairs, he, with several of his Nobles took Shipping for France, where he and Philip King of France became sworn Brothers, and both set forwards for the holy War: King Richard coming to Sicilia, assalted the King thereof, (who had usurped the Kingdom, after the Death of William who was Husband to Lady Jane. King Richard's Sister) making an Agreement with him, and gave him
twenty thousand ounces of Gold for his Sisters Dowry, and twenty thousand oun∣ces more for the Love he bore to the Eng∣lish Nation: yet, for all this shew of Love, he and Philip of France took Council a∣gainst King Richard. Joachin the Abbot, expounding the Apocalypse to King Ri∣chard at Calabria near Sicily, told him that Antichrist was born, and then in the City of Rome, viz. the Pope. The King in his Passage Conquered the Isle of Cyprus, and left in it Richard de Camvile and Robert de Tarnham Vice-Royes. And the English and French besie∣ged the City Ptolomais, and won it: short∣ly after this, the French King returned (not without great shame) to his own King∣dom. Whilst King Richard was imployed in the Holy War, his Brother John and some others of the Peers deprived William Long∣champ of his Command, for several Out∣rages by him committed, especially upon Jeffery Arch-Bishop of York, the King's Brother. The King at his approach to Je∣rusalem took three thousand Camels, and four thousand Horses and Mules of the Salladines coming from Babylon, and all the Carriages with their Rich Spoil. And now the Duke of Burgandy and
his Regiment forsaking King Richard, he made a Peace with Saladine for three years, and so returned very Pensive that he had neither conquered Jerusalem nor Saladine. And intending to have gone through Germany, he was taken in Dis∣guise in Vienna, and the Duke seized him for his Prisoner: The News of the King's Imprisonment coming to England, his Mo∣ther with other of his fast Friends, Swore the Realm to be true to the King: and made all the Strong Holds sure for him. But the Subjects of Normandy, in his Cap∣tivity, were set upon by the French. After this the King regained his Liber∣ty, paying to the Emperor 100000 Marks sterling, and half so much to the Duke for his Ransom: the Emperor afterwards, to gratifie the King, made him King of Pro∣vince. Philip of France having notice of the King's Releasement, sent word to Earl John, the King's Brother (who had endea∣voured to gain the Crown in his Brothers Captivity) that the Devil was let loose again. After his Releasement he came for England, and was joyfully received by Hubert Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and shortly after Earl John was adjudged by his Peers to loose all his Estate. And now the King caused himself to be Crowned again
at Winchester; and had a new Great Seal made, by which Device he got great Summs of money out of his Subjects, cau∣sing them to have all their Evidences new Sealed: after this, being at Dinner at West∣minster, and, hearing of the Siege of Ner∣ville, he swore he would not turn his Face till he had got thither with his Army: and so caused the Wall to be cut down where he was, that he might pass through, which Breach was to be perceived two hundred years after. And now he forgave his Bro∣ther, Earl John, and getting a great Vi∣ctory over the French at Gysors; He thus spoke, Not we, saith he, but DIEVET MONDROIT, that is, God and our Right▪ hath obtained this Victory: af∣ter this the Kings of England made it their Motto. Afterwards, by the interceeding of Pope Innocent the Third, a Peace was con∣cluded between England and France. And not long after this, the King lying a Gar∣rison against the Castle of Chalne, was there shot in the left Arm by an Arballaster, standing on the Wall, with a sqare Arrow out of a Steel Bow, of which Wound he shortly after died. He banished all the Jews of Norwich St. Edmund Bury, Lyncoln, Stanford, Lyn and York, at which last place above five
hundred of them, besides Women and Chil∣dren, entred a Tower of the Castle, and when the Christians came to Besiege them, the Jews cut the Throats of their Wives and Children, and cast them on the Besiegers heads, and then burnt both the House and themselves, so desperatly Wicked were they. This Richard the first, was King of Eng∣land, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen and Aquitain: He was the third Son of King Henry the Second, by Elianor his Queen, eldest Daughter and Heir to William Duke of Aquitain: His Reign began on Thurs∣day the sixth of July 1189, he reigned nine years and nine Months, and was the twen∣ty sixth sole Monarch of England. He died of the before named Wound in his Arm, on Tuesday the sixth of April, Anno Do∣mini 1199, being in the tenth year of his Reign, and 42 of his Age, His body was buried at Font-Everad.
CHAP. XVI. Of King John, commonly termed, by his Father, John Lackland. HE was Crowned at Westminster by Hub Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and had much ado before he got the Crown, and more ado before the People would swear him Fealty; which when they did it, was with a Reservation. Arthur, King John's Nephew, by his Elder Brother Jeffe∣ry, with whom sided Philip King of France, did mightily oppose King John's proceed∣ings, but he was backt by Otho the Empe∣rour. And Hubert the Arch-Bishop, in a great Assembly, made an Oration, wherein he Declared that the Crown of England was meerly Arbitrary and Elective. Now the King after several Out-fals between Philip King of France and him, at length a Peace was concluded, wherein it was agreed that Lewis, Heir of France, should marry King John's Neece. After the Peace concluded the King re∣turned for England, and ordered a col∣lection
of 3s, on every Carucata of Land, for the Marriage of his Neece, and his Martial uses: But Jeffery Arch-Bishop of York▪ (Son to King John's Father by Rosamond his Father's Concubine) denyed the Pay∣ment hereof within his Precincts: and like∣wise refused to accompany the King his Brother into France to solemnize the Mar∣riage, and conclude the Peace: for which Contemps the King caused all his Tempo∣ralties to be Seized on. After this, the King and William King of Scotland meeting at Lincoln, they there swore Amity and Faithful Love, upon the Crosier-staff of Arch-Bishop Hubert. But now the French King breaking the Peace concluded on, several Battels were fought between him and King John, and Prince Arthur was taken Prisoner and died. The Pope sought a Reconciliation between the two Kings, but it took no effect. After this the King returned, and called a Parliament at Oxford, at which time they granted him 33 s. 4 d. for every Knights Fee. In the year 1204, Normandy fell from England to the French, after it had been disbranched from France about 319 years, the next year after the Arch-Bishop died, whose Wealth and Possessions were Seized on by the King, in Regard of his haughty
carriage in his life time, and John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, was translated to Can∣terbury. And now the King bethinks himself a∣gain on Revenge upon the French; and with a great Army landed at Rochel, and presently won the Castle Mount Auban, which was reputed invincible, after this the City Angiers was also subjected by him. And at length the two Kings met, but, by the interceeding of Forein Prelates, a two years Peace was concluded. About this time the King sent one A∣lexander a Divine of Oxford, to the Pope to defend his Authority against that of Rome, which he very well performed and made out both by Scripture and Reason: and writing against the Pope's Authority, he was afterwards persecuted and banished by Langton Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and died in Exile: shortly after this the Emperour Otho arived in England, and was Royally received by the King, who af∣ter some days of Banquetting returned again. And now the Pope begins to play his Prancks, depriving Arch-Bishop Gray, and setting up Stephen Langton in his place, writing to the King in his behalf: and now began the King's miseries to approach, for upon this Account the King wrote to Pope
Innocentius the Third, threatning him for intruding upon his Prerogative: the Pope returned him a thundring Answer, and presently after sent his Apostolical command to the Prelates, London, Ely, and Worcester to interdict the Kingdom, if the King continued in his Obstinacy. This Commission was put in Execution, and the Church Doors shut up for several years: some Authors say 6 years, so that the Peo∣ple lived more like Infidels than Christi∣ans; for which affront several of the Cler∣gy were banished by the King, and sent to the Pope their Master. And now the Irish, being in Rebellion, the King hasted thither, at whose arrival more then twenty petty Kings came to him to Dublin, doing their Allegiance. About this time Gualter Maxes, Arch-Deacon of Oxford, preached vehemently against the Pride of the Pope, and wrote a Book cal∣led the Revelation of the Romish Goliah, for which he was much persecuted and ha∣ted. Shortly after this Philip King of France, by commission from the Pope, took Ship for England, to depose King John, the Pope promising him the Crown of England: but the King prepared against his coming, yet fearing the French Power, he, unwillingly, swore to Pandulphus, the Pope's Nuncio, to
submit, in all things, to the judgment of the Church: hereupon Pandulphus swore him, touching all things in his Excommunication, that he should stand to the Popes Judgment, and that he should restore to their former Dignities the Arch-Bishop, Bishops and Monks: he was also forced to surrender his Crown, Scepter, Sword, Robes and King into Pandulphus's, the Popes Attorneys, hands; laying them at his feet: And lastly, to hold his Crown in Fee-Farm of the Pope, at the yearly Rent of 1000 Marks. And now the Pope got the Prey which he so long hunt∣ed after: But the King was continually af∣ter pestered with the Pope, between whom and the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury he was banded like a Tennice-Ball. The Barrons also proved several times disloyal to him, and at last betrayed the Crown of England to Lewis of France, sending him their Letter of Allegiance, hereupon Lewis (against the Popes Com∣mand) set forwards for England, with 600 Ships, and 80 Boats, and landed in the Island of Thanet in Kent, to whom all the Treacherous Barrons Fed: from thence he marched to London, and at St. Paul's Church he took the Oath of the Ci∣tizens, and the Oath of the Barons at Westminster, The King seeing these pro∣ceedings
spoiled the Castles of the Barrons, which caused them to Repent of their Dis∣loyalty, forthwith returning to the King again who then lay sick at Newark and shortly after died. In this King's Reign London-Bridge was built of Stone, being but of Wood at first, and several Prodigies were seen in his Reign, and also terrible Storms of Thun∣der and Lightning with Hail Stones as big as Goose-Egs, which destroyed Men and Women, besides Cattel and Corn Fields. In the 15 of the King, a Fire hapning in London, near the Bridge, People thronging to make some help, the Fire by the Vio∣lence of the Wind took hold on both ends of the Bridge, so that the People could not pass either backwards or forwards, and and so Barges, Boats, &c. coming to their Assistance, the People thronged so indis∣creetly into them, that the Boats sunk, and above three thousand Persons were drown∣ed in the Thames. It is said that this King John was im∣moderate in blasphemies and execrations, and that he was so Luxurious that he de∣stroyed Matilda a Beautiful Maid, causing her to drink Poyson, because she would not yield to his intreaty to be corrupted by him: he is also thought to have sought
aid from Mirammula King of Affrica, whilest he was in his Troubles, promising him the Kingdom of England, if he Con∣quered, and to renounce his Christian Faith. Anno 1215. being the 16 of the King was held the IV Lateran Council, Innocentius the Third being Pope: this was the 12 ge∣neral Council, in which Auricular Confes∣sion was established, and the Cup taken from the Laity in the Communion. This John was King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Normandy, Guyen and Aquitain, he was sixth Son of King Henry the Second by his Queen Elianor eldest Daughter and Heir to William Duke of Aquitain: his Reign began on Tues∣day the 6 day of April, Anno 1199, and continued 17 years, 6 months, and 13 days. He was the 27 sole Monarch of England, and was Poysoned by one Simon a Monk of Swinested Abby in Lincolnshire, which was upon this occasion, as it is said, viz. That the King being there at Dinner, and having an half penny loaf in his hand, he swore, if he lived, it should be at twelve pence before that time twelve Months; and the Monk over-hearing these words poysoned him. He died on Wednesday the nineteenth day of October, Anno 1216. in the eighteenth year of his Reign, and
50 year of his Age, his body was buried at Worcester. CHAP. XVII. Of King Henry the Third, commonly cal∣led Henry of Winchester. THis Henry about the Age of 9 years was Crowned at Gloucester, in the presence of the Popes Legate Wallo, and other Nobles, and the Earl of Pembrook, by consent of the Peers, was made Guardian of his Person and Kingdom. Shortly af∣ter a Truce was concluded between Lewis of France and the King, Lewis then re∣turning for France, but staied not long 'ere he came for England again with fresh supplyes taking his march to Lincoln. In the mean while the Earl of Pembrook, by the Advice of Wallo and the Bishop of Win∣chester, raised an Army, and gave the French Battel at Lincoln, where they re∣ceived a great Overthrow, so that Lewis hasted to France for more Aid; after
Lewis returned from France, he was be∣sieged in London, and forced, at length, to make Peace, and depart the Realm. And now the Nobles falling into Rebel∣lion, they were fought by the Earl of Pem∣brook, who shortly after died: after whose Death, Peter de Rupibus, Bishop of Win∣chester, and some others were made Guar∣dians to the King; and upon this change the King was Crowned again at Westmin∣ster, by Stephen Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, the King having the Saturday before laid the first Stone of the new work of the Abby Church at Westminster. After this the King made Hubert de Burgo cheif Ju∣stice of England. And now the Barrons and Welsh being in Rebellion again, and hearing of the King's march towards them, durst not stay his coming. Anno 1222, Alexander King of Scotland was married to the King's Sister at York. And this year was granted to the King the Ward-ship of Heirs and their Lands: a∣bout this time an Imposture at the Provin∣cial Synod at Oxford suffered himself to be wounded in the Hands, Feet and Side, cal∣ling himself Christ, who together with a Woman, that took upon her to be the Mo∣ther of God, were immured between two Walls, where they ended their Lives mise∣rably;
And shortly after one Constantine Fitz-Arnulf, raising a Tumult in London, was taken and hanged by Hubert de Bur∣goe's Order, and the common sort had their Hands and Feet cut off. Now the Barrons being earnest for Con∣firmation of Liberties, and denied by Wil∣liam Briwere, one of the King's Council, the King to please all parties Answered; All of us have sworn to those Liberties, and must keep them. And hereupon Writs were issued out to inquire upon Oath, what Liberties were currant in or from the time of Henry his Grand-Father. Not long af∣ter this, the King sent Embassadors to the King of France, to demand Normandy and other his Transmaritain places, but they were denied him: and now the King, upon some Distast taken against one Falca∣sius, Commanded all Strangers to depart the Realm: after this a Parliament being called, the King confirmed MAGNA CHARTA under his Seal, before they would yield to grant him a Subsidy. And now the King, having gotten Money, sent his Brother Robert and other Nobles into France, for the Regaining his Dominions there, who in spite of Fate got and held Aquitain: after this, more aid being
sent, they endeavoured the gaining of Nor∣mandy also. The King having now gotten a Fifteenth of all Degrees in his Realm, and wrested 5000 marks out of London besides. At the next Parliament at Oxford, by the advice Hubert de Burgo, he revoked the great Charter by Plea of Infra Etatem: here∣upon the Barrons Rebelled threatning to drive him out of his Kingdom: and the Welsh being then in Rebellion too, the King was necessitated to conclude a disho∣nourable Peace. After this Ambassadors came from Gascoign, Poictu and Norman∣dy, promising their assistance, if the King would go in Person with an Army thither: whereupon he prepared, and the concourse of Nobles and others for the Voyage was so numerous, that there was not Shipping for half the Company: whereat the King was so inraged, that he called Hubert de Burgo Rank old Traytor, because no more Ships were prepared, and ran at him with his Sword, and being that time pre∣vented of his Voyage, he took Shipping the next year, but returned without his expe∣ctation, after he had spent all his Trea∣sure. Anno the 15 of the King, upon St Pauls day such an horrible Thunder light∣ed
on the Cathedral of St. Pauls Church in London, when Roger Niger the Bishop was at Mass there, that the Church thereby was so shaken as if it would have fallen, and after that came such a flash of Light∣ning, that all the People thought they should have been burnt; and so all the People (save the Bishop and one Deacon) run out of the Church, and being astonished fell on the Ground, void of understanding. The next year after, the Monks of Can∣terbury and the King chose Ralph Nevil for Arch-Bishop there, and after him a second, third and fourth; calling Edmund of Abbington, before they could please the Pope, all being distastful to him, till this Edmund was chosen. Vpon the 7 of April, Anno 1233. there appeared 4 Suns, as it were, besides the natural Sun, of a red colour, and a great Circle of Chri∣stal colour; and the morrow after St. Martins day, began Thunder very horri∣be, which lasted 15 days. The King now wanting Mney caused ll Sheriffs, Bay∣lifss, and other Officers to clear up their Accompts in the Exchecquer: he removed also Hubert de Burgo from his place of chief Justice, through the Bishop of Win∣chester's Suggestions, and Artes being preferred against the chief Justice, the
King's heart was so alienated from him, that Hubert, fearing the Event fled to Sanctuary, in Merton in Surry; hereupon Sir Godfrey de Cranchcome, with 300 men, were sent to seek him, where finding him at Merton, they took him from the San∣ctuary, and brought him Prisoner to the Tower at London; and at length he was forced to yield up all his Treasure (being of an incredible value) into the King's hands, but all would not do, for he was sent to the Castle of Devises, there to re∣main as free Prisoner, and 4 Knights ap∣pointed for his Keepers there. After this the King displacing English Officers from about him, put in Poicto∣vines and Brittons in their Rooms: and Summoning a Parliament to Oxford, the Bairons refused to come, because of this distaste of the Strange Officers, and being again summoned to London, refused to be present; and sent the King word, If he would not drive the Strangers from Court, they would drive both him and them from it: and upon this account Earl Mar∣shal and Lord Basst, with other Nobles Rebelled, and took Hubert de Burgo out of Prison, carrying him along with them into Wales and the Bishops of Canterbu∣ry, Chister and Rchester, were sent into
Wales to take up the business: but before they got thither the Earl Marshal was gone into Ireland and there died; and Leoline Prince in Wales would condescend to no∣thing, till the King would grant to him and those Nobles with him their Pardon, which accordingly was done, and Hubert de Bur∣go received again into favour. Shortly after this, Isabel the King's Sister was married to the Emperor, there being at the Marriage 3 Kings, 11 Dukes, and 30 Marquesses and Earls. Anno 1235, the Jews of Norwich stole a Boy and Cir∣cumcised him and had an Intention to have crucified him at Easter; for which Fact they were Convicted. And the year after being the 20 of the King, the Thames overflowed the Banks, so that men did Row in Boats in the great Palace at West∣minster, in the midst of the Hall there. Now the King's Treasures being exhau∣sted with the payment of his Sister's Porti∣on, he calls a Parliament at London, de∣siring a new supply of Money, but was de∣nied, unless he would confirm MAG∣NA CHARTA again, and Rely wholly upon his natural Subjects for Ad∣vice and Council: all which he granted unto. After this, the Popes Legate called a National Council, but was commanded
by the King to act nothing against his Crown or Dignity. Shortly after, the King and Queen being gone to Woodstock, a Traytor was sent thither by William, Son to Jeffery de Ma∣risco, out of Ireland to murther the King in his Bed, but being taken and prevented of his purpose, he was pulled in pieces with Wild-Horses. Afterwards, Anno 1238, the Pope's Le∣gate going to Oxford, he was encountred by the Students, and his Brother slain, him∣self hardly escaping, whereupon he inter∣dicted the University, and made all the Bishops (who interceeded in the Univer∣sities behalf) and the Students go un-gow∣ned and bare-footed, from St. Pauls Church to his House, being about a Mile, before he would revoke the Sentence again. And now Hubert de Burgo having gain∣ed the Honour and Title of Earl of Kent, is again accused, and 4 of his Chiefest Cast∣les given to the King, and he deprived of his Title. After this, the King Commanded Otto∣bon the Popes Legate to depart the King∣dom, and committing the Government of the Realm to the Bishop of York, took Ship for Poctue, carrying with him thir∣ty
Barrels of Sterling Money for that Ser∣vice, but the King's Fortune in this Jour∣ney proved very averse to him. The No∣bles at the Kings return, all his Mony being gon, granted him a Subsidy of 20 shillings upon every Knights Fee held in chief▪ for aid of the Marriage of his Daughter: and Anno 26 of the King, the Jews were con∣strained to pay 20000 Marks, or else be kept in perpetual Imprisonment: about the year 1241. Pope Gregory the 9, writ to the King, desiring to see England, but was denied. And shortly after the King com∣manded that none of his Subjects should dare to contribute any Money to the Pope. Anno 1245, was the first Council held at Lovain, being the 13 general Council, Innocent the 4 being Pope, who was the only Patron of the 3 Orders of Domini∣can, Carmelites, and Augustines. A∣bout this time the Thames overflowed the Banks about Lambeth, and drowned the Houses and Fields the space of 6 Miles, and Men rode on Horse-back in the great Hall at Westminster. Anno the 32 of the King was a great Plague in England, and the Town of New-Castle upon Tyne was burnt, Bridge and all: and about two years after in October the Sea flowed twice with∣out any Ebb, which made such an horri∣ble
noise, that it was heard into England a great way; and in a dark night the Sea seemed to be on a Fire, and the Waves to fight one against another, which put the Marriners in great Fear, and overthrew a great number of Houses at Winchelsey. The King wanting more Money, called a Parliament to supply him, but was denied, whereupon he sold his Jewels, Plate, and o∣ther precious Stuff, shortning the allow∣ance also of his House, and inviting him∣self sometimes to one Nobleman's Table, and sometimes to another. And Alex∣ander King of Scotland, coming to York, there Married Margaret the Kings Daugh∣ter, to whose Marriage-Feast the Arch-Bishop of York gave 600 fat Oxen, which were all spent at the first Service. Not long after this Prince, Edward the Kings eldest Son went into Spain, and married the Kings Sister, whereupon the Spanish King quitted all his claim to Gas∣coign to King Henry, who gave his Son Edward upon his Marriage Gascoin, Wales, Bristow, Stanford and Grantham; the year after the Prince with his Wife and Royal Retinue landed at Dover: And now also Edmund the King's Son was ho∣noured by the Pope with the empty Title of King of Sicily.
Anno 1225, Seabald Arch Bishop of York, was prosecuted by the Pope, for Preaching and writing against his Holiness's Pride. And this year, 142 Jews were brought to Westminster who were accused, and 18 of them hanged, for Crucifying a Child at Lincoln, and the rest kept Pri∣soners. And now the King again, (perceiving his Coffers to be empty) caused sharp Or∣ders to be made against Sheriffs, for the passing their Accompts in the Exchequer. And about this time came the Germain Ambassadors, with an Embassy to Richard Earl of Cornwall the King's Brother; wherein they declared, That their Masters, the Princes Electors of the Roman Empire, had made choice of him for King; which he, after much Consultation, accepted on. And now the Barrons fall into Rebellion again, and a Parliament being called at Oxford, thither they repaired and beha∣ved themselves very Insolently towards their Sovereign: hereupon the King sailed into France, and there compounded with the French King, that he should hold the Dukedom of Normandy, and Earldom of Anjou, Mayne, Touraign, and Poi∣ctue, for 300000 pounds of Touraigne;
and on promise to receive other Lands of the value of 20000 l. per annum. Anno 43, of the King, a Jew at Teukesbury fell in∣to a Privy upon Saturday, and refused to be helped out, because it was their Sabboth, whereupon the Earl of Gloucester kept him in all Sunday too, and on Monday he was dead. About this time Dr. Strenham wrote that Sufficiency of the Holy Scrip∣tures were only necessary to Salvation. Now the King of France being Umpire between Henry and his Barrons, he gave Judgment for the King, and the Barrons denying to stand to his Sentence, the King gave them Battel near Nottingham; where they received a great Overthrow, and Simon Mountforth Son to the Earl of Leicester (the chief Rebell) and many o∣ther Barrons, Knights and Esquires were taken. After this Overthrow the Barrons sent Letters twice to the King, desiring to be reconciled, but could not be heard, which provoked them to fight the King's Army again; at which time the Fortune of the day fell to the Barrons, for they took the King and his Brother Richard King of the Romans, and some other great Peers, and the next day their two eldest Sons yielded themselves Prisoners. And now Earl Mountforth Joyful of
the Victory, proceeded to the Imprison∣ment of the King of the Romans, his Son and the Prince, in Dover: but this bud∣ding happiness of the Earl's was quickly cropped, for the Earl of Gloucester and he differing about parting of the Prey, the Earl of Gloucester thereupon opposed the current of Leicester's Fortune, with whom joined the Prince (escaped out of Prison) and several other Nobles, and at Everssham in Worcestershire they over∣threw Leicesters Army, and he being there slain, had his Head cut off, and sent to Wor∣cester, and his Hands and Feet were chopt off, and all those on his party disinheri∣ted: and London is threatned to be burnt by the King for taking the Barrons part. Shortly after this, John de Warren Earl of Surrey killed Allan de Zouch, in West∣minster-Hall, upon some distaste taken. Anno 1264, there were 700 Jews slain in London, because one of them would have forced a Christian Man to have paied more than two pence for the Usury of 20 shillings the week: and the year 1269, the Thames was so hard frozen, that Men and Cattel passed over from Lambeth to West∣minster upon the Ice. About this time it was that Prince Ed∣ward
took his Voyage for the Holy-War: and Roger-Bacon a famous Divine of Ox∣ford was Imprisoned by the Pope, for Preaching against the Absurdities in the Church of Rome. Anno 1271, the Steeple of Bow-Church in Cheap-side fell down and flew many People Men and Women, and the year af∣ter was a great Riot in Norwich, through which the Monastery of the Trinity was burned, whereupon the King rode down thither, and after enquiry made of the chief Actors, caused 50 of them to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, and their Quarters to be burnt. And now the King, perceiving his Death to approach, swore the Earl of Gloucester to keep the Realm for Prince Edward his Son. This Henry III. was King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Guyain and Aquitain; He was eldest Son to King John by Isabel his Queen, Daughter and Heir of Aimery Earl of Angolisme; his Reign began on wednesday the 19 of Octob. Anno 1216, and he reigned 56 years and 28 days, and was the 28 sole Monarch of England: he died at the Abby of St. Ed∣munds in Suffolk, on Wednesday the 16 day of November, Anno 1272, being in
the 57 year of his Reign, and 65 of his Age: his body was buried at Westminster. CHAP. XVIII. Of King Edward the First, commonly cal∣led Long-Shanks. KING Edward was gone for the Holy-Land when the Crown fell to him, Elianor his Queen being with him, who, at Acon in their Voyage, was delivered of a Daughter: and at that place her Husband was Wounded by a Trayterous Villain, in three places of his Arm with a Poysoned knife; all which Wounds (after the Chyrurgions were wearied) the Queen cured by licking out the Venom with her Tongue, yet she thereby receiving no prejudice. The news of his Father's Death coming to his Ear, he forthwith returned, and after his Arrival, himself and Queen were Crowned by Robert Kilwarby Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury: and after this, the King called a Parliament at Westminster, which as some
affirm, were the first Statutes there made: and Luellin Prince of Wales refusing to come to the Parliament, King Edward thereupon went into Wales, and built the Castle of Flint, and Luellin made his Submission, and gave the King 50000 pounds for Agreement, and 10000 marks per Annum for the Island of Man. But afterwards he had several Bickerings with the Welsh, but at length reduced them to perfect Subjection, and beheaded Luellin their Prince, and his Brother David, and set up their Heads upon the Tower at Lon∣don: He appointed Sheriffs for Wales, and established the English Lawes amongst them. Anno 1274, was the Second Council of Lugdunence, Gregory the X being Pope, which is accounted the fourteenth general Council. In the III of the King's Reign upon St. Nicholas day were very Terrible Thun∣ders, Earth-Quakes, and Lightning, and a great Draggon and blazing Star, which put many People in great fear: and in the year 1288, the Summer was so hot, that many Persons died with the extremity thereof, and yet Wheat that year was sold for two shillings eight pence the Quarter, and all other Corn at very low-prices: but
the year following, Wheat was raised to Twenty shillings the quarter, by reason of the great Rains that fell that year; which dearth of Corn continued about 40 years, to the end of King Edward the Second's Reign, saith my Author; so that in process of time a Bushell of Wheat was at Ten shillings. The King, the 19 of his Reign, banish∣ed all the Jews out of England, making all their Goods Confiscate, the number of them that were Banished is reckoned to be 15000 and 9 persons. The King also inflict∣ed great Fines upon his Judges and other Officers for their Corruption; the sum im∣posed upon Eleven of them was 236000 Marks. About this time Dr. Scotus (called Dr. Subtilis by some) preached against the a∣buse of the Keys, and that Transubstantia∣tion could neither be proved by Scripture, nor sound Reason. Not long after this, Alexander King of Scotland dying without Issue, great Con∣tentions arose between the Lords Bruse and Baliol about the Crown, but King Ed∣ward, being Umpire between them, gave Judgment for Lord Balioll, who was Crowned King, and did Homage to Ed∣ward for his whole Kingdom.
After this the Scotch King, seeking to shake off his Homage again, he and his Kingdom were all Conquered by King Ed∣ward, and all the Scotch Nobles swore to be true to Edward ever after, acknow∣ledging him for the King. Baliol, late King was sent Prisoner to London to the Tower, and John de War∣ren Earl of Surry and Sussex was left Vice Roy in Scotland: and at this time the King brought the Chair out of Scotland which is now in Westminster Abby, in which our Kings are Crowned, and with it was also brought the Crown, Scepter and Cloth of Estate. The Scots not long after, falling into a fresh Rebellion, were again subdued by the King, with the slaughter of 60000 of their men. Shortly after this the King took to Wife the King of France his Sister, by which means there was a firm Peace concluded between England and France. And now Edward the King's eldest Son was by his Father made Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester: and now the Scots, desirous still of Liberty, revolted again under the Com∣mand of the Lord Bruse, but they were quickly reduced to their former Obed∣ence: after this, getting Heart again, they
stood for the regaining of their Kingdom, and King Edward, marching to give them Battel, died in his march: and command∣ed in his last Will that his Son should car∣ry his Bones with him till he had marched through all Scotland: in his life-time he utterly renounced Pope Beniface's Su∣pream Authority, and on his Death-bed charged his Son to continue the Banishment of Pearce of Gaveston; and to convey his Heart to be buried in the Holy-Land. The year 1299, the King's Palace at West∣minster, with the Buildings of the Monaste∣ry adjoining to it were all burnt. This Edward the First was King of En∣gland Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain, &c. He was eldest Son to Henry the III, by Ellianor his Queen, Second Daughter to Raymond Earl of Province: He began his Reign on Wednesday the 16 of November, Anno 1272, and reigned 34 years, 7 moneths, and 21 days: and was the 29 sole Monarch of England. He died of a Dissenterie at Burgh upon Sands, in his March to Scotland, on a Fryday the 7 of July, Anno 1307. in the 35 year of his Reign, and 69 of his Age, he was buried at Westminster.
CHAP. XIX. Of King Edward the Second, commonly called Edward of Carnarvan. AT his first entrance he recalled Pearce of Gaveston Earl of Cornwal out of Banishment, although he were for∣bidden it by his Father's last Will. Shortly after, he married Isabel Daughter to the King of France; after this, calling a Parlia∣ment, they sadly complayned of Gavestons Insolence; and so far prevailed with the King, that he yielded to his Banishment, whereupon they granted to the King a Subsidy of the 20 part of their goods: but Gaveston, not long after, was recalled again by the King, and was married to the Earl of Gloucesters Sister, and received into greater favour than ever: the King not at all regarding his Father's Command, nor his own Oath to his Nobles. This Gave∣ston now grew so high and was so lavishing of the Kings Treasure, alienating him al∣so from the Queens Bed, that she com∣plained hereof to her Father the King of France. Hereupon the Nobles again com∣plain
of Gaveston to the King, and pre∣vailed for his Banishment, with a Proviso, that if he returned again to suffer Death. About this time Anno 1311. the Or∣der of the Templers was expelled Christen∣dom, and this year, Clement the V. be∣ing Pope, was the Council at Vienna, be∣ing the 15 general Council. The next year after, Gaveston being returned for Eng∣land, he was taken by the Earl of Warwick at the Castle of Scarborough, and, with the consent of the Earls of Lancaster and He∣reford, was carried to Warwick Castle, and there Beheaded: hereupon the King was greatly inraged, but upon Condition that all things belonging to Gaveston should be rendred to him, He Pardoned the Lords. Anno 1314, the King caused his Writs to be published for Victualls, That no Ox stalled or corn-fed should be sold for more than 24 shillings, no Grass-fed Ox for more than 16 shillings, a fat stalled Cow at 12 shillings, another Cow at ten shil∣lings, a fat Mutton, Corn-fed, at 20 pence, another fat Mutton at 14 pence, a Fat Hog of two years old at ten groats, a Fat Goose at two pence half-penny, and in the City three pence, a Fat Capon at two pence, in the City two pence half-pen∣ny,
a Fat Hen a penny, in the City three half-pence, 4 Pigeons for a Penny, 24 Eggs a penny, in the City twenty Eggs a penny. After this a Tanners Son of Exceter cal∣led himself the Son of Edward the first, and would needs prove the King a Changling, but his claim was quickly strangled with a halter at Northampton. And now the Queen was delivered of Prince Edward, and the Parliament short∣ly after granted the King a Fifteenth: and the King going against Scotland, the Earls Lancaster, Surry, Warwick, and A∣rundel, refused to attend him: at this time he received a great overthrow from the Scots, he and Lord Spencer being both forced to fly, and several Lords with seven hundred Knights and Esquires were slain. Anno 1318, The Famine in England was so Raging, that Horses, Dogs and Chil∣dren were stoln for Food: and the Thieves that were in Prison, did pluck in pieces those that were newly brought in amongst them, and greedily devoured them half alive: by reason of this Famine the Morta∣lity was so great amongst the People, that the quick could hardly bury the dead. And not long after a great Mur∣rain
of kine happened, so that the Dogs and Ravens eating thereof were Poysoned, and did swell to Death, so that no man durst eat any Beef. And the next year after this the King calling a Council at Clarendon, the Lords refused to appear, but they were made Friends again by the Mediation of certain Cardinalls: and now the Scots, not satis∣fied with the Honour of their last Victory, their King saled into Ireland, and there caused himself to be Crowned King: but the English there, under the Conduct of the Arh-Bishop of Armagh and the Lord Binningham, encountr'd the new King who there lost his new Honour with his life to boot: and, not long after, a Truce for two years was concluded between England and Scotland. About this time Hugh Spencer, upon the Commendation of the Lords, was made Lord-Chamberlain, and his Father Earl of Winchester, and now Dr. Barrenthorp of Oxford, taught against the Pope, and inveighed against the Deceits and impo∣stures of Anti-Christ; after a while the two new Lords Spencers, Father and Son, grew so insolent, that they far exceeded Gaveston, alienating the Hearts of the Barrons from the King, which caused them
to take up Arms against him: but not long after the Earl of Lancaster, and other 90 Nobles at Borrowbrigs were taken Pri∣soners, and at Pontefract the Earl of Lancaster was Beheaded, and other five Barrons hanged, and the next day at York, the Lords Clifford, Mowbray, and Dey∣will, were hanged in iron Chains: and now the King went against Scotland with an Army, but was forced there to escape by night, leaving his Treasure and rich Furniture for Pillage: and the young Lord Mortimer, escaping out of the Tower, fled into France: and not long after, the Queen again sent her complaint to her Fa∣ther of her ill usage. There being now some Troubles in Gascoin, the King not going himself, sent his Queen into France to Negotiate his Affairs, who drew all to agreement upon Condition that her Husband should give Prince Edward, his and her Son, the Dutchy of Aquitain, and Earldom of Pon∣tine, for which places the young Prince did Homage to his Uncle the King of France: after this, the King sending for his Son and Queen home, and they refusing to come, they were thereupon proclaimed Enemies to the Crown: the Queen hereupon, with∣out consent either of King or Peers, Mar∣ried
the Prince to Philippa the Earl of Ha∣nalt's Daughter; and being now fitted for her purpose, she raised an Army in He∣nalt and Germany, consisting of 2700 Sol∣diers, and many Forein and English No∣bles; and sailing for England, landed at Orwel in Suffolk: the King having notice hereof, fled into the West to raise Forces; promising a thousand pounds to those who would bring him Lord Mortimers head: but the Queen, not sleeping in her design, pursued her Husband from place to place, and at length she got Hugh Spencer the Father, whom she caused to be cut-up a∣live and quartered; and the King lying now hid in the Abby of Neath in Wales, was there surprized by his Cosen, the Earl of Lancaster, and Imprisoned in the Castle of Kenelworth; young Lord Spencer, and the Lords Baldock and Reading being also taken at that time, and carried to Here∣ford, where Spencer was hanged 50 foot high, and then beheaded and quartered, and the Queen gave the bringer of his head to her 1000 pound. And now, a Parliament being called, se∣veral Peers, to wit, 3 Bishops, three Earls, 2 Barrons, 2 Abbots, and 2 Justices, were sent in the name of the Parliament, to the King at Kenelworth to Command his
resignation of the Crown to his Son Prince Edward, at which message, the King fell into a swown amongst the Peers at Kenel∣worth, and afterwards (coming to himself, seeing no other way) resign'd his Diadem: Whereupon Sir William Trussel one of the messengers, in the name of the whole Realm, renounced Homage to the King, in these words, I William Trussel, in the name of all men of the Land of England, and of all the Parliament Procurator, do Ressign to Thee Edward the Homage that was made to Thee sometimes, and from this time forward now following, I defie Thee, and deprive Thee of all Royal Power, and I shall never be tendant to Thee, as for King, after this time. Not long after this the King was taken from Kenelworth, and delivered by In∣denture, to the custody of Thomas Gour∣ny and Sir John Mattravers, who shortly after Murthered him, by thrusting an hot spit up his Fundament, into his Bowels, at Barclay Castle, for which fact they were forced to fly the Country. This Edward the Second, was King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aqui∣tain,
&c. He was the 4 Son of Edward the I. by Ellianor his Queen, Sister to Al∣fonsus King of Castile: His Reign began on Friday the seventh of July, Anno Do∣mini 1307: he reigned 19 years, 6 Moneths, and 18 days, and was the 30 sole Monarch of England; he was mur∣thered, as is before declared, Anno 1327, being the 20 year of his Reign, and 41 of his Age, his body was buried at Glou∣cester. CHAP. XX. Of King Edward the Third, commonly called Edward of Windsor ABout the beginning of this King's Reign, one Nycholas Lyrian a Di∣vine of Oxford, wrote a Book, de Visione Dei, against the Pope: now, by Advice of the Lord Mortimer, the King acquitted the Scots of all his claim and Superiority to their Kingdom: and shortly after this, the King of France died without Issue, and
King Edward laid claim to the Crown, and now the Queen-Mother being reported to be with Child by the Lord Mortimer (who was too familiar with her) he was there∣upon taken at Nottingham, and sent Pri∣soner to London, where he was hanged at Tyburn, remaining on the Gallows the space of two days, for an Ignomenious Spectacle: and presently after the King abridged his Mother of her too large Dow∣ry, bringing her to one thousand pounds per Annum. Anno 1339. a Sudden Inundation of Water at New-castle upon Tine did bear down part of the Town-Wall, where 120 Men and Women were drowned. And, the year after, near Chipping∣norton in Oxford-shire, was found a Ser∣pent having two Heads and two Faces like Women, one Face attired after the New Fashion of Women's Attire, and the other Face like the old Attire, and Wings like a Batt: And Fiends and Devils, and strange Apparitions were seen by Men, and spake unto them, as they travelled. About this time Dr. Ockham of Ox∣ford wrote against the Popes, John and Clement, affirming them to have no Power over Civil Magistrates. And now the King assisted Baliol a∣gainst
David Bruse King of Scotland, who was forced to fly into France; and Baliol procured the Crown, and was made King, and did Homage to King Edward, as his Father had done to King Edward the First. The King went four times into Scotland to the Relief of King Baliol, for which he was very liberally gratified, and at length had the Interest of the whole Kingdom of Scotland granted to him by King Baliol, he reserving only a yearly Pension to himself. About the year 1340. the Isle of Man was conquered by William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, who thereupon was ho∣noured with the Title of King of Man. Not long after this the King created his eldest Son Edward (surnamed the Black Prince) Earl of Chester and Duke of Cornwall: and being now wholly intent upon his French War, the Scots daily re∣volted from King Baliol, and David the banished King and his Queen returned a∣gain into Scotland. And now the King, having taken his Voy∣age for France, took upon him the Title of King of France, causing the Flower de Luces of France to be quartered with the Lions of England: and at this time burnt and spoiled the North parts of
France, as far as Turwin; and so returned for England, and confirmed MAGNA CHARTA, having received liberal Aides from his Subjects for the maintenance of the French War: Now the French, hear∣ing of the King's Second Preparation, had a Fleet of 400 Ships ready in the Sluse in Flanders to intercept, which the King ha∣ving notice of, set sail thither and fought their Fleet, killing about 30000 of their Men, and sinking about 200 of their Vessels. And after this good Fortune at Sea, the King entred France, and, at the Siege of Turney, sent to the French King a Chal∣lenge, who refused to fight. About this time Dr. Bradwardine of Oxford wrote 3 Books in Defence of God's Grace against Free-Will. Now after the Siege of Tur∣nye the Armies of England and France intending to fight it; but by the Medi∣ation of Lady Jane (Mother in Law to King Edward, and Sister to the King of France) a Truce was concluded for a short time: and being afterwards drawn out for Fight again, a new Truce, by the Intercession of two Cardinals, was conclu∣ded for the space of three years. And the King returning into England, shortly after made it High Treason for any Strangers
to enter upon any place spiritual in Eng∣land by the Pope's Authority. This King it was that ordained the most Noble Order of the Knights of the GAR∣TER, upon the occasion of the Countess of Salisbury loosing her Garter before the King, as she was Dancing, saith Mr. Cam∣den: which the King taking up, and see∣ing some of the Nobles smile, he looked on them, and said, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE: The number of this Order is to be XXVI. whereof the King is to be one. After this, the King, returning again for France, he mustered there twenty five hundred Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, his Son Edward the Black-Prince being with him, who in the French Wars mer∣rited Immortal Glory: near Cressy the King pitched for Battel, marshalling his Army into 3 Battalions, and barracading them up behind to prevent their flying, causing them all to put away their Horses, so that they thereby all became Foot Sol∣diers: Philip the French King came to the Field, bravely appointed with a gallant Army, and joining Battel, after a sore Fight, the French were Vanquished, and the Honour of the day fell to the English, the French King and his Soldiers flying
the Field; the gallantry of this day was solely attributed to the Prince, King Ed∣ward never coming in with his Forces, there being no necessity for it: in this Battel the French lost 2 Kings, 2 Dukes, 7 Earls, and 1500 Barrons, Knights, and men of Arms, and about 30000 Soldiers, and the next day were several Prisoners taken. From hence the King went to lay Siege against Callice, and after a strait Siege for a time, the Town at last yielded, and the King pla∣ced there Collonics of English in the Town. Now during these Stirs in France, Da∣vid King of Scotland (by the French King's procurement) entered England, suppo∣sing all the Nobles to be in France, and that none but Priests and Sheppards were left in England, but, to his no small Da∣mage he found the contrary, the greatest part of his Army being slain near Durham, and himself also taken Prisoner, by one Copland, to whom the King gave 500 pounds per annum, at Ʋlverston in Lan∣cashire; and David the Scotch King was carried Prisoner to the Tower in Lon∣don. At the King's return from France there happened so cruel a Plague, that in
one year there was buried in one Church∣yard in London 50000: about this time Dr. Orum of Oxford, Preached before Pope Ʋrban at Rome, condemning the Papacy, and writ the Epistle from Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many Souls to Hell. After this Henry Earl of Lancaster was Created the First Duke thereof, by King Edward: and now the Prince of Wales took Ship for France, there to defend his Right to the Dutchy of Aquitain, and taking great Store of Towns and Prisoners, he returned with the spoil to Burdeaux: But John the French King, promising him∣self letter fortune than his Father, made bold to encounter Prince Edward, who (though the French were 3 to one) by his great valour obtained a great Victory, killing 52 Lords, and 1700 Knights and Esquires, besides 6000 common Soldiers; and taking the King of France, and Phi∣lip his Son, one Arch-Bishop, 10 Earls, and about 200 Knights, Esquires and Gen∣tlemen Prisoners: after this the Prince having well refreshed himself and Soldi∣ers, he hoised Sail for England, where he was Joyfully received, and the Priso∣ners courteously used, the French King and his Son being kept in the Savoy un∣der
a safe Guard, and others secured in other places. And now David the Scotch King, after eleven years Imprisonment, at the inces∣sant Suit of Joan, David's Queen, and King Edwards Sister, was set at Liberty, paying 100000 marks stirling: and after him, John King of France, after four years imprisonment, (through the interceeding of Simon Langres the Pope's Legate) was also set at liberty, paying for the same 3000000 of sutes of Gold, which amount∣eth to 500000 pounds Sterling. About this time Dr. Killington of Oxford wrote several Books against the Monks and Fryers, and some 5 years before Ri∣chard Fitz-Ralph Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh, and Chancelour of Oxford, wrote against begging Fryers: and about the year 1362, Anno 37 of the King, it was ordained that Lawyers should plead in their Mother Tongue. Now after the Releasing of the King of France, as is before shewed, the King created Prince Edward Duke of Aquitain, where he and his Wife went, and remain∣ed at Burdeaux. And now Anno 1366, Peter-pence was ordained to be paid no more; MAG∣NA CHARTA was 12 times con∣firmed
during this King's Reign; who cal∣ling a Parliament in the 50 year of his Reign, they laied several complaints and Accusations to the charge of Alice Peers the King's Concubine, and against Lord Latimer, the King's Chamberlain: and during the sitting of this Parliament the Mirrour of Princes, Edward the Black-Prince of Wales died, whereupon the King made Richard (Prince Edward's Son) Earl of Chester and Prince of Wales, and caused the Nobles to swear him Feal∣ty: about this time the famous Dr. John Wickliff of Oxford, maintained sundry learned points against the Church of Rome. This Edward the Third, was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, &c. he was eldest Son of King Edward the second, by Isabel his Queen Daughter to Philip the Fair, King of France: he began his Reign on Saturday the 25 day of January, Anno 1329, and reigned 50 years, 4 months, and 26 days: and was the 31 sole Monarch of England: He died on Sunday the 21 day of June, Anno 1377, being the 51 year of his Reign, and about the 65 of his Age: his Body was buried at Westminster.
CHAP. XXI. Of King Richard the Second, commonly called Richard of Bourdeaux. IN the beginning of this King's Reign the French invaded England, and burnt the Town of Rye, the Scots the Town of Rocksbrough. And after this the French took the Isle of Wight, and forced the In∣habitants to pay them a hundred marks: not long after they burnt the Town of Hastings. All these Advantages being ta∣ken by reason of the King's tender years; upon the Occasion of these daily Rapines one Sir John Philpot of London, (seeing the remissness of the Lords) at his own proper costs and charges manned out a Fleet to scour the Seas, which Fleet short∣ly after took 15 Rich Spanish Ships, which well recompenced Sir John for his charges. About this time Barwick was surprized by the Scots, who killed Sir Robert Boynton the Governour; and about nine days after it was regained by the Earl of Northum∣berland,
the Scots being all put to the Sword. And now a Parliament being called at London for Manning of those Services, a Subsidy was granted to the King by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal: the Com∣mons, at that time, being exempted from it. Shortly after this Sir John Arundel, and several other valiant Knights and Esquires (being sent to the Duke of Britain for his aid against the French) were all drowned, But the King sending more Forces after these, as the Duke of Lancaster, Bucking∣ham, Warwick and Stafford, with others of the cheif of the Nobility; they landed safely at Callis, and went through France to Britain, spoiling Countries, burning Towns, and killing People; the French not daring to oppose them. About this time Ʋtred Bolton, John Ashwerby, Walter Brute, John Ashton and Peter Pateshall were persecuted, some by perpetual Imprisonment, and some by Banishment, for Preaching and maintaining Dr. Wickliffs Doctrine. After this the King calling another Par∣liament at Northampton, they granted him Poll-money, of Twelve pence per head, of every one above such an Age.
The next year after this, the Commons of Kent, Essex, Surry, Suffolk, Norfolk and Cambridge rebelled, and under the Conduct of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw marched suriously to London, burning the Priory of St. John's without East Smithfield, and turning also the Savoy, and the Bishop of Canterbury's House in Lam∣beth into Ashes; Beheading Simon Tybald the Archbishop, Sir John Hales Lord Prior, with others. And now they sent a malicious arrogant Petition to the King, whose Tenor the King durst not deny, his Person being then in manifest Danger of them. But Wat Tyler cavelled at the conditions of Peace (Suggesting strange Hopes of high mat∣ters to himself) hereupon he was desired to ride to the King, which accordingly he did, and there behaved himself so inso∣lently that he offered to kill Sir John New∣ton one of the King's Attendants, for the omission of some Punctilio of respect to him. But the insolent Traytor for this affront received his Death's Wound from the hand of Sir William Walworth Lord Mayor of London. And the Lord Mayor presently raising a thousand Citizens, sur∣prised the headless Monster, and caused them to beg their Lives of the King. John Lister the Dyar, who headed the Rabble
in Suffolk was also taken by Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, and there was execu∣ted, of this rebellious Rabble, in London and elsewhere, about 1500. Now these Plebean Furies being over, the King took to Wife Anne Daughter to the Emperour Charles the IV; and short∣ly after John Duke of Lancaster was accu∣sed of Treason, touching the King's Person, but the Accusers Reward was Death, which he hoped and intended for the Duke's Lot. After this, the Duke sailing into France, concluded a Truce for about two years space; and then a Parliament being called at London, the Laity sought to depose the Clergy of their Estates, but the King an∣swered their Request in these words, I will (saith he) maintain the English Church in the quality of the same Estate, or better, than I found it when I came to the Crown. At this Parliament was Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford Created the first Marquess of Dublin. This year also the Duke of Lancaster set Sail for Spain, to regain
the Kingdom of Castile, to which by Right of his Wife he laid claim to. Within a while after several Lords rebe∣led against the King, and were all pardon'd before they came to their Tryals, yet not∣withstanding the King's Clemency, they still kept together, and raising great For∣ces, they did not stick to charge the King with several misdemeanours: and now the Duke of Lancaster returning for England again, Peace was concluded between him and Spain, and the King thereof gave him 200000 Nobles, towards the defraying of this charges he had been at; at whose return the King made him Duke of Aqui∣tain. After this, the King desiring of the Lon∣doners the Loan of a thousand pounds, it was denied him; whereupon he seized on their Liberties, and dissolved their proper Magistracy, turning out their Mayor John Hind, and John Shadworth and Hen∣ry Wanner their Sheriffs, and appointed Sir Edward Dallingredge Warden of the City. And about two years after the King ha∣ving a desire to go for Ireland had a Sub∣sidy granted him: four years Truce be∣ing then concluded with France; but af∣ter this he with the Company of the Duke
of Lancaster and Earl of Gloucester sailed into France, where he espous'd the Lady I∣sabel Daughter to Charles King of France: this Journey besides Losses at Sea cost him 4000 marks. At his return from France certain Peers revolted from him, making Forces, removing such Officers from the King as they thought fit: whereupon the Earl of Arundel one of the Rebells had his Head lopt off, and the Earl of Glouce∣ster was smothered with Pillows and Fea∣ther Beds at Callis: and shortly after∣wards the King made himself Earl of Che∣ster, and created several Dukes and Earls at that time. And not long after this, the River be∣tween Swelston and Harleswood near Bed∣ford stood still, and divided it self, so that the Bottom remained dry about three miles space. And now the King extorting Money, and taking up Carriages and other Necessaries intending for Ireland, to suppress the Re∣bells there, who had slain Lord Mortimer Lord Lieutenant there. And the Duke of Lancaster dying about this time, the King seized his Goods, in the absence of his Ba∣nished Son, which was but pro tempore, intending to banish him in perpetuum▪ which proceedings shortly after proved his
Ruin, for the King now sailing for Ireland, did little good there, but himself great harm here. For by this means he gave Henry the Banished Son of the Duke of Lancaster, opportunity to land in England for the gaining of his Right. At whose Ar∣rival several Lords flocked to him. Their first attempt, was against the Castle of Bristol, where they took Bussy the Treasu∣rer, and Green, who the next day were made shorter by the heads. The King hearing of these Stirs return∣ed, and thought to have nipt them in the Bud, but at his coming he found them ful∣ly Blown: whereupon he betook himself to Conworth Castle in Wales, and afterwards delivered himself into the hands of the Earl of Northumberland, conditionally that if he and eight more, whom he would name, might have honourable Allowance, with the assurance of a quiet private Life, that then he would resign his Crown: from hence he was carried to the Tower of London, and a Parliament was called at Westminster in his name, who all agreed to the resignation: and Messengers were sent to the Tower to him with the said In∣strument (the manner and form where∣of is shewed before in Edward the Seconds time) to this Instrument the King set his
hand and Seal, desiring that his Cosen Henry Duke of Lancaster might succeed him, and thereupon put his Signet Ring on the Dukes hand. After this the Definitive Sentence being given in open Parliament, Duke Henry rising from his Seat, made his challenge to the Crown, as followeth, In the name of God, Amen. I Henry of Lancaster Claim the Realm of England and the Crown, withall the Appurtinances, as coming by the Blood Royal from King Henry the III: and that Justice which God of his Grace hath send to me, by the help of my Freinds, for the Reco∣very of the said Realm, which was in point of Perdition through default of Government and breach of Laws. These words said he was by all the States acknowledged for King, and placed in the Royal Throne. This Richard the Second, was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland,
and Duke of Aquitain, &c. he was the Second Son to Edward the Black-Prince, by Joan his Wife, Daughter to Edmund Earl of Kent: his Reign began on Sun∣day the one and twenty day of June, Anno 1377, and he reigned twenty two years, three months and eight days, and was the the thirty two sole Monarch of England. He was assassinated in Ponte∣frack Castle by Sir Pierce of Exton and o∣ther seven Assassinates, he having first va∣liantly defended himself, and slain four of the Assassinates. Some affirm that he was starved to Death, Anno 1400: His body was brought to London, and carried through the City to St. Paul's Church, and there left bare-faced by the space of three dayes, for People to gaze at, and was afterwards buried at Westminster, some say at Langley.
CHAP. XXII. Of King Henry the Fourth, common∣ly called Henry of Bullingbrook. THis King Henry was crowned at West∣minster by Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and shortly after his Coronation he created his Eldest Son Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: and caused the Crown to be entailed upon the Heirs of his Body. And then took from the Lords Awmarl, Surry, and Exeter (the late King's Friends) the Titles of Dukes. And not long after he sent Embassa∣dors to Rome, France, Spain and Germa∣ny, to give them the Reasons of his assu∣ming the Crown. But the People of Aquitain hearing of those Carriages in England,  favoring King Richard's Cause, beg  Revolt, but Henry sending the Earl of Worcter thither with some Forces, thy quickly fell to their Obedience again. And now the
Scots, upon some Distates entred the North-parts of England, doing much harm. And shortly after several Lords; as, John Holland, late Duke of Exceter, Tho∣mas Holland late Duke of Surry, Edward Plantaginet late Duke of Aumarl, John Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Lord Spen∣cer, Sir Ralf Lumly, Sir Thomas Blunt, and Sir Benedict Celye, with others; con∣spired against Henry, either out of Pitty to Richard's cause, or Emulation to Hen∣ry's greatness; but the Plot being dis∣covered, before it came to any Perfecti∣on, by some of their own party. The two late Dukes of Exceter and Surry, ha∣ving notice thereof hasted to Cicester, pre∣tending, as they passed along, that King Richard was at liberty, and that Henry was fled, which was all false: for at this time he had got 6000 men in Readiness to oppose them: and Exceter seeking to es∣cape by Sea, was taken, and, at the Coun∣tess of Hereford's instigation, was behead∣ed by the common People, at Pleshie; the Lord Spencer receiving the like doom at Bristol, and others in other places, in all nineteen: whereof two had been Dukes in King Richard's time, to wit, John Holland and Thomas Holland.
Presently after this, the King entered Scotland, and spoiled the Country, but be∣fore his Return, Wales was in Rebellion, under the Command of Owen Glendour: of which the King having Intelligence, he turned his March thither, and burnt, kil∣led, and took such Revenge as that time would permit, and so returned with such spoil as he had got, Glendour being gotten into the inexpugnable Snowden hills. But the King's Danger was not less at home than abroad, for in his Bed there was hidden a Calthrope or Engine with three very sharp Teeth or Spikes, all of them set upward for his Destruction, but he discovered it before he lay down, but the Traytor was never found out. Now Glendour still proceeding in his Outrages, Edmund Lord Mortimer went against him, but with the loss of about a thousand of his men in the Attempt, and his own Liberty to boot, being taken Priso∣ner: and afterwards, either for love or fear, did marry Glendour's Daughter, and was privy and consenting to Piercy's Rebel∣lion, which followed afterwards. About this time were several Libels dispersed up and down in Defamation of the King, but the Authors being taken,
suffer'd death, amongst whom were seve∣ral Grey-Fryers: after the Execution of these offenders, the King again entered Wales, but the cruel Storms there at that time forced his return. And the Earl of Northumberland the King's Lieutenant of the North, and Piercy Hot-Spur the Earls Son, had better success against the Scots, who had entered England, but re∣turned by weeping Cross, being overthrown in two Battels by the Earl and his Son, and several taken Prisoners. After this, the King took to Wife Lady Jane of Navar, Widdow of John de Mount∣forth Duke of Britain▪ and shortly after several Prodigies appeared Prognostica∣ting the Piercys Rebellion, which follow∣ed not long after; the first of them, dis∣covering himself in open Arms, was Lord Piercy Hot-Spurr, who made head about Chester, to whom repaired the Earl of Worcester, their intentions being to enter the Town of Shrewsbury. The King sent for them, promising under his hand their safe conduct; but they refused to go, which caused the King with the Prince and other Nobles to march towards them: as soon as Piercy Hot-spur discovered the Royal Standard, he drew out his Army, consi∣sting of about 14000, to try the Fortune
of War, which at that time proved very averse to him, for he and the Earls of Worcester, Douglas, Sir Richard Vernon Barron of Kinlaton, and several others, with 200 Esquires and Gentlemen of Cheshire that day, or the next, loss their Lives, with an Incredible number of com∣mon Soldiers: and on the King's party were slain the Earl of Stafford, and ten new Knights, all made that morning, and ma∣ny Esquires and Gentlemen, and about 500 common Soldiers▪ the Battel ended, the King marched to York, whither he commanded the Earl of Northumberland to come, who obeyed his Command and had pardon of Life, but was abridged in Estate. Whiles things were thus setling in the North, news came that Wales was still in Rebellion: so the Clergy, at the moti∣on of their Metropolitan, granted the King a Subsidy for Maintenance of his Army: and William de Wilford, also being in the King's Service on the narrow Seas, brought some assistance to his Indigencies, by ta∣king 40 Prizes laden with Iron, Oyl, Sope and Rochel Wines, to the number of one thousand Tuns. And not long after, a Parliament being called, another Subsidy was granted, and
the Earl of Northumberland was again restored to his Possessions: presently after this, came a Troop of Western men, who brought to the King three forein Lords and 20 Knights of note, Prisoners from Dartmouth, where they also slew the Lord of Castile and several of his men, which Lord formerly had burnt Plimouth, and thinking to have done so here, was by these Plebeans put by his purpose; for which good Service the King gave them store of Gold. And now the King calling Three Parlia∣ments, one after another, for Money, could get none: the chief Opposer was Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshal, who drew Richard Scroop Archbishop of York into a Conspi∣racy against the King, and the Earl of Westmerland, pretending to side with them, ensnared them both in his Gin, and presented them to the King, who caused both their Heads to be struck off, although Westmerland had promised them their Lives. And now the King began again to pursue the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf (who were supposed privy to Earl Marshals Conspiracy) with an Ar∣my of 37000 Men, whereupon they fled into Scotland: the King seeing this, took Barwick by battering down a Tower in the
Wall, with a great Gun, the first that was used in England, and took Alnwick, and all other Castles belonging to the Earl of Northumberland. And from hence mar∣ching to Wales, he expected the like good Fortune there, but such a sudded Rage of Waters in Wales came so fast down upon his Army, that he was forced to return, 50 Waynes laden with Treasure, and other Carriages being destroyed by the Rage thereof. After this, another Parliament being called, they granted a Subsidy, being ra∣ther wearied with the King's Importunity than out of any good Will to him. Anno 1407. being the next year after, there was so great a Plague in England, that in short space it destroyed 30000 in London, and multitudes elsewhere in the Realm: and the year after was a great Frost that held 15 Weeks. All this while Glendour continuing his Rebellion in Wales. The Earl of Nor∣thumberland and Lord Bardolf leaving Wales (into which they had escaped) and coming to raise Forces in the North, were met and encountred by Sir Thomas Rook∣by the Sheriff of York-shire, who flew the Earl, and gave the Lord Bardolf a wound, of which he died.
After this, the Duke of Burgundy send∣ing to the King for Aid against the Duke of Orleance, had his Request answered: and presently after Orleance sending for Aid against Burgandy, and promising greater matters than the other, it was grant∣ed to him also, to the great wonder of ma∣ny: and now the Lord Hail, Marshal of France, laying a Siege to a certain strong place in Gascoign, with other Lords, and about 4000 Men of Arms, were driven from thence by Sir John Blunt with 300 Soldiers, and 12 of the Principallest, and about 120 Gentlemen were then taken Pri∣soners; but the King lived not to see the Fortune and Carriage of these Wars. In this King's Reign (through Arch-Bishop Arundells Procurement) William Saw∣tree, William Swinderby, and William Thorp suffered Martyrdom for their Faith, be∣ing all worthy Divines. This Henry the Fourth was King of En∣gland and France, and Lord of Ireland: he was the eldest Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Blaunch his Wife, Daugh∣ter and Heir to Henry Plantaginet Duke of Lancaster (Son to Edmund Sir-named Crouch-back) he began his Reign on Mun∣day the 29 day of September, Anno 1399, and reigned 13 years, 5 months and 19
days, and was the 33 sole Monarch of Eng∣land: He died at London of an Apople∣xy on Sunday, the 20 day of March, An∣no 1412. and was buried at Canterbury. CHAP. XXIII. Of King Henry the Fifth, commonly called Henry of Monmouth. HE was Crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury: and at his first entrance, dis∣missed all his youthful Companions, and made choice of grave men for his Councel∣lors. He was wont every day after din∣ner, for the space of an hour, to receive Petitions of the oppressed, who with great equity he relieved; he was so zealous to∣wards the Clergy (hating Lollards or Wic∣kliffians) that he caused Sir John Old-Ca∣stle, Lord Cobham (who was the cheif that held that opinion then) to be Imprisoned; but he afterwards escaping for Wales, 37 of his Faction (as it was then thought to be) being taken, were all condemned, and seven of them, viz. Lawrence Redman, Da∣vid
Sawtree, William James, Thomas Brightwell, William Haulam, Ralph Greenburst, and John Schut were burnt and strangled in St. Gyles's Fields: after this the King restored the Son of Lord Piercy Hot-Spur to his Blood and Grand∣father's Honour of Earl of Northumber∣land: and presently after sent Embassa∣dors to France, to demand the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitain, Guyen and An∣jou, but in derision to his Demands; the Dauphin of France sent him a Tun of Tennice Balls, as Bullets most fit for his tender hands. The King disgusted here∣at, preparing for Warrs, the French made the Scots, their Friends, to invade Englands marches, which accordingly they did in such a violent manner, that the King scarce knew which Kingdom to be∣gin with first, but at length it was conclu∣ded for France: the Clergy giving a Tenth, and the Temporal Lords their Aid of 346 Men at arms, and 552 Archers, and a∣bout some 10 Ships, and to keep back the Scots, Sir RobertƲmsreivil was sent against them, who in a Skirmish took 360 of them Prisoners, and great spoil. The news of the proceedings here in England flying into France, Charles the French King sent his Embassadours to
England, with offer of money, and some Territories of France (but none of the best) and the Princess Catherine in Mar∣riage to King Henry; but these proffers found no Acceptance, for Antelope, the Pursevant at Arms, was sent to the French King with Letters of Defiance. Hereupon Charles sent a million of Gold out of France to the Lords Scroop, Gray and Cambridge (all three in especi∣al favour with King Henry) to betray or murther him, before he arrived in Nor∣mandy; which they (O the prevalency of Gold) intended to have put in execu∣tion, but being discovered the Night be∣fore the King intended to have put to Sea, they were all three beheaded. And so the King embarked for France, and landed near Harflew, commanding his Army that they should do no violence to Churches, Church-men, Women or Children; and so advanced towards the Town, and laid Siege to it, which shortly after was yielded to him, and he turned out the French, and Peopled the Town with English Artizans; from hence he march∣ed with 2000 Horse and 13000 Foot, through the Countries of Caux and Ewe towards Callis▪ but finding so many Ob∣stacles in his way (the French having pla∣sed
shed Woods, pulled down Bridges, and car∣ried all Victuals out of the Country where he intended to pass) and his Soldiers growing sick and faint for want of Victuals, he therefore resolved to march back to Callis. The French upon this Advantage think∣ing to surprize the King, near Azin Court pitched their Banner Royal, their Host consisting of 150000 Horse, and 10000 Men at Arms, Princes, Noble∣men and Knights. King Henry conside∣ring the faintness of his Soldiers through want of Victuals, (and that the French were six to one) desired a Peace, but was denied: the French making themselves so sure of the Victory, as that they had disposed of Court-places and other pre∣ferments in England among themselves, each knowing his place: but this day pro∣ved more fatal to them than they expected, for King Henry seeing no way but one, encouraged his Men, and entered Battel, obtaining a most glorious Victory, with the loss of Edward Duke of York▪ the Earl of Worcester, and some few others: but of the French fell that day 4000 Princes, Nobles, Knights and Esquires, besides 10000 Common Soldiers; and so many Prisoners taken that they far exceeded the
Conquerors, wherefore the King▪ Com∣manded to kill them all, least they should rise up against them. From thence the King marched to Callis, and so took Ship for England, landing at Dover, where he was received with great Triumph, and at his entrance into London, was presented with 1000 pounds in Gold, and two Gold Basons worth 500 pounds. Not long after, Sigismond the Emperor arrived in England, desiring a Peace be∣tween England and France, which would not be granted; and so concluded a Peace between himself and England (and recei∣ved the honourable Order of Knight-hood of the Garter from King Henry) he re∣turned. And now the King of France having a Navy wasting on the Seas with many Bravadoes; the English Fleet under the Command of John Duke of Bedford, battered, sunk and took the most of them, and sent the three great Carracks of Genoa to England. But Burgundy now siding with France against England, the King thereupon called a Parliament, and a Subsidy and tenth was granted him for the maintenance of the Wars against France: but all not be∣ing sufficient for defraying so vast a charge, he was forced to pawn his Crown, and sell
his Jewells for raising more moneys. And being now well prepared, he made his Bro∣ther John Duke of Bedford Protector of England, and so made his second Expedi∣tion for France, and arrived in Norman∣dy, whose Terrour was such that 25000 Families fled out of the Country upon his Arrival. His first Attempt was against Conquest (the strongest Castle in Nor∣mandy) which he presently took and be∣stowed it on his Brother Thomas Duke of Clarence and the Castle of Aum∣belliers on the Earl of Salisbury, with that of Lovers on the Earl Marshal, and presently after Cane was also taken by him. About this time the Scots laying Siege against Barwick and Roksborough, they were all scared away with fear, when they heard that the Lord Protector and Arch Bishop of York with other Nobles were drawing near them with an Army. Presently after a Parliament was called by the Protector's Authority, for raising Money for the Wars: in which Parliament Sir John Old-Castle, Lord Cobham (who held the opinion of Dr. Wickliff) was con∣demned, and hanged in St. Giles's Fields, being burnt also whilest he was hang∣ing.
The King at this time laid against the Town and Castle of Fallais, which after a while was surrendred upon certain Condi∣tions: and after this he divided his Army into several parts, under the Command of Himself and Nobles, who wan several Castles here and there; he with his party laid Siege to Roan, which after six months Siege was forced to Surrender, there being famished in the Town during the Siege 50000, and 12000 Starvelings turned out of the Town who died in Ditches. He caused the Burgesses there to pay him 356000 Crowns towards his Expences in the Siege, and likewise to swear Fealty to him and his Successors. This place had been about 215 years in the possession of the French, from the time that King John of England lost it. Presently after the Surrender of this place, about 40 other Towns and places of note did yield themselves to the King: and now the Duke of Burgundy sought to make Peace, but it was denyed, King Henry following on now to make an abso∣lute and entire Conquest, which shortly after he effected, a Flood-Gate being o∣pened unto him for accomplishing of the same, by reason of some affronts offered by the Dauphin to his Mother the Queen,
who impatient of wrongs, raised Forces, and with the help of the Duke of Burgundy, be∣came Regent of France, which civil Broils made well for King Henry, for Peace be∣ing sought with him it was granted with these Conditions, that the Crown of France and all its Rights after the Death of the French King Charles and his Queen, should remain to King Henry and his Heirs for ever; whereupon he married Lady Catherine Daughter to King Charles; and so the Sallique Law of France at this time was made void, but the Pope being sollicited to confirm Henry King of France, would not condescend to it. Upon the Sealing and Swearing the a∣bove mentioned Articles, Philip Duke of Burgundy did Homage to King Henry, who was then Stiled and Proclaimed Re∣gent of France; and kept his Court at Pa∣ris for a time, Parliaments being then cal∣led which confirmed all things, the Nobles all swearing to be true to King Henry, ex∣cept the Dauphin and his party who were in Rebellion, and in the last Parliament had Sentence of Disinheritance pronounced against him, and, in the Court of Chan∣cery in Paris, all things were sealed with the Seal of King Henry. And now all things thus confirmed, the
King with his Queen came for England, who was no sooner out of France, but the Scots hasted thither to the Aid of the Dau∣phin, and in a Skirmish several of the Eng∣lish were slain, amongst whom the King's Brother the Duke of Clarence was one, and the Earls of Somerset and Suffolk, with other Lords were taken Prisoners: the King having notice hereof embarqued a∣gain for France and landed at Callis, and chased the Dauphin from place to place, he not daring to Fight; during these proceed∣ings the Queen was brought to Bed at Windsor of a young Prince Henry, which news coming to the King's Ears, he in a Prophetical way thus spake, Good God (saith he) I Hen∣ry of Monmouth shall have but a short Reign, and win much, but Henry of Windsor shall Reign long and loose all, but the Will of God be done. Which words of his afterwards proved true. And now the King after several brave exploits by him perform'd, in this his last expedition into France, died; appoint∣ing, by his last Will, his younger Brother
Humfry Duke of Gloucester Protector of England, his Brother John Duke of Bed∣ford Regent of France, and Thomas Beau∣fort Duke of Exceter Guardian of his Son's Body. This Henry the V. was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland; he was the eldest Son of King Henry the Fourth by Mary his Queen, Daughter to Hum∣fry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton. He began his Reign on Sunday the 20 day of March, Anno Do. 1412, and reigned nine years, five mo∣neths, and 10 days, and was the thirty fourth sole Monarch of England. He di∣ed of a Burning Feavor and Flux at Boice de Vincennois in France, on Monday the the one and thirty day of August, Anno Domini 1422, and was buried at West∣minster.
CHAP. XXIV. Of King Henry the Sixth, commonly cal∣led Henry of Windsor. THis King was Crowned at Westminster, being but about 8 months old, and a Parliament being called and a Subsidy granted; that the regal Chair in the House might not stand empty, thither the Queen did carry the young Prince, and sate with him in her Lap, he speaking to the House in anothers Tongue. And now the af∣fairs in France were various, Fortune sometimes smiling on the French, and other sometimes on the English: where∣upon the Duke of Bedford Regent of France desired to enter Battel with the French, which accordingly was perform∣ed near the Vernoil where the French were beaten, and about 5000 of them slain, besides many taken Prisoners. During these proceedings in France, James the young King of Scots, (who had casually been taken Prisoner at Sea in Hen∣ry the Fifths time) was set at Liberty in
England thereby to draw the Scots off from Aiding the French, not long after Duke Humphry the Protector was married to Jaqueline of Bavaria, her Husband being then living, which caused the Duke of Burgundy to forsake the Regent in France: and now Factions breeding in the Court of England, the Regent left France to ap∣pease the dangers at home, which he hap∣pily performed, and then with the Lord Talbot and fresh Forces returned again to France. From the beginning of April 1428▪ unto All-Hallon-Tide after, fell such abundance of Rain, that not only Hay but Corn also was distroyed. About this time, at the Regent's Return into France, Siege was laid unto Orleance, where the Earl of Salisbury was slain, yet notwithstand∣ing the Siege continued. And Charles the young French King being very pensive not knowing how to remedy this Mischief likely to ensue. At Chinon a young Maid called Joane of Loraine, a sheeperdess, appeared to him, bidding him be of good Courage, for God had sent her to deliver the Realm, and so going to Blyce, with the Marshal of France; and there getting Forces, by her Valour the Siege was raised at Orleance, the English loosing 600, men
at that Brunt: and for some short space after this, the loosing and taking of Towns was interchangeable: but Joan and the Duke of Alanzon still proceeding in their good fortunes, near Jergeaux they fought the Lord Talbot, taking him and several Nobles Prisoners, and killing about 1000 of the English, they not loosing above 600. Hereupon several Towns Revolted from the English, and Charles himself (who before had kept in) now Issued out in Armes, thinking to have recovered Paris, but he was disapointed of his hopes by the Regent: and now the English ly∣ing Siege to Champaign, Joan the Martial Maid coming to it's Rescue, was taken and sent to Roan, and there Burnt for a Witch, which did not a little dismay the French: but success proving still various, it was thought that King Henry's presence in France would be a great discourage∣ment to the Carrolines: hereupon the King with the Company of the two English Cardinals, York and Winchester, and other Nobles sailed into France Anno. 1432, and at Paris by the Cardinal of Winchester he was Crowned King of France: yet Charles esteemed himself not the less a King for all this: the King having thus taken possession of France, not long after
took his farewel of it, his Return was by Roan and so over Land to Callis, and thence to England again: and now the Sol∣diers beginning to be weary of their Im∣ployment, and discontented with their Wages, fell to Mutiny at Paris, for which the Regent cashiered 110, and chopt of the heads of four of the Principallest of them. Anno 1435, the Theames was so fro∣zen, that the Merchants which came to the Thames Mouth, were forced to be carryed to London by Land. And now after several Changeable Suc∣cesses in France, at length the Regent dyed, the news of whose death coming to Eng∣land, Richard Duke of York was sent Re∣gent, but Paris was lost before his Arrival in France: and after several Skir∣mishes with the English, the French pro∣ceeded to besiege Callis, to which place the new Regent drew his Army, but King Henry hearing hereof, and fearing the worst, sent the Protector with a great Fleet against the French; at whose ap∣proach they all ran away, and so the Pro∣tector Settling the State of Callis, return∣ed with great honour. But this new Re∣gent, performing little or nothing in France, he Returned for England; and Richard
Earl of Warwick went in his place: but, he after a short space dying, the Duke of York went again, and, at his Return into France, prossered several times to fight the French King, who never durst undertake to joyn Battel with him. Not long after this the Duke of Orleance was set at Liberty who had been Prisoner ever since the Bat∣tel at Azin Court, which was above 26 yeares before, his Ransom was 300000 Crowns, the Protector was much against his Releasment. Anno 1438. All the Lions in the Tower of London dyed: and this same year was held the Council at Florence, being the 16 General Council, Eugenius the fourth be∣ing Pope. Julythe 18. Anno 1440. The Postern of London by East Smith-field against the Tower of London sunk by Night: and a∣bout 2 years after a Contest fell between the Duke of Gloucester and the Cardinal his Uncle, and the Duke's Lady was accus'd by the Cardinal Henry Chicely Arch-Bishop of Canterbury for Witch-craft, as if by Art Magick she went about to take away the King's Life: and she was forced to satisfy publickly for that wickedness she had not attempted, though others that were
guilty, in their very Sufferings excused the Dutchess of it. Yet notwithstanding she did Pennance, going, the first day from Temple-Bar down Fleetstret, with a wax Taper in her hand, to Pauls, where she offered her Taper to the Altar: the next day but one, she went through Bridge∣street and Grace Church Street to Leaden-Hall, and so to Christ-Church by Allgate, and two days after she went through Cheapside to St. Michaels in Cornhil, in form aforesaid. Now the Affairs still various in France, at length a Truce was concluded for 18 Moneths, and hopes of perpetual Amity, grounded upon a Match Contracted by William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk for the King with Margaret Daughter to Renate Duke of Angiers, and Titular King of Sici∣ly, Naples and Jerusalem: but this Match proved inauspicious to the King, for by it he lost his Friends in England, and Revenues in France: and not long after all was Ruled by the Queen and Suffolk and their Com∣plices; and a Parliament being called the Duke of Yorks Commission was revoked, and Henery Beaufort Duke of Somerset was sent Regent into France: And now began the King's Miserys to approach, for in the Parliament at St. Edmundsbury, the
Protector through the Queen's means (un∣known to the King,) was Arrested of high Treason, and before he came to any Tryal he was Murthered in his Bed, with Pillowes, as it was thought: and the Car∣dinal of Winchester the other Prop of the Kingdom lived not long after him, after whose death, the Affaires both of England and France were carryed on very unfortu∣nately. And now Suffolk, the Queens chief Favourite, is made Duke, which passages displeasing the people, Richard Plantagi∣net begun to think how these distempers might work well on his side for the obtain∣ing the Crown: whereupon hetook shipping for Ireland, to still the Irish Commotions there, which he quickly effected, and there layd the foundation of his first plots. In mean time Somerset Regent in France lost all, which unhappy News coming to En∣gland, it caused several to look sleightly at the Queen, but especially at Suffolk, a∣gainst whom several Articles were exhibi∣ted by the Lower-house of Parliament, whereupon he was Imprisoned in the Tower, but shortly after was again re∣stored to his Liberty. The 23 of the King, on Candlemas Eve, in diverse places of England, were heard
Terrible Thunder, with Lightning where∣by the Church of Baldock in Hartfordshire, and the Church of Walden in Essex, and divers others were sore shaken, and the Steeple of St. Pauls Church in London a∣bout three of the Clock in the afternoon was set on fire, but was happily quenched again. And now the Duke of York shortly after procured Adam Mollins the Bishop of Chichester Keeper of the Privy Seal, (ano∣ther Pillar of the Kingdom) to be Mur∣thered by the Seamen at Portsmouth. Not long after one Thane alias Blew∣beard, a Fuller of Canterbury, attempt∣ing to raise some forces in the Duke of York's behalf, miscarried in his Enterprize, and was taken, hanged and quartered. And another Parliament being called (and the Commons wishing well to the Duke of York, they again accuse the Duke of Suffolk, and now obtained of the King Sentence of his Banishment for five years, who being upon the Seas, intending his banished Voyage, was taken, and in Dover Road had his Head Chopped off on the side of a Cock Boat. After this the Bishop of Salisbury was Murthered by his own Tenants, and Lord Say Treasure of England, and his Son in
Law with some other were slain by the Common People, such footing had the Duke of York's cause gotten amongst them, and now in his behalf (though he was still in Ireland) rose the Commons of Kent, under Jack Cade's Command, and pitched on Black-heath neare Greenwich in Kent: the King perceiving it no time to be idle, raised an Army; in the mean time Cade retired to Sevenock in Kent. And the King supposing he had fled, sent Sir Humphry Stafford and other Gentlemen with some forces to pursue him; to whom Cade gave Battel and slew Sir Humphry, with some others; of which the King ha∣ving notice, he left the Tower to the Custody of the Lord Scales, and fled to Kenelworth Castle; and so Cade marched to London, causing the head of Master Crmer high Sheriff of Kent to be lopt of: and fal∣ling to the plundering of some of the Weal∣thiest Citizens; the Lord Mayor then, con∣sidering the danger they were in, sent forth∣with to the Lord Scales for Aid, who sent the Renowned Esquire Matthew Gough to their Relief: and now the Cittizens took heart and began to bar up London-Bridge; the Kentish Plebeans quartering in South∣work, and hearing hereof ran furiously to their Armes, and with their Leader
Cade sought to open the passage by force, but was not able, the Contention was ve∣ry hot and continued all Night, Gough and several others being slain; to appease these Furies by Pollicy which could not be con∣quered by Force, the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury sent a Pardon under the King's great Seal, whereupon the Plebeans threw down their Arms, and gave their leader Cade leave to shift for himself: who after∣wards attempting new Troubles, a 1000 marks was promised to them that could take or kill him: whereupon one Mr. E∣den a Gentleman of Kent slew him, and 26 more of his crew suffered Death at Can∣terbury and elsewhere. These Stirs were no sooner over but the Duke of York arrived in England, leaving Ireland, who at his first approach impri∣soned several Nobles in Ludlow Castle, but many of the Peers sided with him; now the King (as it was time) began to rouse up his Spirits, marching towards the Duke then in Wales, who hearing of the King's march fled into Kent, and at Brent-Heath encamped: of which the King having intelligence he steared his Course that way, and sending Messengers to the Duke to demand the Reasons of these Tu∣mults, he perceiving the King too power∣ful
for him, did thereupon submit, and was received again into favour. And now some hopes arising of the re∣covering of Gascoin again, the Lord Tal∣bot and some others were thereupon sent into France, who at first were very suc∣cessful in their Designs; but the Lord Tal∣bot being slain, the French regained all again, and the English lost all Aquitain: after they had possessed it about three hundred years. And about this time, the Queen was delivered of her First born Ed∣ward: by this time the Duke of York had arrested the Earl of Somerset of high Trea∣son, who being sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, was from thence Released by the King and made Captain of Callis; whereupon York and his Adherents fell in∣to open force, levying an Army about the Marches of Wales, from whence they intended their march to London, but were stopt at St. Albans by the King and his Forces: the Duke at his coming hither sent to the King, desiring him to deliver up to him such persons as he would name, to which the King returned Answer that he and his adherents were all Traytors: so the Yorkists assailed the Town, and flew 48 Nobles, Knights and Esquires, a∣mongst
whom were the Earls of Somerset, Northumberland and Stafford, and 5000 Common Soldiers, and wounded the King in the neck with an Arrow, so he was taken Prisoner. The next day the Duke of York and Earls of Salisbury and Warwick marched to London with the King, and in his name summoned a Parliament, by whose Au∣thority the Duke of York was established Protector of England, Salisbury Lord Chancelor, and Warwick Captain of Cal∣lis: but it was not long before they were a∣gain displaced. The French by reason of these intestine Broils took their Advantage, making se∣veral inroads on the Coasts of England, kil∣ling the Mayor Bayliffs and several other Officers of Sandwich, and burnt Foway, and several other Towns in Devonshire. Anno 1458, there was a Fray in Fleet∣street, between the men of the Court and the inhabitants of the said Street; in which Fray the Queens Attorny was slain, for which Fact the King committed the Governours of Cliffords, Furnivals and Barnards-Inn to Prison; and William Taylor Alderman of the Ward, and se∣veral others were sent to Windsor Ca∣stle.
The year after being 1459, the Science of PRINTING was found out in Ger∣many at Magunce, by a Soldier; and was brought into England about 12 years af∣ter, by one William Caxton a Mercer, who practized it at St. Peter's Abby in Westminster for a pretty while. And now a seeming reconcilement was concluded on between the King with his Lancastrians and the Yorkists, but it had not long continuance: for the Yorkists, un∣der the pretence of some Afronts offered to the Earl of Warwick, by some of the King's Servants, drew to an head again; but their Intentions being discovered by one Andrew Trollop, they all thereupon disperced themselves. And shortly after a Parliament being called, in it were the Duke of York Earl of March, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Rut∣land, and Earl of Salisbury, with certain others, all attainted of High-Treason, and their whole Estates consiscared; but they neither fearing nor regarding their attain∣der, drew out again from the several pla∣ces whither they were fled, and uniting their forces together, consisting of about 25000 men, they fought the King at Nor∣thampton, slaying about ten thousand men with several Nobles; as Humfry Duke of
Buckingham, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Egremont and others, and taking the King himself Prisoner; whereupon the Tower was surrendred, and the Lord Scales, Lieutenant thereof seeking to es∣cape, was murthered by Whirry men on the Thames. Now a Parliament again being called, the Duke of York, coming out of Ireland, made his Claim to the Crown, deriving his pedigree from Lyonell the 3 Son of Ed∣ward the III, elder Brother of John of Gaunt, Father of King Henry the IV: and after great debate in the Parliament, at length it was concluded, that King Hen∣ry should possess it during his life, and af∣ter his Death, then the Crown to remain to Richard Duke of York, and his Heirs in general tail. During these proceedings, the Queen with her Son were in the North raising of Forces, whither the Duke of York march∣ed to encounter them, reposing himself at Sandal Castle expecting more force to come to his aid: but the Queen in the mean time coming before the Castle with a small force, laying Ambushes on either side of the Hill before the Castle, which the Duke not suspecting, rushed out upon the Queen's men, whom he had no soon∣er
encountred, but the Ambushes pre∣sently coming out surrounded him; by which means the Duke with several of his Complices and Friends, as the Earl of Sa∣lisbury, and the Earl of Rutland a Child of 12 years old (who though begging his life on his knees with tears) were slain, and about 3000 Soldiers; Edward Plan∣taginet Earl of March, Son and Heir to the Duke of York hearing of his Father's Death, with an Army of 23000 men in∣tended to Fight the Queen's Army, but he found imployment by the way; for at Mortimer's Cross, near Ludlow, he was encountred by the Earl of Pembrook and Earl of Ormond, to whom he gave a great Overthrow, slaying 3800 of them, and taking several Prisoners, amongst whom was Owen Tuder, who had married Catherine Mother to Henry the VI. whose Head was chopped off: in the mean time the Queen was gotten as far as St. Albans where the Londoners fearing their Plun∣der by her Army, together with the King, and several Nobles gave her Army Bat∣tel, she giving them the overthrow, and slaying two thousand of their men: but Edward Earl of March drawing nigh, the King and Queen retired into Scotland, leaving the Kingdom to Edward, where∣upon
he entered London, giving a Period to Henry's Reign: which accounted is but till this time, although he lived eleven years after. This Henry the Sixth was King of Eng∣land, France, and Lord of Ireland; he was the only Child of King Henry the Fifth by his Queen Catherine, Daughter to Charles the VI. King of France. His Reign began on Munday the 31 day of August, Anno 1422. he reigned 38 years, 6 months, and 3 days, and was the 35 sole Monarch of England: he was stabbed to the Heart in the Tower, by Crook-back Richard, Duke of York, af∣terwards King of England, on Monday the twenty day of May, Anno Domini 1471, being the 49 of his Age: his body was first buried in the Abby of Chartsy in Surry, and afterwards removed to Win∣sor by King Henry the Seventh, and after that again removed none knows to what place.
CHAP. XXV. Of King Edward the Fourth. KING Edward was Crowned at West∣minster, but his Carriages towards the Citizens at his first entrance, made them repent their forwardness in his be∣half against King Henry: and hearing of Henry's preparations in the North, he marched toward Pontefrack in York-shire, giving the Lord Fitzwalter charge of the passage at Ferry Bridg nigh Pontefract, where the said Lord and several of his men were slain: shortly after the Armies drew into a plain between the Towns of Towton and Saxton, the King's Army consisting of 48660, and Henry's of 60000 men, the Fight was bloody and continued 10 hours, but at last the Lancastrians not able to gain-stand Edward's Forces, they betook themselves to their Heels, leaving the glory of the day to King Edward, there was slain that day being Palm-Sun∣day the 29 of March, several Nobles, as Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland,
John Lord Clifford, John Lord Nevil, and Leonard Lord Wells, and several other persons of Quality, to the Number of 357, and in all there was slain about 35091. This doleful News coming to Henry, he with his Queen and Son fled into Scot∣land, where they were honourably received by King James, to whose Sister not long after the Prince was married, and now after these passages in Scotland the Queen sailed into France to seek Aide, where she got more men then her Coffers would dis∣charge. Edward in the mean time road Victori∣ously to London, and was again Proclaimed King, and a Parliament shortly after being called, They disinherited Henry, his Queen and Son, and about 43 Nobles, and others; and now the Queen returning into Scotland with her French Fleet, and after∣wards making for England her Fleet was Scattered by a Tempest, so that her Hus∣band and She were left solely to the Aide of the Scots, who marching into England as far as the Bishoprick of Durham, King Edward prepared to meet them, but making an halt at York, he sent the Lord Montacute with forces to oppose them; who was encountered on Hedgley Moore by the Lords Hunger∣ford, Ro's, and Sir Ralph Peircy, to whom the
Lord Montacute gave the foyl, taking Sir Ralph Percy, and several others being slain; and growing proud of this Victory he assail'd King Henry's Camp at Hexham, where, after great slaughter, he took the Duke of Somerset, and other three Lords, and one Knight, which were all beheaded: whereupon Henry fled into Scotland, and afterwards coming into England in disguise, he was taken, and having his feet tyed to the stirrups, and his guilt spurs taken off his heels, he was then committed Prisoner to the Tower of London. Shortly after King Edward called a Par∣liament and Enacted several good Laws, especially against pride in Apparrel; and now he begins to think of a wife, whereupon the Earl of Warwick was sent to sollicite a Marriage between the King and Lady Bona Daughter to Lewes Duke of Savoy: and all things being well approved of by the Lady and her Friends, the Earl Returned; before whose Return the King had set his Affections on the Lady Elizabeth Gray here in England, whose Mother was Ja∣quelline Daughter to Peter Earl of St. Pauls, to whom shortly after he was Mar∣ried. The Earl of Warwick took great distast thereat, thinking himself hereby abused,
and endeavoured afterwards to uphold King Henry's Cause, drawing to his Assistance some Nobles and Forein Princes; and upon these discontents, some of the Commons rose under the Command of one Robert Hildern, intending to gave seized on York, from which place they were beaten back by the Lord Montacute president thereof, and their Leader be∣headed. Yet the Commons not dismai'd hereat, chose Henry Lord Fitzhughs Son, and Sir Henery Nevil Son to the Lord Latimer, but they being but young, made choice of Sir John Coniers a valliant Knight, and in∣tended their march for London: of which the King having notice, he made William Lord Herbert Earl of Pembrook General, and Sir Richard Herbert his Brother as∣sistant to him. And now the Northern forces draw∣ing near Northampton, the Lord Stafford and Sir Richard Herbert with 2000 Horse fell in the Rear of them, but were repulsed and lost most of their Men: afterwards the Armies meeting near Banbury, some distast being then taken by the Lord Staf∣ford at the Earl of Pembrook the Kings General, he thereupon withdrew his Archers upon which occasion Pembrook lost the
field and had 5000 men slain, and the Earl with his Brother and other ten Gen∣tlemen were taken and carryed to Banbury, and there beheaded. After this Victory some Commons, un∣der the Leading of Robin of Ridsdale, hasten to Grafton the King's Mannour house, and there surprized Earl Rivers, the Queens Father, and his Son John, and at Northam∣ton beheaded then: and now the King set forth with an Army himself, and pitched at Wolny four Miles from Warwick▪ whose Guards were not so vigilant as they should have been (the King being at that time animated with some hopes of peace) of which the Earl of Warwick taking advan∣tage, he entered the King's Camp Trea∣cherously by night, and took him prisoner when he never dreamt upon it; from whence they conveyd him with easie journys by night, to the Castle of Midleham in Yorkshire, and there left him to the keep∣ing of George Nevil Arch-Bishop of York▪ Warwicks Brother: from whom the King not long after escaped and came to York▪ where the Citizens received him lovingly, and so, raising an army, he past from thence to London: not long after this Sir Robert Wells, Son to the Lord Wells, raised 30000 plebeans in Lincolnshire, and pitched near
Stanford, whereupon the King caused the Lord Wells, Sir Roberts Father, and Sir Thomas Dimmok his Kinsman to be be∣headed (which was against the King's Oath and promise to them) and then marched to fight Sir Robert, who, with Sir Thomas Deland were taken Prisoners, and Lincoln∣shire men cast of their Coats, and run away, whereupon that Battel was called Loss-Coat field, there were slain that day about 10000. this Newes made the Duke of Clarence and Earl of Warwick flye to sea, and casting Anchor before the Town of Callis they were there denyed Entrance by the Lord Ʋanclere, who was the Earl of War∣wicks Deputy there; for which good ser∣vice he was by King Edward made Captain of Callis, and Warwick discharged, as a Traytor: yet nevertheless he was welcome to the French, where the Queen of King Henry at that time was, with whom War∣wick joyned, whose Daughter at that time was betrothed to Prince Edward King Henrys Son, and they all sollicited for Forces, which was granted; and the Earl, landing in England with a great Army, proclaimed King Henry, to whose Aide great store of People flocked: the Lord Fawconberge in the West, and the Earl of Pembrook in the North, doing the like.
And the Earl of Warwick now taking his March towards London, King Edward Commanded his Lords to attend him in the War, but several of them disowned his Mandates, which he perceiving, with some few Nobles in his Company, hasted towards Nottingham, there to determine what was best to be done: but his Foes greatly increa∣sing, Bon-fires burning, Bells ringing, and all the people crying up King Henry: for very fear King Edward with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester took shipping at Lyn, and sailed into Flanders to Charles Duke of Burgundy: and his Queen took Asylum at Westminster, where she was de∣livered of Prince Edward, afterwards King of England: and at this time several of the Kings Friends took Sanctuary: Edward being fled, Warwick took King Henry out of the Tower where he was pri∣soner, and Riding in Tryumph through the Streets of London, great were the Ac∣clamations of the People, crying, God save King Henry. And now a Parliament being called, Edward was declared Traytor, and his with all his Adherent's Goods confiscated, and the Crown Intayled to the Heirs Males of Henry's body, and for default thereof to the Heirs Males of George Duke of
Clarence, and finally all the Statutes made by King Edward were Abro∣gated. But King Edward having gotten some small Forces, of about 12000 men of his Brother in Law the Duke of Burgundy, he returned for England as a Subject▪ and proclaimed King Henry, deluding the Peo∣ple, and so got to York, which he (making them believe that he came but to look for his own Inheritance) surprized and assumed to himself, leaving a Garison in it; and from hence he marched to Not∣hingham, and so to Leicester, and from thence to Coventry, where Warwick lay but durst not Fight him, and so to Warwick▪ whither the Duke of Clarence being come, he and Edward became Friends, and they march∣ing to London where the Geates were set open, every one crying, King Edward. Here Henry was again taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower; the Earl of War∣wick▪ perceiving how things went, found it was no time to be idle, and therefore resolved to win or loose all by Battel, and so marched towards London, as far as Bar∣net, King Edward pitching his Tents at Gladmore near Barnet to oppose him, having at this time King Henry with him, on Easter day they joyned Battel, and For∣tune
sided with King Edward, the Earl of Warwick and Lord Montacute his Brother were slayn, and three Lords on King E∣dward's side, and in all on both sides about 10000, besides several Nobles, as the Duke of Somerset: the Earls of Oxford and Exceter, &c. fled and took Sanctuary, and afterwards proved Broachers of new Plots. And now King Edward rid Trium∣phantly to London, having King Henry still with him: and about this very time landed Queen Margaret Henry's Wife, and her Son Edward in England, but hear∣ing of the loss at Barnet field, they took Asylum at the Abby of Ceerne, to which place the Lords that fled from Barnet re∣paired, who comforted the Queens heart with future hopes: here forces repairing to them they flye from place to place, and at length fought King Edward at Teuxsbury where three or four of the Chief of them, as the Earl of Devonshire and Somersets Brother were slain, and 3000 men besides: and Prince Edward heir to Henry was taken, and several Lords taking Sanctu∣ary at Tewxsbury, were nevertheless haled thence and beheaded: and it is reported Prince Edward was basely murthered by the Duke of Gloucester, and some of King
Edwards Servants, for speaking somewhat to boldly in the Kings Presence. After this Queen Margaret was taken from Sanctuary, and carryed Prisoner to Worcester, and shortly after from thence to London; after this the Lord Fawconberge, Son to the Earl of Kent, raised a confused Army of 17000 men, for the Aide of King Henry, but he was quickly curbed and fled to Sea. And shortly after King Henry was stab∣bed to the heart by Crookt-back Richard Duke of Gloucester who, as is shewed before was a main Instrument in Prince Edward's Murther; it is recorded of King Henry that he had an honest mind, a comely per∣sonage, and was more like a Saint than a King: now Queen Margaret being ran∣somed by her Father, went beyond Seas to him and there languished away her dayes. And after this all Henrys Friends being either banished or put to Death, Edward was then at quiet, and calling a Parliament, all King Henry's Laws were Abrogated. And about this time the Duke of Burgandy sent to desire King Edward's Assistance a∣gainst King Lewis of France; so the King went in Person with as great an Army as ever went out of England; but he did
Burgundy little good, for he concluded a Peace with France on condition that Lewes should pay King Edward 70000 Ducats for his Charges, and 50000 to be paid him yearly, and that the Dauphin should marry Elizabeth his eldest Daughter, and so returned for England. About this time one John Huss suffered the flames, on Tower hill; for the profession of a good Faith: and now, all things being setled, King Edward followed his pleasure, and being on his Progress in Warwickshire, he chanced to hunt in the Park of one Thomas Burdet Esq and killing store of Deer, among the rest a white Buck was killed, which Mr. Burdet hearing of, he wished the horns in his belly that Councel∣led the King to kill him; for which words he was beheaded at Tiburn. And in those catching times a Jest of a Mercer in Cheapside, telling his Son if he would ply his Book, he should be Heir to the Crown, (meaning his own house that had that sign) cost him his Life. After this the Duke of Clarence being falsely Attainted and Condemned by Parliament, he was shortly after drowned in a Butt of Malmsy in the Tower. And James King of Scots about this time sent into England to dare King Ed∣ward
to Fight, who sent an Army under the Command of his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, whereupon the Scots fainted, and concluded Peace upon certain conditi∣ons and yielded up Barwick into the hands of the English, out of whose possession it had been about 21 yeares. After this the French breaking the Ar∣ticles of Peace, by the Dauphin's Marriage to Lady Margaret of Austrich, Grand Child to the Emperour Frederick: the King hereupon intended War against them, but was prevented by Death. Of those four Concubines King Edward delighted in, Jane Shoare was not the least beloved by him. This Edward the Fourth was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, he was Son to Richard Plantaginet Duke of York by his Wife, Daughter to Ri∣chard Nevil Earl of Salisbury. He be∣gan his Reign on Monday the fourth day of March, Anno 1460. and Reigned 22 years 1, Moneth and 5 dayes, and was the 36 Sole Monarch of England. He dyed of a Surfeit at Westminster on Friday the 9 day of April Anno 1483, being the 40. year of his Age, and 23, of his Reign. His body buried at Winsor, in the new Chappel, whose was foundation himself laid.
CHAP. XXVI. Of King Edward the Fifth. THis King was never Crowned, for at the very first, his Uncle, the Duke of Glocester, began to think of deposing him, drawing to his side the Duke of Bucking∣ham and Lord Hastings, they resolve forth∣with to remove all the Queen's Friends from the King, and to compass their De∣sign, they perswade the Queen that her son the King might come to London to his Coronation, accompanied only with some few of his friends, which she (little su∣specting what they aimed at) easily con∣discended unto: and now they proceed to the taking of their Prey, imprisoning the Lord Rivers, the Queens Brother, at Northampton, they then hasted after the King to Story-Stratford, whither he was gone on his way for London: and here they made bold, in the King's presence, to arrest the Lord Richard Woodvile, Sir Richard Grey, and Sir Thomas Wagham; and carried the King and all his company back to Nor∣thampton,
there displacing such of his Ser∣vants as they thought fit; and putting others (whom they pleased) in their places. Having thus far proceeded in their De∣sign, the perfidious Duke of Gloucester took upon himself the Order and Govern∣ance of the young King, and sent Lord Richard Woodvile, and the other two Knights to Pontefract Castle in York-shire, where in Conclusion they were beheaded. The Queen, having notice of these proceed∣ings, betook her self with her Children to Sanctuary in Westminster, where shortly after the Arch-Bishop of York then Lord Chancelour, delivered her the Great Seal; but afterwards considering of the Dan∣ger he might incur hereby, sent for it again. And now the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham coming to London with the King, his Majesty was received with great Joy, and lodged in the Bishop's Pallace, where all the Lords were sworn to him, and there the subtile Duke of Gloucester be∣haved himself so reverently towards the King, that the next Council he was chosen Protector. At this Council the Arch-Bishop of York was reproved for his for∣wardness in giving up the great Seal to the
Queen, and was deprived of the Chancel∣lorship, and Dr. Russel Bishop of Lincoln put in his place. All things thus proceeding, according to the Protector's mind, he proceeds further in his wicked Plot, making such a cunning Apology to the Council, for getting the young Duke of York (the King's Brother) out of Sanctuary, that they all (suspecting no harm) consented to him, and agreed that the Arch-Bishop of York should repair to the Queen to de∣sire her delivery of the young Prince; and if denied, then to bring him away by force: and after a long conference between the Queen and Bishop, at length, with tears, she delivered the Child into their hands, from whence he was carried into the Star-Chamber to Gloucester, who took him in his Arms with much seeming Joy, and gave him a Judas kiss. So having got what he desired, he and Buckingham made Covenants between themselves, that Gloucester should be King, and that Buckingham should have the Earldom of Hartford, and great part of the King's Treasure; and to blind the People of their intentions, several Lords from several parts of the Realm were cal∣led, to devise things for Edward's Corona∣tion,
at whose appearance the Prote∣ctor and Buckingham withdrew into Bi∣shops-gate Street, to contrive the contrary. Soon after several Lords repaired to the Tower, to consider further of the Coro∣nation, and the time drew so near that all things were in readiness for it, but not the Protector comes in amongst them, seeming to be very merry, excusing him∣self that he had been so long from them, and desired to withdraw a little: and a∣bout 2 hours after he came in with a sow∣er and frowning Countenance, and took his place, and after a while he thus spake: What are they worthy of (saith he) that compass and imagine my Destruction? to whom Lord Hastings made Answer, That they were worthy to be punished as Tray∣tors: That is (quoth the Duke) yonder Sorceress my Brother's Wife (meaning the Queen) and that other Witch of her Coun∣cil Shoar's Wife: At these words the Lords of the Council were much dismayed; and hereupon the Lord Hastings said, Surely they would not do so; but the Protector answered, and said, I tell thee, they have done so, and that I will make good on thy Body, Traytor: and so giving a clap on the Table with his hand, in came as many men in Harness as the Room
would hold, and all the Lords were con∣veyed some to one Room and some to ano∣ther, and the Lord Hastings within three hours after was beheaded on a Log before the Chappel Door in the Tower. And now sending for several able Citi∣zens into the Tower after Dinner, he pre∣tended to them that the Lord Hastings would have destroyed him and the Duke of Buckingham, and so dismissed the Citi∣zens, and caused Proclamation to be made of the Lord Hastings Treason. And not long after the Sheriffs of Lon∣don were sent to seize of Jane Shoars goods, which amounted to 300 marks, and she afterward was forced to do Pennance to her great shame: and now the Protector fought to strike whilest the Iron was hot, and so sent for the Lord Mayor Edmund Shaw, and made him acquainted with the Design, who in hopes of Honour promi∣sed to draw the Citizens that way: and means, how to accomplish this Design, was to get some able Ministers to Preach that King Edward the IV was a Bastard, and that all his Children were Bastards, and so to set up the praises of the wicked Pro∣tector; thereby to seduce the People who are naturally apt to listen to Novelties: and for this purpose Dr. Shaw the May∣ors
Brother, and Dr. Pincker were the Men pitched upon, who performed the Task very dexterously, and it is wonder∣ful to think what waverings and doubtings this caused amongst the People: but the two Doctors felt God's Judgments for this Offence afterwards. These things being thus bruited abroad the Duke of Buckingham shortly after re∣paired to Guild-Hall in London, to which place the Mayor, Aldermen and Com∣mons of the City were come, where he made a Learned Apology to them for the Election of Richard Protector to be King: the People here at were all mute and answered not one word, but being asked thrice of their Opinions herein, and in a manner threatned to it, at length they drew down into the Hall, and began to whisper among themselves, at which in∣stant a great Company of Apprentices and the Dukes Servants prepared for the pur∣pose, rushed in at their Backs, Crying King Richard: and hereupon it was con∣cluded to be the Cry of the whispering Ci∣tizens, and so the Assembly being dismis∣sed for this time, they were all required to meet Buckingham the next day at Bay∣nards Castle in Thames-Street, at which place the Protector then Lodged: and after
the Assembly was come the Duke of Buck∣ingham made the Protector, with their (as he said) Election of him, to be King: at which words Richard (as though he had been ignorant) looked very strangely on them, and denied to accept of that (he so much coveted) the Crown: but Buck∣ingham, making himself the Mouth of the Assembly, told him, If he would not accept of it, they would make choice of some o∣ther Noble man: whereupon the Prote∣ctor (seeming as it were to have that for∣ced upon him he most desired) accepted of it; promising more to the People then, in a quarter of an hour, than he perform∣ed in all his Life. And so at this time Ed∣ward was deposed, and he and his Brother, about two months after, were murthered in the Tower. This Edward the V. (though never Crowned) was accounted King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland: he was the eldest Son of King Edward the IV, by Elizabeth his Queen, Daughter to Sir Richard Woodvile Earl of Rivers, by Ja∣quilana his Wife, Dutchess of Bedford. He began his Reign on Friday the 9 day of April, Anno 1483, and reigned two months and thirteen days, and was the 37 sole Monarch of England. He with his
younger Brother the Duke of York, were smothered to Death in their Beds, in the Tower with Pillows, about the lattter end of July, Anno 1483, being the first and last year of his Reign, and the 12 of his Age: Their Murtherers were Miles For∣rest and John Deighton, Servants to Sir James Tirrel, who was imployed for this purpose by the Duke of Gloucester their Uncle, then King of England: their Bo∣dies were buried deep in the Ground un∣der a Stare-case in the Tower, and being afterwards taken up again, none knows where they were laid. CHAP. XXVII. Of King Richard the Third. PResently after his Election, as is shew∣ed before, a Parliament was called, and he thereby confirmed King, and the Crown intailed upon him and his Heirs, and Prince Edward his Son made Heir apparent; but against his Coronation (guilty Consciences accusing themselves)
he being still in Fear, he sent for five thousand Soldiers out of the North, under the Command of Robert of Ridsdale, to come up to London: and before his Coro∣nation (which was very glorious) he set at Liberty the Arch-Bishop of York and the Lord Stanly, but continued Bishop Mor∣ton's Imprisonment, whereupon the Uni∣versity of Oxford sending a Letter to the King in Bishop Mortons behalf, he was thereupon delivered to the Duke of Buck∣ingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecknock in Wales; and after the Coro∣nation was over, the King took his Progress to Gloucester: and from thence sent a Letter by one John Green to Sir Robert Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower to destroy the two young Princes, who dete∣sting so foul a Murther, Sir James Tirrel a Man of small estate, (for what will not Wealth and Honour prompt a man to) being promised great things by the King, undertook the Murther, and for executi∣on thereof, he imployed two Bloody Varlets who about Midnight smothered the two Innocent Princes with pillows and the fea∣ther-bed. But God's Judgments attended these murderers: and the King's mind ever after was fill'd with Horror and Fear, ha∣ving his hand constantly on his Dagger.
And now the Duke of Buckingham be∣gan to dislike the King, for he had denied the Duke the Earldom of Hartford, which was promised by Richard before he got the Crown: whereupon the Duke (of whose Intentions Bishop Morton was privy) ne∣ver came to the Court, but seeking how to depose him (whose main Instrument he was in exalting) to bring this business to effect, a Marriage was propounded by him, and sollicited afterwards by others, to the Queen and the Countess of Rich∣mond, between Henry Earl of Richmond, Heir to the House of Lancaster, and E∣lizabeth the Queens eldest Daughter, Heir to the House of York, which match was well resented by all parties, for hereby the Houses of Lancaster and York being United, the Quarrel in which so much Blood had been spilt would be ended. Upon this Account Bishop Morton went over into Flanders, and did the Earl of Richmond (then in Banishment) very good Service; now the Earl having intelligence of these Proceedings, forth∣with disclosed it to the Duke of Britain, who promised him his Assistance: where∣upon he sent into England to the Duke of Buckingham to make him acquainted with his preparation for England; but in the mean
time, the King heard some whisperings of this Plot, and therefore sent for Bucking∣ham to repair to the Court, who refused to go, immediately preparing for War, a∣gainst the King: at which news the Mar∣quess of Dorset left his Sanctuary and rai∣sed an Army in York-shire, Sir Edward Courtny another in Devonshire and Corn∣wal, and Sir Richard Guilford one in Kent. The King roused up at this news, took his march towards Shrewsbury from London, intending to encounter the Duke of Buck∣ingham (the head first,) who hearing here∣of made out to meet the King accompa∣nied with a great number of Wild-Welsh∣men, and intending to pass Severn to join with the Courtnies, he was prevented by the River, it being then without the Bancks, so not being able to get to them, nor they to him; his Welsh-men hereupon forsook him: whereupon the Duke fled to the House of one Humphry Banister, formerly his Servant, and there in disguise thought to have stayed, till he could either have rai∣sed new Forces or gotten into Britain to the Earl of Richmond. As soon as the other Nobles heard of the misfortune of the Duke, they all left their Armies, and most of them fled be∣yond Sea to Henry; and the rest took San∣ctuary;
and a Proclamation being made, with promise of a thousand pounds to those that could take Buckingham; this Judas Banister (who had gotten his Estate un∣der the Duke) was taken with the Golden Bait, and preferring, with Judas, the money before his Master's Life, went and discovered him to the Sheriff of Shrewsbu∣ry, who took the Duke disguised, like a poor Country-man, digging in a Grove near Banister's House, and carried him to Salisbury, where the King then was; at which place without Arraignment or Judg∣ment he was beheaded; and several Nobles of the Duke's Faction received the like Doom at London and elsewhere: But this greedy Banister missing the promised Reward of the King, was rewarded with the Judgments of God, for not long after his Children came to unfortunate Ends, and he himself had got his deserts in a Hal∣ter, but that he escaped by his Clergy. And now the King hearing of Earl Henry's preparation for England, he thereupon called a Parliament, in which the Earl and all those that had fled to him were Attainted, and their Goods Confiscat∣ed, and the King also to make himself more secure at home, made Peace with the Scots, and sent great Store of Gold to the Duke
of Britain to betray Henry into his hands; but the Duke, at the Arrival of the Embas∣sadors, being so sick that he could not be spoke withal, his Treasurer allured with the Gold thought (though unknown to his Master) to have done the Feat; but Earl Henry, having notice hereof by Bishop Morton then in Flanders, he escaped into France, to whom repaired the Earl of Oxford out of the Castle of Hammes, with Captain Blunt his Keeper and Sir John Fortescue Captain of Callis, being all re∣solved to take their Fortune with Earl Henry. And now the King seeing the Duke of Britain would not be taken with his Bait, he begins to solicit the Queen for the deli∣very of her Daughters to his Custody (thinking thereby to prevent the Match of the Earl Henry with the Lady Eliza∣beth the eldest Daughter) and after many sugared and fair flattering Speeches to the Queen, she at length resigned them up to him, and Queen Ann his Wife, being pur∣posely made away, as was supposed, he now begins to Court his Neese Elizabeth (his own Brothers Daughter) intending to marry her; and to lessen his expences, he discharged his Navy, commanding the Welsh to keep the shoar, where he sup∣posed
Earl Henry intended to land; yet notwithstanding shortly after he landed at Milford-Haven in Wales, with 2000 Britains, and marching into England as far as Litchfield, several worthy men joyned Forces with him on his March, and the King then at Nottingham, receiv∣ing Intelligence hereof, commanded all his Nobles to wait upon him with their Forces, and so took his March to Leicester; and the next morning pitched his Tents in a plain, called Reddmoor, neare Bosworth, in Leicestershire, where he was encountered by the Earl of Richmond, where after much Courage and Manhood shown, he was slain with some of his Nobles, and about 4000 Soldiers, and after he was slain: he, was taken and hung over an horse, all naked and besmeared with blood and dirt, and so was carryed to Leicester, and there lay two days without Burial, for a spectacle to the people: and was afterwards in∣terred with great solemnity in the Grey-Fryers in Leicester, and at the dissolution thereof, the stone-trough wherein his Corps were laid, was taken up, and is now a drink∣ing trough for Horses at a Common Inn in Leicester. After the Fight was over, the Lord Stanly found the Crown among the spoiles
of the field, and set it upon the Earl of Richmond's head in the field, at which in∣stant began the Reign of this new King; and so an End was put to the bloody Con∣tentions, between the Yorkists and Lancast∣rians: there were fought here in England eleven Set-Battels, five in Henry the Sixt days, as St. Albans, Blackheath, North∣ampton, Wakefield, and Towton: and five in Edward the Fourths time; as, Hex∣ham, Banbury, Lose-Coat-Field, Bar∣net field: and Tewxsbury, and lastly Bosworth field, which put a period to the to the Reign of the Plantaginets, and open∣ed away for the Tewdors to succeed them: in these Civil Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York were slain above one Hundred and Sixteen Thousand Men. This Richard the Third was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, he was a younger Brother to King Edward the Fourth, and Son to Richard Duke of York, who was Son to Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was Son to Edmund Duke of York, who was Fifth Son to King Edward the Third: his Reign began on Friday the 22 day of June, Anno 1483. He reigned two years and two moneths, and was the 38 Sole Monarch of England, he was slain
in the Battel at Bosworth field, as is before shewed, on Monday 22 day of August Anno 1885. and his Body was buried in the Grey-Fryers at Leicester. CHAP. XXVIII. Of King Henry the Seventh. AFter the Battel at Bosworth field was over, the King hasted to London, where with great Joy he was received, and shortly after Crowned; and Edward Plan∣taginet Earl of Warwick imprisoned in the Tower. And now a Parliament being called King Richard was attainted, and the Crown intayled on Henry and his heirs for ever. About this time was the Sweating-Sick∣ness, of which Disease a world of people dyed, a new Disease never known in Eng∣land before. And now the King dissolving the Parlia∣ment, in January after he married the Lady Elizabeth eldest Daughter to King
Edward the Fourth, who in September af∣ter was brought to Bed of Prince Arthur; and not long before the King's Marriage was Wheat sold for three shillings per Bushel, and Bay-Salt the same price: and the Cross in Cheapside was new builded. And now the King taking his Progress to York, to gain the Love of his Northern Subjects, the Lord Lovel with some others that had taken Sanctuary after Bosworth Field, raised forces, thinking to surprize the King, but he with 3000 men, under the Conduct of the Duke of Bedford, sent either to pardon or Fight them: and, the Duke proffering pardon, the Lord Lovel fled by night, and the multitude yeilded without stroak: and shortly after Sir Humphry Stafford another Rebel suffered at Tyburn. And not long after a new Tumult be∣gan upon the Report of one Richard Symon a Priest, who broached abroad, that one Lambert Symnell Scholar of his, was heir to Edward Duke of Clarence (who was cast into Prison a little before by Henry) and so sailing with him into Ireland, he there prevailed so much among the Peers, (e∣specialy with Thomas Fitz-Girald Lord Chancelor) that at Dublin he was Pro∣claimed
and Crowned King: and there obtaining some help, he returned for Eng∣land, to whom those Lords that favoured the Cause of the Plant aginets joyned them∣selves, although they knew the Fraud, a∣mong whom the Earl of Lincoln was chief, who with the Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas Broughton, Collonel Swart and Mawrice Fitz Thomas, near a little Village, about three Miles for Newark called Stoak, were all slain by the Kings Army, and 4000 Common Soldiers besides: and the Coun∣terfeit Symnel, with the lewd Contriver of this wicked Stratagem, Simon the Priest, were both taken; and Symnel (confessing the business to be forced on him) was made one of the King's Falkoners, and the Priest Simon was commited to a dungeon and perpetual shackles. And shortly after this Battel the King sent Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter, and Sir Richard Edgecomb Embassadors to the King of Scots, where they, to the King's great Satisfaction, concluded a seven years Truce. About this time the Duke of Britain sent to the King for his Assistance against France, but he unwilling to disoblige ei∣ther party, having been formerly behold∣en to both) sought a reconciliation, ma∣king
himself Umpire between them, to which the French seemed to listen; but in the mean time prepared for War; and at St. Albans gave the Britains a great O∣verthrow, and slew the Lord Woodvile, and all or most of his men, who was gone to the Duke's aid, without King Henry's knowledge; hereupon the King prepared to lend his Assisting hand to the Britains, but their Duke in the mean time died, which put an end to the business. And now began some stirs in York-shire, where the Earl of Northumberland was slain by the Commons, at a place called Cock-Leg near Thirske, at the intice∣ment of one John Chambers, for demand∣ing the Subsidy granted by Parliament to the King: and the Plebeans afterwards made head under the Command of Sir John Egrimont, but the King sending an Army against them, under the Command of Thomas Lord Howard Earl of Surry, they were quickly dissipated, and the Ring∣leadears shortly after received death, the due Reward for such Rebels: but Sr. John Egrimont escaped to Margaret Dutch∣ess of Britain, the common Encorager and Receiver of all King Henry's Enemies. About this time the Scots rose in Rebel∣lion against James the Third their King,
and fought the Army at Bannocks-Burn, where, in a Mill in the same field, he was murthered. After this, King Henry began to prepare for War against France, at the Request of Maximilian the Emperor, whom they had basely abused, in not only divorsing his Daughter Margaret from the French King, but also in making Ann, the Heir of the Dukedom of Britain, his Wife, who had been betrothed to the said Emperor by his Embassadors; and the King taking his Voyage for France, landed at Callis, and marched on as far as Bulloigne, and find∣ing the Emperour unprepared, upon whose Accounts he had undertaken that War; he thereupon made Peace with France, and had the sum of 186250 li. granted yearly, which was duly pay d du∣ring his time and his Son's, until the debt vvas run out. After this Voyage, Margaret the Dutchess of Burgumdy, the King's grand Enemy, obtruded upon the English one Peterkin or Parkin Walbeck, by the name of Richard Plant aginet, Second Son of Ed∣ward the Fourth, and many of the Nobi∣lity out of Innovation rather than Love (knowing it to be a Deceit of the Dutchess,) sided with him, and the Lord Stanly a∣mongst
the rest did supply him with Mo∣ney, for which Cause shortly after he lost his Head, although formerly he had been a main Instrument in advancing the King to the Crown. About this time Wheat was sold for six pence per Bushel, and Bay-Salt at three pence half peny, Nantwich salt six pence per Bushel, white Herring six shilling per Bar∣rel, red Herring three shilling per Cade, Sprats six pence per Cade, and Gascoign wine six pound per Tun. And now this Psendo-Richard was dis∣covered to the King to be but Perkin War∣beck, by one Sir Robert Clifford a great actor for Perkin beyound Sea; but after∣wards won to the King with Gold: for Perkin's sake all the Flemmings were ba∣nished the Realm, and several of his Com∣plices here, discovered by the said Sir Ro∣bert Clifford, were put to death: And now Perkin coming on Shoar in Kent, expecting a great Relief, receiving in lieu therof great distress, for being encountred by the Mayor of Sandwich and the Kentish men, five of his Cheif Captains, and 164 of o∣thers were taken, and shortly after execu∣ted, whereupon he fled back into Flanders, and from thence fled into Ireland, but ex∣pecting, little help from so poor a Na∣tion,
at last he betook himself into Scotland, and the King of Scots being taken with Courtly cariage believed his Reports, and Married him to Catharine Gourden the Earl of Huntly's Daughter, and then the King in Person, with a great number of Scots came with him against the Mar∣ches of England, doing great harm, and Proclaiming much favor and immunity to such as would joyn with Perkin, and  1000 pounds to such as could take King Henry: but all this working no Im∣pression upon the Peoples minds: the Scot∣ish King thereupon returned into Scot∣land, esteeming the less of his new Cozen, because none would rise in his behalf. Upon this Account a Subsidy of 120 thousand pound was granted to the King for maintenance of the War against Scot∣land, and the Lord Dawbnye sent General, but on his March was called back to sup∣press some Cornish Rebells, who withstood the Collectors▪ of the Subsidy, under the Command of one Thomas Flemmock a Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Black-Smith; these marching for Kent, expecting more Aid, at Well the Lord Awdly joyn∣ed with them, who, together with the other two Leaders, were taken at Black-Heath, in Kent, and their Forces Routed, three
hundred being slain and 1500 taken Pri∣soners, and afterwards the Lord Awdly was beheaded, at the other two hanged and quartered at Tyburn for their Rebellion. During these Stirs the King sent the Lord Howard, Earl of Surry to defend the parts in the North aganst the Scots, who were then doing great Damage in the Bor∣ders, but before he got thither the Scots withdrew; yet notwithstanding he march∣ed into Scotland, and after some Booty ta∣ken, he returned again for a time. And now Hialus the Spanish Embassa∣dor coming into Scotland he concluded a Peace between the two Kings. And about this time Anno 1497, fell Hail-Stones at St. Needs in Bedfordshire of eighteen Inches about; now (upon the Conclusion of the Peace aforesaid) Perkin's main Hope being gone, his last Refuge were the Cornish men, of whom he had a great Army, but the King marching against him, and he not daring to trust to his Cor∣nish followers, he thereupon fled by night and took Asylum at Bewdly, which when his Followers perceived, they all yielded themselves to the King's Mercy. And not long after Perkin their Leader did the like, and was carried to London, and conveved through the Streets on
horse-back for People to gaze at; and af∣terwards, attempting to escape from his Guard, he was pursued and retaken, and set in the Stocks upon a Scaflold a whole day before Westminster-Hall, and another day in Cheap-side in London, and after sent Prisoner to the Tower. About this time one Ralph Wilford, a Shoo-makers Son of London was hanged for assuming unto himself the name of Edward Earl of Warwick, who was then close Prisoner in the Tower; and not long after Perkin was hanged at Tyburn, and Edward Plantaginet the Earl of Warwick beheaded for seeking to make their escape out of the Tower: this Earl was Son to George Duke of Clarence, who was Brother to King Edward the Fourth, and was the last Heir of the Plantaginets. Shortly after this there happened such a devouring Plague, that the King and Queen left London and fled to Callis in France: and after the Plague abated they returned again; about which time the Lady Catherine of Spain arrived in Eng∣land, and was presently after married to Prince Arthur, who injoyed her Bed not long, for about five months after, be∣ing then in Wales he was cut off by Death; an
and the next year after, James the IV King of Scotland married the Lady Mar∣garet the King's eldest Daughter; and not long after the Queen died, and Henry the King's second Son, was made Prince of Wales, and by the Pope's Indulgence, took to Wife the Lady Catherine of Spain, his Brother Arthur's Widow. And now the Earl of Suffolk being fled, and intending a Rebellion, certain of his Adherents being discovered, were there∣upon taken, and suffered Death; as Courtney Earl of Devonshire the King's Brother in Law, William de la Pool Bro∣ther to the Earl of Suffolk, Sir James Tir∣rel (King Richard's Wicked Instrument in the Murther of Edward the V. and his Bro∣ther) and Sir John Windham and others; all these with the Earl and the rest of his Faction, were by Authority of the Pope's Bull, Proclaimed at Paul's Cross to be accursed. After this the Earl fled to Philip Duke of Austria, who afterwards by the Right of his Wife coming to be King of Spain, as he was on his Voyage thither was by Tem∣pest driven into England, where he was Royally entertain'd by King Henry: and at their parting it was agreed between them, that the Earl of Suffolk should be delivered
up to King Henry, upon Condition that no Violence should be offered to his Person, and so he was only imprisoned; but in Henry the Eighth's time lost his Head. Now the King having dissipated all his Enemies, he began to extort Money from his Subjects, two Lawyers Empson and Dudly being the cheif Instrument herein, by calling People in question for the breach of old moth-eaten Penal Statutes; but the King's Death shortly after ensuing. These beginning Oppressions were thereby also brought to a Period, before they attained to that maturity, which was feared by some, but wished for by others, especially by Empson and Dudly. During this King's Reign, there were a∣bout some nine Persons, Men and Women that suffered the Flames, for the Professi∣on of a good Faith; besides several others that did Pennance, with a Faggot on their Backs, and some were burnt in the Cheek with a hot Iron. This Henry the Seventh was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland: he was son to Edmund Tewdor Earl of Richmond, by Margaret his Wife, Daugh∣ter and Heir to John Beaufort Duke of Sommerset, Grand Child to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster: he began his Reign on
Monday, the 22 day of August, Anno 1485, and reigned 23 years and 8 moneths: He was the 39 Sole Monarch of England, he dyed on Sunday the 22 day of April Anno 1508, being in the 24 year of his Reign, and about the 52 of his Age; and was buried at Weminster, in that famous Chappel of his own founding. CHAP. XXIX. Of King Henry the Eight. THis King Henry was Crowned at Westminster by William Warham Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and shortly after Empson and Dudly were attainted by Parliament, for their Oppressions in Henry the Seventh's time, and were be∣headed on Tower hill: and now the King, at the Instigation of Pope Julius the Second, sent into France to demand the Dutches Normandy, Guyen, Anjou, and Mayne, and being denied them, he hereupon joyned Amity with Maximilian the Emperour, Ferdinand King of Spain, and some other
Princes, and then sailed for France, where he took Terwin ane Tournay by Siege, and then, Winter approaching, he returned for England, first making Thomas Wolsey Bishop of Tournay, and afterward of Lin∣coln, York, Winchester, Bath, Worcester, Hereford. Now during the Siege at Terwin the Scots under the Command of their King James the Fourth (Henry's Brother in Law) entered the Borders of England, pretending Truce broken (by the killing of Andrew Barton the Scotch Pirate) against whom the Lord Howard Earl of Sury Lord Lieutenant of the North went with an Army, to whom joyned his Son, the Lord Admiral, and these at Flodden Field fought the Scots, and gave them a great Over∣throw, killing the King, three Bishops, two Abbots, twelve Earls, and seventeen Lords and Knights, besides a great number of Gentlemen, and about 8000 Soldiers, and almost as many taken prisoners. About this time a peace was concluded on between the English and French, and Lewis the King of France was to marry Lady Mary King Henry's Sister, which shortly after he did, and within a quarter of a year after dyed: and she was married afterwards at Callis to Charles Brandon
Duke of Suffolk, upon her return for Eng∣land; her Dowry in France was 30000, Crownes yearly for her Life, and 120000 Crowns yearly for five years to the King her Brother. About this time Wolsey had a Cardinals Cap sent from Pope Leo, and was preferred by the King to the place of Lord Chancelor. Anno 1517. The Thames was so hard frozen that Men with Horses and Carts might pass betwixt Lambeth and Westmin∣ster: and this same year was the fifth Lattern Council held, being the seven∣teenth General Council, Julius the second, and Leo the ten being Popes. And now Strangers growing insolent in London, a great Tumult thereupon, under the Conduct of one John Lincoln did rise on May Eve, for which Uproar he was hanged, and 400 Boyes and 11 Women were led through the City to Westminster with halters about their Necks in their Shirts, but were pardoned by the King. And the new King of France paying to King Henry 600000 Crowns in twelve years, and under some other certain Con∣ditions, had Tournay redelivered to him, and Peace was Concluded, although Charles the Emperor came in person into England to diswade the King from it; but this peace
continued not long; for the French break∣ing Truce, as was pretended, the King thereupon procured several Princes to take the Emperour's part against France, and prepared himself for the War, causing a general Muster to be made of all able men from 16 years and upwards, in every Hamlet, Villiage, Burrough, City and Shire in England, and in the mean time the Em∣perour coming into England again, he then agreed to stay for and to take Lady Mary King Henry's Daughter, to Wife, and then he returned, having for his Conduct the Earl of Surry Lord Admiral, who at that time wan Morlois; and shortly after Re∣turning to France again, won and burnt se∣veral Towns, and then returned to Eng∣land with great Booty: and during these proceedings, the Earl of Shrewsbury went against the Duke of Albany, who was then made Governor of Scotland, and a Truce was concluded on, but the Lord Admi∣ral after his Return from France, being made Lord Lieutenant of the North, not∣withstanding the said Truce, entered Scot∣land doing great harm, and returned with great Booty. Upon the Account of these Wars a Parliament being called, by Wolsey's pro∣curement, the half of all Spiritual Livings
were granted to the King for five years, and the Tenth part of temporal Substance: and about this time Christian King of Den∣mark landed in England with his Queen, and after 22 dayes Royal Entertainment, he Returned to Flanders, where he remain∣ed as a banished man. And now the King sent an Army un∣der the Command of Charles Brandon Duke Suffolk into France: who after sever∣ral places won, and Winter approaching, re∣turned honourably for England, but the Duke of Albany and the Lord Lieutenant of the North being still at variance, at the Mediation of Margaret Queen of Scot∣land King Henrys Sister, together with Wolseys working with the King, at length Peace was concluded for a time both with Scotland and France: after this several Commotions rose amongst the Commons about the payment of the Subside, which when the King heard, he pardoned the Offenders, and remitted the payment of the Subsidy: and now Wolsey began to alienate the King's heart from the Em∣perour, and caused him to with-hold Pay from the Duke of Burbon, which was the cause of the French King's Captivity, of Burbon's March to Rome, where he entered the City in one day, and caused Pope
Clement, and 23 Cardinalls to take the Castle of Angelo for their Refuge, where they were (maugre all the pushes of the Pope's Leaden Bulls, and Curses with Bell Book and Candle-light) besieged six Moneths: for which offence the Duke of Burbon, in the Parliament of France, was condemned of Treason. And during these Broyles at Rome, there arose great Troubles in Ireland, but they were quickly laid again by Thomas Lord Howard Earl of Surry Lord Lieuten∣nant of that Kingdom, who being recalled into England upon some other Service, the Earl of Ossry was made Deputy: and shortly after, being displaced, Kilder suc∣ceeded him, against whom Wolsey was a strong Enemy, he thereby gained the King's displeasure for his malepartness therein. The year 1527 fell such abundance of Rain in November, December and January that the Corn fields, Pastures, and Cattel were thereby destroyed: then was it dry till the 12 of April, and then Rain again every day and night till the 3 of June following, which caused such a Famine in London and all England over, that many dyed for want of Succour. And now the King begins to charge the
Emperour with a promise of Marriage to Lady Mary (afterwards our Queen Mary) but her Legitimation was by him much questioned, as being begotten on his Brother Arthur's Wife: hereupon the King grew into dislike of his Marriage, and disclaimed his Contract, it being the Opinion of some six Forein Universities to be an unlawful Marriage; and for this cause Cardinal Campius came into Eng∣land, with whom was joined Cardinal Wol∣sey in Commission, with power to erect a Court to hear the King's Cause pleaded, which accordingly was done; and when Sen∣tence of Divorcement should have been (according to the King's expectation) pro∣nounced, Campius then caused Proclama∣tion to be made, and adjourned the Court, and referred the Sentence to the Pope. The King highly displeased hereat sent Dr. Cranmer and some others to the Pope to di∣spute the unlawfulness of the Marriage, who gave Cornelius Agrippa (the grand Rabbi in those days) such Satisfaction in this point, so that none of the Pope's Disputants durst encounter the Doctor about it, whereupon, a Parliament being called by the King, all per∣sons were forbidden to appeal, or make payment to Rome: and further, the King's Marriage with the Lady Catherine of Spain,
by the said Parliament was Dissolved. Upon these proceedings in England, the Pope caused his Curse to be set up at Dun∣kirk in Flanders against the King, and pro∣nounced the Marriage Lawful, but the King regarded it not; for hereby the Pope lost his Supremancy in England, and Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moore their Heads for standing for it. And now the King married the Lady Ann Bullin Daughter to Viscount Rochford, which Lady was accounted a Lutheran; and Cardinal Wolsey for his dislike of this Marri∣age, and Adjourning of the Court, as is before shewed; fell into the Kings Displeasure; and several Articles being exhibited against him in Parliament, as that he used to write in his Letters, I and my King, and had caused the Cardinals Cap to be stamped on the Kings Coyn, and several other grand Offences. hereupon he lost all his Dignities; and his House and Furniture were seized, and the Earl of Northumberland was sent to bring him up to answer his Charge, who took him at Cawood Castle, about seven miles from York; and as he was on his Journy to Lon∣don, at Leicester Abby, he ended his dayes, by taking an over much quantity of an Italian Confection, for breaking Wind from his Stomach, as Report went: He is said
to have suppressed 40 Monasterys for the raising his two Colledges in Oxford and Ipswich, and to have laid by 12 Barrels full of Gold and Silver to serve the Pope in his Wars. About this time Elizabeth Barton, called the holy Maid of Kent, was reported by those who feared the Downfall of Babel, to have Revelations from Heaven; among which one was, That if the King proceeded in his Second Marriage, he should not Reign a Moneth to an end, but the Mouth of this Oracle was quickly stopt, for herself with seven of her Disciples were all execu∣ed at Tyburn for Treason. And now the Pope seeing his Revenue here in England likely to go to wrack▪ began to write and stir up James the Fifth King of Scots against King Henry his Uncle, promising the Crown of England to those that could win it. About this time Queen Ann was deliver'd of the Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Queen of England, and the next year after of a Dead Child: and not long after she was sent to the Tower, and falsely accused of Adultery and Incest, for which she with her Brother the Lord Rochford, and Norris, Weston, and Brierton, gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, together with one Marks▪
all lost their Heads: and the next day af∣ter Queen Ann's Death, the King married the Lady Jane Seymer. And now began the Lord Cromwells rising, who by birth was a Black Smyth's Son, and had been Cardinal Wolsey's So∣liciter, he was first made Master of the King's Jewel-house, Baron of Oakham in Rutlandshire, then Knight of the Garter, after that Earl of Essex, and then Lord high Chamberlain, and lastly the King's Vicar general: he was the Sole cause of the demolishing of Monasteryes, and the pul∣ling down of Images, Idols and Shrines, in the Churches of England: but this Pillar of the Church was undermined by Stephen Gardener (that Murtherer of Protestants in Queen Mary's dayes) and so by his means being brought into Dislike with the King, at length he was beheaded. Now several Commotions arose in York∣shire and Lincolnshire, occasioned by the demolishing of Abbys; the Commons being incited thereto by the Monks who had lost their Roast-meat and took ill with Courser Fair: but after several proposi∣tions made by the Commons to the King, and Answers thereunto, having Pardon granted, they threw down their Arms, but several of the Monks rising again with
several persons of Quality; as the Lord Darcy, Lord Hussye, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Francis Biggot, Sir Stephen Hambleton, Sir John Bulmer the Abbot of Fountains, Abbot of Ger∣vaulx, Abbot of Rivax, and Prior of Burlington, were afterwards taken and suffered Death: and now the King having been two years a Widower, since the death of Queen Jane (who dyed in Child-Bed of Edward the Sixt, afterwards King) he was married to the Lady Ann of Cleve, but about half a year after, through Gardiner's false Suguestions, was by Parliament divorsed from her; and not long after he Married Catherine Howard Daughter to Edward Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk: but about 6 Moneths after her Marriage, she was condemned of Adultery and lost her Head at Tower Hill, and with her the Lady Jane Rochford and several others that year, as Margaret the Countess of Salisbury, Lord Grey, Lord Dacres, Francis Dereham and Thomas Culpeper; and now the King married the Lady Katherin Parr Wife to the Lord Lattimer. And about this time it was enacted by Parliament to be high Treason, either to deny the Oath of the King's Supremacy, or to acknowledg the Pope, and though
by this the Discipline of the Church was al∣tered, yet little of Doctrine was changed, for it was made heresie and death to deny any of the Six Articles following: as, 1. That after the speaking of the words of Consecration by the Priest, the Real and Natural Body and Blood of Christ, as he was Conceived and Crucified, was in the Sacra∣ment and no other substance. 2. That the Communion in both kinds is not necessary to Salvation. 3. That Priests may not marry. 4. That Vows of Chastity ought to be observed, by the Laws of God. 5. That private Masses ought to be con∣tinued, and 6. That Auricular Confession is necessa∣ry and expedient to be retained in the Church of God. Upon the denial of these six Articles several People suffered the Flames. Anno 1541. The King took upon him the Title of King of Ireland: and the same year sent an Army against the Scots, under the Command of the Duke of Norfolk, who when he came to Fight the Scots they wil∣lingly lost the day, and suffered themselves to be taken Prisoners, out of disdain to their Leader Oliver St. Clere; for grief whereof their King James the fifth dyed, there was
at this time 21 men of Account taken Pri∣soners and committed to the Tower of Lon∣don, but shortly after these Prisoners were released again, and a Peace for 10 years concluded, upon the promise of a Marriage with the Lady Mary King James his only Child, and Prince Edward, Henry's Son and Heir, afterwards King, by the name of Ed∣ward the sixt: but the Pope and the French diswading the Scots from this Marriage, King Henry thereupon made War against both Nations, and took Bulloyn in France, for the Redemption whereof and conclu∣tion of Peace, the French were to pay him in Eight years space 800000 Crownes: and during these proceedings in France, the King's Army did much harm to the Scots by burning Edenbrough, and wasting the Country for 7 Miles round about; but all these stirs were ended by King Henry's Death which not long after ensued. The year 1545. The 27 of April, one William Foxly Pot-maker for the Mint, fell a sleep in the Tower of London, and slept 14 days and 15 nights, and could not by any means be awakned, and when he did awake, seemed in all things as if he had slept but one Night. And this same year began the Council of Trent, which was continued till Anno
1563. Paul the III. Julius the III. and Pio the IV. being Popes: this was the 18 Ge∣neral Council. The King, about the 13 of his Reign, writ a Book against Martin Luther, and sent it to the Pope, for which he had the Tittle given of Defender of the Faith (which his Successors retain to this day.) But not long after falling to variance with the Pope (as is shewed before) he writ another Book a∣gainst the Pope: during this Kings Reign se∣veral persons, to the number of 81, suffered the Flames for the Profession of their Faith: and before Luthers time several persons did the like: for in Henry the IV time suffered 3: in Henry V time about 40 suf∣fered: besides several others grivously persecuted. 8 in Henry VI time, and above 100 whipped and persecuted: one in Ed∣ward the fourth's time: and about some 9 in Henry the VII. time. Her after followeth a true and perfect Cattalogue of the number of all the Religi∣gious houses, as Monasterys, Prioryes Fry∣orys Nunnerys, Colledges and Hospitals in every County of England, which were demolished in this Kings Reign, with their valluation, as they were presented to the King by the Commissioners at the time of their Suppression.
Counties Monasteries Priories Friories Nunneries Colledges Hospitals Pounds Shillings Pence Halfpence Bark-shire 05 02 01 03 03 02 06368 12 08 00 Bedfordshire 01 06 03 04 03 03 03054 10 03 00 Buckinghamshire 01 01 01 02 01 00 00730 01 11 01 Cambridg-shire 09 14 04 07 01 04 05002 11 10 01 Cheshire 05 01 03 02 03 01 01447 02 00 01 Cornwall 11 03 01 00 02 00 01287 00 06 01 Cumberland 04 04 01 02 22 00 02549 12 09 00 Derbyshire 08 02 00 03 03 01 01055 12 11 01 Devonshire 14 10 01 02 01 01 05394 02 06 00 Dorcetshire 07 02 02 03 03 01 04520 06 09 90
Durham 04 00 00 01 10 04 02696 15 00 00 Essex 13 14 03 02 02 04 07013 08 06 00 Gloucestershire 11 03 01 02 01 05 07302 05 10 01 Hamshire 08 10 06 03 03 04 07218 17 05 00 Herefordshire 02 06 01 02 00 01 00522 04 05 00 Hartfordshire 02 12 03 05 02 03 04076 03 10 00 Huntingtonshire 02 04 00 02 08 01 02743 05 06 01 Kent 09 13 06 09 01 13 08840 18 07 01 Lancashire 05 05 00 00 06 00 02288 19 08 01 Leicestershire 09 06 00 03 04 05 04833 11 09 01
Lincolnshire 32 24 05 06 05 03 11664 12 00 01 London 03 03 00 04 02 11 12595 08 00 00 Middlesex 03 03 05 02 09 05 03550 00 08 00 Norfolk 12 20 16 05 09 04 06128 07 03 00 Northampton 06 06 04 07 07 03 04731 15 06 00 Nottinghamshire 03 06 02 01 04 03 02763 07 07 01 Northumberland 02 02 04 03 03 01 01252 15 10 00 Oxfordshire 07 07 05 04 01 03 03078 01 06 00 Rutlandshire 00 01 00 00 00 01 00043 13 04 00 Shropshire 08 05 06 00 03 02 02757 14 06 01
Staffordshire 04 10 02 05 08 03 01902 17 03 01 Somersetshire 10 08 02 03 05 06 09324 17 02 00 Suffolk 13 15 03 03 04 01 05390 07 09 00 Surry 03 04 03 00 01 01 04883 14 00 01 Sussex 08 09 03 05 03 04 03355 10 07 00 Warwick-shire 04 10 03 06 06 04 03839 03 00 00 Wiltshire 03 13 04 04 04 08 04044 17 01 01 Westmerland 01 00 01 00 00 00 00166 10 06 00 Worcestershire 07 04 02 02 02 02 04896 01 08 00 York-shire 33 10 11 23 15 10 14611 03 05 00
Asaph Diocess 04 00 00 01 00 01 00808 05 05 00 Banger Diocess 05 01 03 00 02 00 00298 18 02 00 David Diocess 06 05 02 00 07 00 01548 03 07 00 Landaff Diocess 06 06 03 01 01 00 00925 12 00 00             Total 183707 13 00 00
Now although the Revenues of these Religious places, at the Dissolutions there∣of did amount to one hundred eighty three thousand seven hundred and seven pounds and thirteen shillings per annum, yet the King was not much inriched thereby, most of the said Lands being either given away by the King, or sold off at small Rates, and made to hold of some of the King's Man∣nours (most of them of East-Greenwich) by small and inconsiderable Rents. The number of Monasteries suppressed in Eng∣land and Wales were 313, Priories 290, Frieries 122, Nunneries 142, Colledges 152, and Hospitals, 129: in all 1148. This Henry the Eight was King of Eng∣land, France and Ireland: he was Second Son of King Henry the Seventh by Eliza∣beth his Queen, eldest Daughter to King Edward the Fourth: His Reign began on Sunday the 22 day of April, Anno 1509, He reigned 37 years, 9 months and 6 days, and was the 40 sole Monarch of Eng∣land. He died on Thursday the 28 day of January, Anno 1546, being in the 38 year of his Reign, and 56 of his Age, his body was buried in the Chappel at Wind∣sor.
CHAP. XXX. Of King Edward the Sixth. HE was Crowned at Westminster, being about nine years old, and at his first entrance took Care to settle Soul-sa∣ving Ministers among his Subjects; and as He took care for the Church, so the Lord Seymer Duke of Somerset (the King's Un∣cle) was as busie in managing the State Affairs of the Realm; and thereupon went into Scotland to prosecute the Marriage with the Lady Mary Queen of Scotland, and at Barwick declaring his Intentions, the Governour of Scotland thereupon sent the Fire-Cross through the Realm, requi∣ring all Persons of ability of body to meet at Muskelbrough, where they were fought by the English, and received a great Over∣throw, 9 of their Nobles and about 10000 of their Soldiers being slain: and whilest these things were in Action the Lady Ma∣ry was conveyed into France, there to be married to the Dauphin. And now the Duke of Somerset, Prote∣ctor
of England during his Nephews Mi∣nority, returning from Scotland, a Par∣liament was then called, wherein it was Enacted that the Statute of the 6 Articles in Henry the Eights time, and those of Richard the Second, and Henry the Fifth for suppression of the Scriptures in English should be all repealed; and Images all thrown out of the Churches throughout the Realm, and the Church Service to be read in English, and the Sacrament exhibited in both kinds; and the other old Ceremo∣nies were abolished; and all those that made opposition were either imprisoned, or deprived of their places. Hereupon Tumults arose in Devonshire and Corn∣wal doing much harm, especially to the City of Exceter, which City for its Loy∣alty had the Mannour of Exilond, not after, bestowed upon it by the King, and Pardon was granted to the Rebells; yet notwithstanding they persisted in their Rebellion; and 4 times being fought by the Lord Russel, and each time worsted, yet they still made head again, till at length their Ring-Leaders were taken and Executed. At this time also the Mayor of Bodmyn was Hanged, and a Millers Man who took upon him his Master's name and cause,
when seeing himself likely to suffer for it, thencryedout, That he was but the Mil∣ler's Man: well, said Sir Anthony Kingston, Thou canst never do thy Master better Service than to hang for him. No sooner were these Troubles quelled, but one Robert Ket moved about 20000 Commons in Norfolk to a Rebellion, ta∣king the City of Norwich, in which place the Lord Dudly shortly after caused 60 of them to be executed, and afterwards over∣threw their Army, and took Ket their Leader, who was hanged up in Chains up∣on the Top of the Castle of Norwich, and 9 of his Companions hanged in the Oak of Reformation, a Tree in which Ket used to sit as Judge to determine of their intended Reformation and Proceedings: the great occasion of these Commotions in several Counties in England was against Inclo∣sures, and taking up of wast Grounds, which was then coming into Fashion, for they disparked a great many Parks and other inclosed Grounds, whereupon several of them were slain in the Quarrel, the Ple∣beans also at Seymer near Scarborough in York-shire, rose also under the Conduct one William Ombler a Yeoman there, Tho∣mas Dale a Parish Clerk, and one Stephen∣son the Post, but the King sending down
his Pardon, the Commons left their Lea∣der, to be led to York where they were Executed. But now began greater Sorrows, for the King's two Uncles the Lord Protector and Lord Admiral falling at Variance a∣bout their Wives, who should take place, it proved unlucky to them both, for the Lord Admiral was afterwards attainted of some Treasonable Articles (as was supposed by his Brother the Protector's procure∣ment) and was beheaded at Tower-hill; and not many years after the Protector himself (being fallen into dislike among the Lords) at the same place received the same Doom: and during these unhappy proceedings, the English were quite dri∣ven out of Scotland, and the French had sought to recover Bulloin, but they were so bravely withstood by vallor of one Carter an English Soldier, that 15 Waggons went loaded away with their slain: and they af∣terwards, attempting the Islands of Gern∣sie and Jersie, they were there also forced to desist, with the loss of a thousand men. And now the King's Death began to approach, he having taken the Death of the Protector his Uncle to Heart; and be∣fore he died he ordained the Lady Jane,
Daughter to Henry Duke of Suffolk late∣ly married to Guilford Lord Dudly to suc∣ceed him in the Kingdom, Notwithstand∣ing the Statute made for the Succession of his Fathers Children. Anno 1552, about 7 miles from Ox∣ford at a Town called Middleton, a Wo∣man brought forth a Child which had two perfect Bodies from the Navel upwards, which were so conjoined together at the Navel, that when they were laid out at length, one Head and Body was East, and the other West, and the Leggs of both the Bodies were joined together in the midst, they were Female Children and lived 18 days. This Edward the Sixth was King of England, France and Ireland: he was the only Son of King Henry the Eight, by Jane his Queen, Daughter to John Seimer Knight: He began his Reign on Thursday the 28 day of January, Anno 1546: he reigned 6 years, 5 months, and 8 days: and was the 41 sole Monarch of England. He died of a Consumption of the Lungs on Thursday the 6 day of July, Anno 1553, being in the 7 year of his Reign, and about the 16 of his Age, his Body was buried at Westminster.
CHAP. XXXI. Of Queen Mary. AFter the Death of King Edward, the Lords of the Council caused Lady Jane Guilford to be Proclaimed Queen: Lady Mary hearing of these proceedings writ to the Lords to acquaint them with her Title to the Crown; but they regard∣ed it not, alledging the divorce of her Mother; hereupon she betook her self to Fremingham Castle, to which place the Suffolk men repaired, and promised their Aid; Provided, she would not alter the Religion Established in her Brother's days, to which Request she willingly condescend∣ed, but afterwards upon their Petition to her (after she had got the power in her own hands) for performance of her Promise, she dismissed them with rough Answers. And now several men of Account re∣paired to her, and Proclaimed her Queen at Norwich; the Lords at London, having notice hereof, sent the Earl of Northum∣berland with an Army against her; but
Queen Maries Forces still encreasing, she was Proclaimed Queen in Buckingham∣shire, Oxfordshire, Northampton-shire: and the Lords now began to grow fearful, procured Dr. Ridly Bishop of London, to maintain Lady Jane's cause in his Ser∣mon at Paul's Cross: but, this working no effect, they forthwith Proclaimed Queen Mary: and so the poor distressed Earl of Northumberland being forsaken by his Soldiers, for want of an Harrold at Cam∣bridge proclaimed Queen Mary himself: but notwithstanding shortly after lost his head, although he had renounced his Re∣ligion in hope of Pardon: with him suffe∣red Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Pal∣mer, and not long after them the Lord Guilford and Lady Jane his Wife, a Prin∣cess, for her Wisdom and Learning, wor∣thy of Immortal Fame. It is reported that Morgan who gave Sentence of Death upon her, fell afterwards into Madness, always crying out, Take away the Lady JANE from him. Now the Queen released the Duke of Suffolk from his Imprisonment, but he af∣terwards seeking to withstand the Queen's Marriage, was betrayed by one Ʋnder∣wood his Servant, and himself with his Brother Thomas Lord Gray were Behead∣ed;
and several worthy Bishops, as Cran∣mer, Ridly, Story, Coverdale, Hooper, &c. and all married Priests were displa∣ced, and Romanists, such as Bonner, Gar∣diner, Day, Wesie, Heath, &c. were put in their places. Sir Thomas Wyat now with a great Pow∣er in Kent, sought to withstand the Queen's Marriage, and to have placed better Coun∣cellors about her, and thinking to have en∣ter'd over at London-Bridg, was there stopt, so spoiling Gardiner's, the Bishopof Winche∣ster's House, he returned and got over the River of Thames at Kingston, and in∣tended to have entered the City of Lon∣don at Ludgate; but being there withstood, upon his return at Temple-Bar (dispair∣ing of his purpose) he yielded himself Prisoner, and was shortly after beheaded, and 50 Persons more of his Complices were hanged in London, and 23 in Kent: and the Lord Courtny, and Lady Elizabeth (afterwards our Queen) were clapt up in the Tower, upon suspition of favouring Sir Thomas Wyat's proceedings, and this Innocent Lady, without respect to her Per∣son, being extream Sick at her Mannor of Asbridge, was nevertheless brought away Prisoner to London; and was so straitly kept in the Tower, that a little Boy, about
4 years of Age, who was wont every day to carry her some Flowers, and prattle and talk to her: Command was given to his Father, that the Boy should go no more; and the next day the Child going, and the Door being shut, he peeped in at a hole, Crying unto her; Mistress, I can bring you no more Flowers now. From hence this pious Princess was re∣moved to Woodstock; where, one day sitting sollitary at her Prison window, she espied a Maid singing merrily over her milking Pale, whose condition she esteemed to be better than hers. A little before Arrival of King Philip, two Suns were seen at one time, and a Rain∣bow reversed the Bow turning downwards, before the Marriage certain Honourable Conditions were propounded to King Phi∣lip, and agreed to by him. And now the Protestants began to be hated, Mr. Bourn a godly Minister having a Dagger thrown at him, as he was Preaching at Paul's Cross; and Bishop Bonner caused all Scriptures painted on the Church-walls to be blotted out; and Cardinal Pool coming in∣to England, Images, Holy Water, Pax, Censures, Oyl and Cream were brought into the Church again. And about this time fell such abundance
of Rain that for the space of six days, men might row with Boats in Saint George's Feilds, and the Water was half a yard deep in Westminster-hall. Now the Queens cruel Bishops with her consent, partly through their perswasions, consumed in the Flames (during her Reign for the Profession of their Faith, 5 Bishops, 21 Divines, 18 Gentlemen, 84 Artificers, 100 Husband-men, Servants and Labour∣ers, 26 Wives, 20 Widdows, 9 Virgins, 2 Boys, and 2 Infants, in all 287: besides 16 other Persons that perished in Prison, and 7 scourged, and several Condemned, which were released upon the happy en∣trance of Queen Elizabeth. Many also in these perilous times fled, amongst whom the Dutchess of Suffolk and her Husband Mr. Berty were two, who suffered both Hunger and Cold, and were often in Danger of their Lives, till at length they got into Poland; where they were Honourably treated till Queen Ma∣ry's Death. And now nothing being Talked of, but the Queens being with Child, Prayers were made for her safe Deliverance, Mid∣wives, Rockers, and Cradles, and all things else prepared, but when it come to the point indeed, it proved nothing but a
Tympany, and King Philip seeing himself so frustrated of his Expectation, took Ship∣ping for Spain, and stayed at that time 19 months from the Queen; in whose absence her Exchequer was intended to have been Robbed, but some of the Plot∣ters Ʋdal, Throgmorton, Peacham, Daniel and Stanton, were taken and suffered Death, and others fled; and the same year that Coaches were first used in England, viz. Anno, 1555, began the hot burning Fea∣vers, whereof died many old Persons; so that in London died 7 Aldermen in less than 10 months time; about 2 years after this Thomas Stafford, Son to the Lord Staf∣ford, rose in Rebellion but was taken and beheaded. And now the King (being instigated by his Queen) prepared an Army against France, and several Nobles went thither, where their greatest exploit was the win∣ning of St. Quintins, which was repayed by the French winning Callis from the Eng∣lish, after it had been in their Possession about 211 years: This loss so grieved the Queen that shortly after she died of a Burning Feaver, telling her Physitians, That they would find Callis written in her Heart, if they dissected her Body, after her Death.
That year Queen Mary died, the Quar∣taine Agues continned very sharp, so that many old Folk died, especially Par∣sons and Priests, so that a great number of Churches were unfurnished: and a lit∣tle before the Queen's Death, dyed two of her Physitians, besides many Bishops and Noble men. And in July, the same year, a Tempest of Thunder as it went through two Towns near Nottingham, beat down the Churches and all the Houses in the Towns, the Bells were thrown out of the Steeples, and some of the Webs of Lead thrown 400 Foot into the Feild, and wreathen up together like a glove, Trees were plucked up by the roots and cast 12 score foot off, and a Child was taken out of a man's hand, and carried an 100 foot, and then let fall and died, five or six men were killed, and Hail-stones fell 15 Inches about. This Mary was Queen of England, France and Ireland; She was the eldest Daughter of King Henry the Eight, by Catherine his first Queen, Daughter to Fer∣dinando the VI, King of Spain: and Wid∣dow Dowager to Prince Arthur King Henry's Elder Brother: She began her Reign on Thursday the sixth day of July, Anno 1553, and reigned five years, four
months, and 11 days, and was the 42 sole Monarch of England; She died of a Burn∣ing Feaver on Thursday the 17 day of No∣vember, Anno 1558, being in the Sixth year of her Reign, and 40 of her Age: Her Body was buried at Westminster. CHAP. XXXII. Of Queen Elizabeth. THis Queen was Crowned at Westmin∣ster by Owen Ogilthorp Bishop of Carlile, Pool Arch-Bishop of Canterbury dying the same day that Queen Mary dy∣ed. At her Entrance the Title of Supre∣macy was again restored by Parliament, and all Queen Maries Statutes in favour of Rome repealed; and she being desired by Parliament to marry, said, That she intend∣ed a Virgins Life, which accordingly she performed: for being Courted by Maxi∣milian the Emperour, Ericus Son to the King of Sweden, and by the Arch Duke of Austria, and Duke of Anjou, she deni∣ed
them all: and now Divine Service be∣ing celebrated in English, and Images thrown out of the Churches again. The Scots also began to seek Reformation too: whereupon there arose great Tumults among them, and the King of France send∣ing the Romanists Aid there, the Reform∣ers were forced to crave help from Queen Elizabeth, which she sent them under the Command of the Lord Grey: and the Queen Mother Regent of Scotland dying, the French thereupon concluded Peace for Scotland and left it. The year 1561, In June a Terrible Tempest of Thunder and Lightning hap∣penned about London, which set Paul's Steeple on fire, and burnt it down to the Roof of the Church, consuming all the Bells, Lead, &c. And in March the year after, a Mare brought forth a Fole with one Body and two Heads, and a long tail growing out between them: a Sow also Farrowed a Pig with four legs, like to the arms of a Child, with Hands and Fingers; and in April af∣ter, another Sow Farrowed a Pig with two Bodies eight Feet and but one Head; and many Calves and Lambs were Monstrous; some with Collors of Skins about their
Necks like to the double Cuffs of Shirts then used. About this time Francis King of France dying, Charles his Brother succeeded him, and great Dissentions arising, Queen Elizabeth sought a Reconciliation, but it could not be obtained: whereupon, for sup∣portation of Religion, she sent an Army in∣to France, under the Command of Lord Ambrose Dudly, Earl of Warwick, who landed at Newhaven in Normandy, and after eleven moneths possession thereof, were then constrained to render it to the French, through Famine and Plague which they brought into England, Anno 1563, whereof there dyed in 8 moneths space 23660. The year after the Thames was so hard frozen that Markets were kept on the Ice, and all manner of Exercise performed thereon without Danger, which Frost going away with a five dayes thaw, caused great Floods, and drowned many people especially in Yorkshire; and this year also was such a Terrible Tempest of Hail Lighting and Thunder in June, that at Chelmesford in Essex, 500 Acres of Corn was destroyed with it, and the Windows on the East side of the Town, all the Tyles of their houses were beaten down with it,
besides divers Barns, Chimneys and the Battlements of the Church; and the like harm was done in divers other places, as at Leeds, Crainbrook, and Dover. And now Shan O Neale Rebelling in Ireland, and after several Submissions and Pardons, still bursting out again into Armes, at length he was slain by his Bro∣ther in a Tent. And about this time Anno 1566. The Royal Exchange in London was first built at the Charges of Sir Thomas Gresham: the Marchants in former times using to meet in Lumbard-Street. And two years after, to wit, Anno 1568, The Scots murthered their King: and Mary Queen of Scotland fled into England, where she was honourably recei∣ved, but at length lost her Head. Now after these Commotions in Scot∣land, the Earls in the North, Westmer∣land, and Cumberland, Dacres, Nevil, Norton, Tempest, Danby, and others in the year 1569 rebelled against the Queen: but they were quickly dismaid at the Ap∣proach of the Earl of Sussex who was sent against them, and surprized them; and at Durham caused an Alderman, a Priest, called Plumtree, and 66 Constables to be hanged, and Sir George Bowes Knight
Marshal did see them Executed in every Town betwixt Newcastle and Weatherby: whereupon the Earls fled, Westmerland into Flanders, and Northumberland into Scotland, from whence he was sent into Eng∣land, and lost his head. Anno 1570, And the year after, at Kingston, in the County of Hereford, on the 17 of February was the ground seen to open, and certain Rocks with a piece of ground removed, and went forwards four days together, carryed with it great Trees, and Sheep-Coats, some with 60 sheep in them, and overthrew Rimnalstone Chappel: the depth of the hole where it first broke out is 30 Foot, and the breadth of the Breach was 160 yards; also two high ways were removed neare 100 yards with trees and hedg-rowes, &c. And now Peace being concluded with France, and the Queen of Navar a Pro∣testant coming to Paris in France, to solemnize her Sons Marriage with the Kings Sister, was there secretly poysoned; and after her, the Admiral of France cruelly murthered, and such a Massacre made as neither Sex nor Age escaped the Fury of these Romanists: this was about the year 1572. and the time being now elapsed, for the delivery of Callis to Queen Elizabeth,
according to conditions, when the Peace was concluded, she therefore sent to de∣mand it, and after much Dispute and Debate it was at length absolutely denyed. And not long after this, the Queen was deprived of all Princely Authority, at the fained suit of one Morton at Rome, and the Pope sent his Bull into England to that purpose, which Bull being hung up at the Bishop of London's gate, the bringer therof John Felton was for his paines hanged and quartered in St. Paul's Church∣yard. After this, Anno. 1576. In March, near Richmond in York-shire, a strange Tempest happened, which overthrew Cottages, Trees, Barnes, and Hay-stacks, and great part of the Church called Patrick Brunton, and most strange sights were seen in the Air both terrible and fearful. And about this time the Regent of Scotland was murthered, and after him, the Earl of Lenox the new Regent; so powerful were the Popes perswasions with these Idolizers of his holiness; the Duke of Norfolk also lost his head on Tower-hill, for being (as was supposed) too favourable towards these Scotch Proceedings; and now another new Regent being chosen in Scotland, he desired the help of Queen
Elizabeth for the defence of the young King, which was granted; and 1500 Men were sent under the Command of Sir Wil∣liam Drury, who presently caused the Surrender of Edenbrough Castle. Anno 1580. that renowned English Navigator Sir Francis Drake, finished his Voyage of compassing the Earth: and now our Merchants began to Trade with the Muscovites and Turks: This year there happned a great Earthquake; and a Blasing Starr was seen Nightly in October and November: a strange and Terrible Tempest also of Lightining and Thunder hapned, which seized on the Churches of Blybrough in Suffolk, and Bongey nine miles from Norwich, and rent the Churches and steeples, killing four Persons, and se∣veral others thrown down groveling on the ground: and the same year also in the Parish of Blandsdon in York-shire, a women of 80 years of Age, named Alice Perim was deliver'd of an hideous Monster, whose head was like unto a sallet, the fore part of him like a Man, with eight Legs of several shapes, and a Tail of half a yard long. An. 1583, Tobacco came first into England. The Pop's Envy now burning still against the Queen, he procured the King of Spain to send 600 men for Irelands Rebellion,
who were all slain by the Lord Grey Deputy of Ireland. Anno 1585, Virginia was made an En∣glish Colony; and about this time all the Assizes kept at the City of Exceter in Devonshire, before Sir Henry Anderson Lord Justice of the Common Pleas, there dyed Serjeant Floriday, Sir John Chichester, Sir Arthur Blasset, and Sir Barnard Drake Knights, Thomas Cary, Richard Cary, John Fortiscue, William Waldrum and Thomas Risden Esquires, and Justices of the Peace: and of the Common Peo∣ple, dyed very many Constables, Reeves, Tythingmen, and Jurors: especially of one Jury died eleven of the twelve: this Sickness began amongst the Prisoners, and fastned on the rest by degrees: and about ten years before at the Assizes at Oxford, before Sir Robert Bell Lord Chief Barron, there dyed abundance of Persons also suddenly by the rising of a damp among them: Now, as is said before, the Pope still seeking all occasions against the Reformed Religion, it made several flye, and some sued to Queen Elizabeth for Aide, amongst whom the States of the Netherlands became her Petitioners for their Defender: which Request She thrice denied; but at length condescended (which
kindness hath been badly retaliated) and sent 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horse under the Command of Sir John Norrice: and shortly after went the Earl of Leicester as Deputy, but no great matters being per∣formed, he was again recalled, and Com∣manded to resign up his Government to the Netherlands again: and the King of Spain now under the false proffers of Peace prepared his Invincible Navy (as it was called) against England: of which the Queen had notice by the French King, so that she caused the generall Forces of her Realm to be mustred, and fifteen hundred horsemen and two and twenty thousand Foot were Commanded to repair to Til∣bury in Essex, whither She also went attended with her own Guard, consisting of two thousand three hundred fifty two horse∣men, and thirty four thousand and fifty foot: her Admiral at Sea was Lord Charles Ho∣ward, and Vice Admiral Sir Francis Drake. This Armado consisted (as some of our Chronologers reckon) of Seventy two Gallisers and Gallions, forty seven Ships and Hulks, eleven Pinaces and Car∣vals, two thousand eight hundred forty and three great Ordinance, eight thousand ninety and four Saylers, eighteen thou∣sand six hundred fifty and eight Soldiers,
two thousand eighty and eight Gally-Slaves, two hundred and twenty thousand great Shot, four hundred and seventy thousand and four hundred pounds of Powder, one hundred and twelve thousand pounds of Lead for Bullets, one hundred thirty four thousand and four hundred pounds of Match, seven thousand Muskets and Callivers, ten thousand Partizans and Halberts, with Biskets, Flesh, Cheese, Rice, and other Necessarys, for six months: but this Terrour of the World was terrified and van∣quished by the gallantry of the renouned Lord Howard, and Sir Francis Drake, who destroyed fourscore and one of the Spaniards Vessels, and seventeen thousand of their Men, besides many Noble persons taken Prisoners: nay, there was scarce a worthy Family in all Spain, that in this expedition lost not either a Son, Bro∣ther, or Kins-man: the Pope's Contribu∣tion towards this Expedition was a Million of Gold: it was in the year 1588. And now the Queens Enimies being Dissipated, She caused publick Thanks to be given to God through the Realm: and there were Exe∣cuted for Treason against her Majesty here in England, at several times, before and after this Invasion, about one hundred Persons, whereof threescore and seven were Jesuires.
And now to requite the Spaniars, the Queen, the year after, assisted Don Antonio King of Portugal with eleven thousand Soldiers, and five and twenty hundred Marriners, under the Command of Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake: these English Soldiers, won the Groyne, and it being intended to be rescued, they so val∣liantly behaved themselves, that they took the Spanish King's standard, and made great slaughter of their Enemies: and burn∣ing both the said Town and the Country for three miles round about, they then be∣took themselves to Sea again: and shortly after the Earl of Essex joyned with them: and then they Sailed for Portugal, and took Penish, from whence they went to At∣tempt Lisbone the Metropolis of Portugal, but not being able to overcome it, they returned, and had the Castle of Cassais ren∣dered to them, and they took 60 Spanish Hulks Laden with Corn, Masts, Cables Copper, and Wax, and so retuned for England with great Honor. After this, Supplys were sent by the Queen to Henry King of Navarr, (a Pro∣testant) for the gaining the French Crown, but he, finding many Rubs in his way, chang∣ed his Religion, and then easily obtained it.
About this time Anno 1591, one William Harket was executed in Cheap∣side for Blasphemy and Treason: and about three years after Doctor Lopez suf∣fered. And now the Spanish Practices still in the Queens thoughts, at length she set out a Brave Navy against the Spaniards, Anno 1596. their first Assault was on Cadez which Place they won, and forced the Cittizens to pay them twenty thousand Duccats for their Ransom; and the Ships of the Spaniards, which the English ran a∣shoar there, proffered five and twenty hundred thousand Duccats for their ran∣som, which being denyed Acceptance, at the Command of the Duke of Medina Sidonia they were all set on fire, they being esti∣mated to be worth twelve Millions of Duccats. After this another Fleet went again, and the Spaniards every where being worsted, the Fleet again returned for England with three Prizes worth four hundred thousand Duccats, and Sigismond King of Pollonia and the King of Denmark, about this time sought to the Queen to conclude a Peace with France, but prevailed not. And now Tirr Owen in Ireland break∣ing
into Rebellion, after some Expeditions thither, at length the Earl of Essex was sent Deputy, who concluded a Peace with Tirr Owen, from six weeks to six weeks, for which he was much condemned by the Lords, and recalled into England again by the Queen, and afterwards lost his head, the Queen being neither privy nor consenting to it: for whose Death she sore lamented dure∣ing her Life (which lasted not long after) and bid the Plague of God light upon them for their act, which Curse shortly after took effect, for in one year there dyed of the Plague in London, and the Suburbs thirty thousand five hundred seventy eight, besides all those that dyed of other Di∣seases. After Essex, the Lord Mountjoy went Deputy for Ireland, by whose vigilancy and Courage Tirr Owen at length with all his Adherents (from the Pope and the King of Spain) were Totally routed, and he forced to fly into Spain; and now the Spani∣ards, all hopes of prevailing against England being gon, began to sue for Peace, which upon certain Conditions was granted them: and the Queen afterthis perceiving the time of her dissolution to draw nigh, named King James of Scotland for her Successor, and not long after dyed: she was a Queen
endowed with all the benefits of Nature, a comely person for her Body, but more com∣ly in her Soul, and an excellent Schollar; as may appear by these following Verses made in praise of her; None like Elizabeth was found in Learn∣ing so divine, She had the perfect skilful art, of all the Muses nine: In Latine, Greek and Hebrew, She most excellent was known To Foreign Kings Embassadors, the same was daily shown, The Italian, French, and Spanish Tongue, she well could speak and read, The Turkish and Arabian Speech grew perfect at her need. This Elizabeth was Queen of England, France and Ireland, she was the only Daughter of King Henry the Eight, by his Second Queen Ann of Bulloin; she began her Reign on Thursday the 17 day of November Anno, 1558. and reigned 44 years, 4 months and 7 days, and was the 43 Sole Monarch of England. She dyed on Wednesday, the 24 day of March Anno 1602, being in the 45 year of her Reign, and 69 of her Age. She was buried at Westminster, with
this Queen expired the Sovereignty of the Tewdors, yielding place to the Stuarts to Succeed, in which Name it still doth (and long and prosperously may it so) conti∣nue. CHAP. XXXIII. Of King James. HE was Crowned at Westminster by Dr. Whiteguift, Arch Bishop of Can∣terbury, at which time all people of the City of London were forbidden to re∣paire thither, by reason of the then raging Plague among them; there dying that year in London and the out-Libertys 30578 persons of the same disease: he continued Religion as it was begun in Queen Eliza∣beth's days, and caused the Bible to be tru∣ly Translated according to the Original: at his Entrance to the Kingdom, Plots were contrived for the destroying of his person, and his Eldest Son Prince Henry; to change Religion, to raise Tumults and
let in Strangers, but they were happily discovered, and some of the Ring-leaders apprehended, and put to death: some adjudged to perpetual Imprisonment, and some pardoned. An. 1603. one John Lepton of Repwick Esquire in the County of York, undertook to Ride 5 several times betwixt London and York in six days, to be taken in one week, between Monday morning and Saturday night: and began his Journy Monday Morning the 20 of May, and finished his Journy on Friday after, to the great Ad∣miration of all men. Two years after, to wit, Anno 1605. one William Calverly of Calverly in the Coun∣ty of York Esquire, murthered two of his own Children at home at his own house, then Stabbed his Wife into the Body, with full Intent to have killed her, and then went out with Intention to have killed his Child at nurse, but was prevented: he was Pressed to death at York for this murther, because he stood Mute and would not plead. And now although the King had made Peace with the Popes Champion the King of Spain, yet his Holiness Sons thought to have brought the Ruine of the King and all the Kingdom to Light.
Anno 1605. by a treacherous Plot of blowing up the King and whole Nobility, Root and Branch at one Blow when they were Assembled in Parliament; to which end they had laid in several Barrels of Gunpowder, Barrs of Iron, Faggots, and and other things for doing Execution under the Parliament house: but this Hellish Design was hapily discovered by a Letter sent to the Lord Mounteagle son to the Lord Morley, by some of the Conspira∣tors, wherein they wished him to stay his Appearance from the House the first day of the sitting: this Letter being Commu∣nicated and shewn to several of the Nobili∣ty, they could not sathom the depth of the dark meaning thereof, but at length being shewn to the King, he presently conjectured that the Plot was to blow up the House with Gunpowder; and so, narrow Search being made, it was happyly found out, and the Conspirators discovered: who were some of them shot to death (to wit, Percy and Catesby) for disdaining to be taken, others of them were slain by Gunpowder which they had drying by the Fire, and Sir Everard Digby, the two Wrights, John and Christopher, Fawkes, Graunt, Winter, Boits, and Keyes, were
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered for being chief Actors in this Plot. After this storm was over, the Faces of more troubles appeared through the Insur∣rections of Fines and Rainolds, in North∣amptonshire and Warwick-shire, but this flame quickly vanished into Smoak. About this time the Lady Elizabeth the King's Daughter was married to Fre∣derick Count Elector Palatine. The Joyes of their Nuptial were shortly after over∣shadowed with clouds of sorrow, which ensued upon the death of Prince Henry, which happned Anno 1611, his death was supposed to be something untimely, but his Docters gave Satisfaction herein, that it was by Course of Nature, and not by Poyson as was suspected. And now Charles the King's Second Son (afterwards King) succeeded his Brother in the Principallity of Wales: about this time Sir Walter Rawleigh was released, intending to visit the new found World, and many Gentlemen took their fortunes with him: but unhappily in his Voyage burn∣ing St. Thomes, it shortly after cost him his Life, for Intelligence being given to Condibert then Embassador in England, he never left pressing the King for Repara∣tion: hereupon Sir Walter as soon as he
came to Plymouth was apprehended by Sir Lewis Stuckly, and was brought tryed and condemned in the Kings Bench, and the next Morning after his Tryal was Behead∣ed. And about this time the King being very Sick, he happily Recovered again, but his Loving and vertuous Queen Ann dyed Anno 1618. After this the King made a Motion of Marriage for his Son Charles Prince of Wales with the King of Spains Daughter; thinking thereby to gain opportunity of helping his Son in Law, who having been lately chosen by some of the German Prin∣ces King of Bohemia, was afterwards upon some distast driven out of Bohemia by the Emperor, and afterwards out of all Ger∣many, and remained at this time in Holland, being a Refuge for all distressed people. To effect this marriage, the Prince with the Duke of Buckingham went for Spain, where seeing the Marriage with himself and the Lady Maria the Infanta of Spain procrastinated and delaid, left the Court and Returned for England. Anno 1623. The Plantations in the In∣dies were settled in this Kings time; he was a very learned King, as appears by his Works now in print: he was an honest
Father to his Childern, worthy of his wife; and good to his subjects, and a great desirer of Peace, whose Motto was Beati Pacifici, and as he desired Peace so he dyed in Peace. This James was King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; he was Son to Henry Stuart Lord Darly, who was Grand Child to Lady Margaret eldest Daughter to King Henry the VII of England, by her Second Husband: and his Mother was Mary Queen of Scotland, who was Grand Child also to Lady Margaret by her first Hus∣band James the fourth King of Scotland; so that the said Lady Margaret was great Grand-mother to King James both by Fa∣ther and Mothers side. He began his Reign on Wednesday the 24 day of March, Anno 1602. Reigned 22 years and 3 days, and was the 44 Sole Monarch of England. He dyed of the Spleen on Saturday the 27 day of March, Anno 1625 being in the 23 year of his Reign, and nine and fiftieth year of his Age: his Body was buried at Westminster.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of King Charles the first. SHortly after his Coronation at Westmin∣ster, he proceeded to a Marriage with Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Charles the Fourth King of France, whom he had formerly seen in his journy through that Country into Spain: his first Complement to her, when he went to meet her at Dover was, That he desired to be no longer Master of himself, then he was Servant to her: and indeed this Love he continued to the last hour of his Life: for on the day before his unfortunate end, he desired his Daughter the Lady Elizabeth, to assure her Mother, if ever She see her again, That his Thoughts had never Strayed from her, and that his Affections should be the same to the Last. After the King's Marriage was over, his dislike against the Spaniards, at his De∣parture from that Court, was still fresh in his memory: whereupon a Fleet was set to Sea, who spoiling all the Spanish
Vessels they met withal, for that time re∣turned; and after this, the King called a Parliament, and desired a Subsidy, but was denied, notwithstanding his Treasures were Exhausted, and the War Just and Hono∣rable. But although the Parliament denied the King a Supply, he made use of some other means for pocurement of Money, and join∣ing Amity and Forces with the Ʋnited Provinces, once again he set a mighty Navy to Sea, which did mightily annoy the Spanish Coast, and spoiled their Ships: and among the rest some of France be∣came Preys to them; which caused the Sei∣zure of some English Merchants Goods: whereupon several French were comand∣ed to leave England; but Monsieur Bas∣sompiere, coming Embassador, prevailed so far that several French were again re∣called: but nevertheless all Commerce be∣tween the two Kingdoms was prohibited on both sides. And the French grievous∣ly oppressed the Rochellers, to whose As∣sistance several men were sent out of Eng∣land: but doing little good, they returned again, for which Cause some were Impri∣soned. And now several Complaints being ex∣hibited upon this Account by the Parlia∣ment,
the King dissolved them, and in∣tended new Supplies under the Duke's Command for Rochell; but he being rea∣dy to Embarque was Stabbed by one Fel∣ton, who got the Gallows for his Reward. And now the King called another Par∣liament, desiring a Grant of Tunnage, but was denied: whereupon they were Dissol∣ved, upon which Account great Conten∣tions arose, the King Commanding the Merchants to pay their Customs, and the Parliament forbidding them: whereupon several Members were Imprisoned: and a∣mong the rest Sir John Elliot was one, but the Merchants ready enough to Im∣brace those Commands, were most for their Advantage, did thereupon obey the Par∣liaments Mandates, and slighted the King's: they remembring that about 100 years before, there was a Penalty imposed upon the Merchants, for paying their Cu∣stoms, the Parliament being then against it: and in Memory thereof there was a Chappel built called Alderman-Bury; Anno 1630, May the 29, the Queen was brought to Bed of Prince Charles, now King of England: and about 6 years after, Mr. Hambden refusing to pay Ship-money, Sentence passed against him by 12 of the Judges, who absolutely declared for the
Legality of it, only Judg Hutton and Judg Crook dissented; and new Stirs now arising about the Book of Common-Prayer in Scotland (which occasioned the sad War that afterwards ensued, the King marched thitherward with an Army, and the Scots meeting him, laid down their Arms: where∣upon Peace was concluded, but at the King's return he was again Pricked for∣ward by some, who rather sought their own Advantage than his: hereupon he went again for Scotland, but nothing was done: and now they had taken their Co∣venant (as it was called) against the King, who called a Parliament to relieve his wants: but they treading in their Predeces∣sors Steps denied him a Supply. And now the Irish being afresh in Re∣bellion, the Long Parliament (for so it was called) by Reason of its long Conti∣nuance, for the King had Signed a Bill for them to Sit as long as they pleased) sought means to suppress them: and all Ceremo∣nies were forbidden in the Church of Eng∣land; but only such as were usen in Queen Elizabeths time: the Earl of Strafford, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Bishop Wren were Impeached of High-Treason, and sent to the Tower; and most of the Judges who had declared for Ship-mony
were Voted Delinquents; Judg Berkly was Arrested by the Usher of the Black Rod for High-Treason, as he sate on the King's Bench. Seven Romish Preists were also Imprisoned, whose Pardon was granted by the Parliament, at the Request of the French Embassador, and the King to In∣gratiate himself released them; at which the Parliament took Snuff, because they were not first made acquainted before their Releasement: and to thwart the King in his Proceedings, they changed their former Decree, and caused two of the Priests to be put to Death, which Act of theirs took mainly with the People: but this (as good Reason) displeased the King, who complained of the Insolencies of the Lower house to his Peers, and so pro∣ceeded to displace some Officers of State, putting in another Lieutenant of the Tower, whereupon the Lower house did Article a∣gainst the new Lieutenant to the Peers, who refused to meddle in the Business, it being the King's Prerogative to put in whom he pleased: but not long after a multitude of Apprentices and other People came Thun∣dring to the Hall-Door, crying to have the new Lieutenant either remov'd, or else they would turn All upside down. This giddy headed Rabble of Plebeans demanded also
that Bishops should be Excluded the Parli∣ament-house; and, to satisfy their blind folly, they ran into Westminster Abby, and spoiled the Vestments, Organs and Se∣pulchers, and all else that was comely or decent: and from thence they ran confu∣sedly to Whitehall, and there Thundered out the same Languages; but least they should proceed to some further Insolencies, the King the next day fortified himself with a strong Guard. And now things beginning to work for the Parliament, they thought it good pol∣licy to make Hay whilest the Sun shone, and to strike whilest the Iron was hot; and hereupon they (under the pretence of some Fear) assumed to themselves a Guard al∣so, for their Defence, and constituted the Earl of Essex Captain thereof: and further they (without the King's Consent or Knowledge) appointed an Extraordinary Assembly in the City of London: and fur∣ther to ingratiate themselves with the No∣velty-mongers, they cast 12 Bishops into Prison, which Business much troubled the King: and the year before, Anno 1641, the Lord Strafford was Beheaded, and a∣bout two years after the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, who died as Sacrifices for the
Popular Fury, and Martyrs for the Go∣vernment. Now the King grieved at these Insolen∣cies, proceeded to accuse one Member of the House of Peers, and five of the House of Commons of High-Treason: and de∣manding the Members, they were denied to be delivered to him; whereupon he with 500 Armed men went to the Hall, he alone entring the Parliament House, and not seeing any of the Accused Mem∣bers there, he then declared his Good In∣tentions to the Parliament, and so return∣ed: and the next day went again, but found them not: the Parliament hereup∣on put the City in Arms; and Adjourned their Sitting for five days, forbidding the Citizens to help the King to find out any of the said Members; whose Commands they so far obeyed as that in Despight of the King they carried the said Members, and placed them in the House again, in their several places; and the Parliament still proceeding to lessen the King's Power, sent Letters to the adjacent Counties, commanding them to draw up in Arms, upon which Account there was ready up∣on occasion above twenty Thousand men: the King seeing these Proceedings hasted to Hampton-Court.
And now the Parliament daily increased in their Power, and went and sate in the Ci∣ty, to endear themselves the more to the Citizens: and forthwith sent their Man∣dates to the respective Governors of the Sea-port Towns, Prohibiting them to obey any of the King's Orders, unless they were confirmed by them: hereby they weakned the King's Authority, more than all their former Proceedings had done; which the King might easily have prevent∣ed in time, if he had put Soldiers into the said Towns to have kept them for himself. And not long after this, they took into their hands most Sea-Port Towns of Con∣cernment, among which Hull was one: which denied to the King, and delivered to them. And now the King seeing the harsh proceedings of the Parliament, he writ to them from Windsor, protesting his Inno∣cency: whereupon they sent Messengers to him to desire his return to London, but he refused: upon which occasion the Low∣er-House drew up an Humble Remon∣strance (as they called it) whose Propo∣sitions were so unreasonable, that the House of Peers would not consent to them, till they saw the Commons uniting them∣selves against them: and then Messengers were sent to the King with the Remon∣strance,
who with some Reservation yielded to part of it, and denied the other part: yet this would not satisfie them, but they pro∣ceeded further to Petition the King, That the accused Members might be free and clear from all Guilt, which was granted them: but now those who favoured the King's Cause, fearing the event of these proceedings, part of them left England, and part repaired home, leaving the Par∣liament; so that there were not above 25 in the Upper-House, and scarce 80 in the Lower-House; and shortly after hardly 16 in the upper House, and the Queen a∣bout this time left England, accompanying her Daughter to her Husband the Prince of Orange, to whom she was Espoused: and the King caused all Priests to be banished out of the Realm, and severe Statutes to be published against the Papists. And now all things growing worse and worse, the Parliament began to take the boldness upon them to accuse the King of harkning to a Change in Religion: and that he had given Cause to the Uproars in Ireland: but especially those that were most powerful with him, secretly bespot∣ting the Queen: the King to remove these Aspertions, Published his Declarations to the People of his Innocency; but they ta∣king
no effect, he with his Son Prince Charles, the Palsgrave, and Duke of Rich∣mon took their Journy for York▪ Resolve∣ing to oppose Force against Force. And now the King, after several Passages between him and the Parliament, called all the Knights of the Garter, and all others that held of the Crown, to Repair to York▪ the Par∣liament on the contrary, made it death for any to go, yet notwithstanding several Mem∣bers went over to the King upon this Account. And now people fearing the worst, the Men of Kent Petitioned the Parliament on the behalf▪ of the King: That nothing might be done without the King's Consent; that the Liturgy might not be altered; That the Bishops might be restored, (whom they had Excluded the Lords House) That they would not suffer the Fundamental Laws of the Land to be Antiquated with∣out the Kings permission; Nor Arms to be raised without his Command; That some good means might be found out to make a Reconcilement, &c. This Petition was ill taken, and the brin∣ger, therof together with the Earl of Bri∣stol the Receivers of it, were both Impri∣soned for their Pains: and Somersetshire men afterwards preferring a Petition to the Parliament, they Commanded it to
be burnt by the Common Hang-man. And now, after Thwartings and Discon∣tents between the King and Parliament, he at last Commanded all the York-shire men to meet him at a certain place called Howard Moor, near York▪ who according∣ly appeared, being about Threescore Thou∣sand men: and the King with the Prince, and some Lords, about six hundred horse met them there, and with about twenty thousand men went back to York: and Com∣manded them all to repaire to their Houses: in the mean time the Parliment borrow'd a great Sum of money of the Londoners, on the Publick Faith (as they called it;) and Rais∣ing an Army of ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, they sent them towards York; in the Interim the King assailed Hull, but was withstood by Sir John Hotham: and having this bad Success at first, he thereupon sent to the Parliament to Con∣clude a Peace, and promised forthwith to repair to them, if they would leave Lon∣don, and make choice of some other place to Sit in: but they Refused it; whereupon the King proclaimed all men guilty of Treason, that should Assist the Houses either with Money or other Supplyes, and also threatned to deprive the Londoners of their Priviledges, if they offended herein;
and the King having fortified Newark and Barwick, sought again to obtain Hull, but in vain: and now the Parliament Pro∣claimed open War, making the Earl of Essex General: and the King set up his Standard at Nottingham: and now it being come to open War, the Victory was doubtful, some∣times one Side, sometimes the other get∣ing the better, with no small loss of blood, and the Life of many a gallant man: and the Prince, when he saw his Fathers Affairs in a desperate Condition, took Shipping for the Scillyes, from whence he was In∣vited by the Parliament to return to Lon∣don; but he thought it not safe for his Per∣son to do so, and so sailed to the Hague, to his Sister the Princess of Orange, where he remained till the Sad News of his Fa∣ther's Murther was brought to him. Now although there be several Book in print, treating at large of the several Skirmisses, Battells, Sieges, &c. which happned between the King and Parliament during the seven years unhappy Dissentions between them; yet partly to Satisfie the Reader (whose Purse affords him not Mony to buy them, or, multitude of business time to peruse them) I have here Incerted a brief Catalogue of the most considerable of them, as followeth.
1642. Apr. Sir John Hotham denyed the King Entrance into Hull, for which he was pro∣claimed Traytor. Aug. The King's Standard set up at Not∣tingham, and a little before 20 of his men slain, and a Colour taken by a Sally out of Hull. Sept. Portsmouth Besieged by Sir John Merrick▪ and yeilded to him: Lord Byron set upon, near Bracklye, got off again with some loss, marched to Wor∣cester, secured it for the King: and the Parliament Forces attempting the Town, were set upon in the Rear at Wickfield near Worcester by Prince Rupert and Routed: but the Earl of Essex after∣wards advancing thither, Worcester was then yeilded to the Parliamenta∣rians. Octob. The signal great Fight at Edge-hill, about 5000 slain. Banbury and Brough∣ton-House surrendred to the King, af∣ter which he entered Tryumphantly into Oxford with an 150 Colours taken in Fight. Novemb. Brantford Fight, about 200 of the Parliament party slain, besides several drowned, and some 15 pieces of Ordnance sunk in the Thames.
Decemb. Marborough taken for the King by Lieutenant General Wilmot: and Tadcaster by the Earl of New-Castle: and Winchester and Chichester delive∣red to the Parliament. Januar. Bodmyn Fight, and Liscard ta∣ken by Sir Ralph Hopton: Belvoire Castle surprized by Collonel Lucas. Leeds stormed and taken by Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, and afterwards Don∣caster and Wakefield were quitted by the Royallists, and Garrisoned by the Par∣liament: A party of 700 Horse and Foot, under the Command of Collo∣nel Slingsby defeated at Gisborough: and Brill assaulted by Collonell Hambden, but bravely repulsed by Sir Gilbert Ger∣rard. Febr. The Fight at Hutton Feild, better known by the name of Yarm Fight, where the Parliaments Forces were routed, Cy∣rencester or Cycester in Gloucester-shire taken by Prince Rupert. Shudly Ca∣stle stormed by Collonell Massy, and yielded to the Parliament: and the Queen landed at Bridlington-Key in York-shire. March. Litchfield won by the Parlia∣ment, and the Lord Brook killed there by a Shot in the Eye. The Fight at
Hopton-Heath in Staffordshire. Gell, and Brereton defeated there by his Ma∣jesties forces, Earl of Northampton who Commanded them slain. Malmsbery surrender to the Parliament. Grantham taken by Collonel Charles Cavandish, Scarborough delivered up to his Maje∣sty by Brown Bushell: and Sir Thomas Fairfax routed at Bramham-Moor. 1643. Apr. Burmingham taken by Prince Ru∣pert. Young Hotham routed near An∣caster in Lincolnshire by Collonell Ca∣vendish. Litchfield after three weeks Siege surrendred to his Highness Prince Rupert: And Redding after a Fort∣nights Siege, surrendred to the Earl of Essex. May. The Parliament Forces routed near Banbury, by the young Earl of Northampton. Warder Castle and Monmouth surrendered to the Par∣liament. The Parliament Forces de∣feated at Stratton in Devonshire by the Lord Hopton. And the King's Forces defeated at Wakefield. June. Taunton and Bridg-water delive∣red to the Parliament. The Parlia∣ment Forces routed by Collonell Ca∣vendish at Dunnington in Lincolnshire,
and by Prince Rupert also at Chalgrove-Field in Oxfordshire. Howly house taken by the Earl of Newcastle. Tham∣worth Castle yielded, and Fairfax de∣feated by the Earl of Newcastle on Adderton-Heath. July. Middletons Horse and Dragoons routed at Padbury near Buckingham by Sir Charles Lucas: Bradford taken. Hallifax and Denton house quitted by the Parliament. Burton upon Trent taken for the King by the Lord Germin. Landsdown Fight, Lord Dencourt's eldest Son slain. Lord Grey of Wark, Sir Wil∣liam Armin, and Mr. Darly sent by the Parliament to Invite the Scots to their Assistance. Runaway-down Fight, the Parliament Forces routed there by Prince Mawrice: Earl of Carnarvan, Lord Wilmot, and about a thousand slain and 4000 taken, and 28 Colours of Foot. Bristow surrendred to Prince Rupert: and not long after Gainsborough ren∣dered. Aug. Dorchester yielded to the Earl of Carnarvan, Portland Reduced: Wey∣mouth and Melcombe submitted, and Beaverly taken by the Earl of New∣castle. Sept. Biddford, Appleford, and Barn∣stable
surrendred to the King. Exceter taken by Prince Mawrice. Gloucester besieg'd and relieved by the Earl of Es∣sex. Lin yielded to the Earl of Man∣chester. Awborne Fight in Wiltshire Mar∣quess De La Ʋien Ʋille slaint here. Newbery Fight, Earls of Carnarvan and Sunderland with the Lord Viscount Faulkland slain, and about six thousand men on both sides. Octob. Redding garrisoned by the King, and Dartmouth surrendered to Prince Maurice. Decemb. Hawarden Castle yielded to the King. Arundel Castle taken by the Parliament Forces. Beeston Castle and Laply house taken for the King; and after that Grafton house in Northamtonshire, and Grew house in Cheshire. January. Scots invaded England. March. Sir Thomas Fairfax and Mit∣ton beaten from Drayton in Shropshire by Prince Rupert. Hopton Castle and Warder Castle taken for the King▪ Newark relieved by his Highness Prince Rupert, and Sir John Meldrum and his Forces there defeated, their Armes, Cannon and Ammunition all taken from them, and they permitted to goe away
with their Lives; after this Gainsborough Lincoln, and Sleeford were all quitted by the Parliament, and Sturton Castle surrendered to the King. 1644. Apr. Longford house in Shropshire sur∣rendred to Prince Rupert. Cheriton∣down fight, about a thousand slain▪ Winchester retaken by Sir William Waller, Tong Castle surrendred to Prince Ru∣pert, and Studcombe in Dorcetshire ta∣ken by him. May. Bewdly in Worcestershire taken by Collonel Fox. Stopford in Cheshire by Prince Rupert. Latham house after 18, weeks Siege relieved by his Highness's Approach: and Bolton in Lancashire taken by him, and about 800 Men slain. June. Borstall house taken by Sir Henry Gage. Collonell Shuttleworth defeated by Prince Rupert at Blackburn in Lan∣cashire. Waller at Crappedy-Bridge loosing about three hundred Men. And the Skirmish at North-Allerton where the Royallists under the Command of Collonel Errington (who thought to have blown up the Toll-Bouth there with about 90 Scots in it Commanded by
Master Rymer) were defeated, one Sal∣vine, and some three more slain. July. York relieved by Prince Rupert, after which followed that bloody Fight on Marston-Moore, about 9000 men slain, shortly after which York was yield∣ed up by Sir Thomas Glenham. Aug. Lestithiel taken by the King. Sept. Bassing relieved by Sir Henry Gage and Sir George Bunckly. Octob. Banbury Siege raised by the Earl of Northamton, and Collonel Gage: and Newbery Second Fight, where was slain four or five thousand men. Novemb. Dennington Siege raised by the King, and the siege at Bassing house; against which place Sir William Waller had lost about a thousand Men: and Monmouth retaken by the King's party. Decemb. Earl of Essex cashiered of his Command, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, Voted General of the Parliament Forces. Jan. Sir John Hothan Father and Son be∣headed, and the Skirmish at Cutham Bridge, Sir Henry Gage slain. Feb. Ʋxbridge Treaty. Shrewsbury surprized by the Parliament, and Rossi∣ter
Defeated near Melton Mow∣bray. March. Pomfret relieved, and the Par∣liaments Army deseated by Sir Mar∣maduke Langdale. 1645. Apr. Collonel Massy defeated by Prince Rupert at Ledbury: and Bleching∣ton-House delivered to the Parlia∣ment. May. Oxford the first time besieged. Godstowe house quitted. Eversham taken by the Parliament: and Leicester by the King. June. Leicester regained by the Parlia∣ment. Carlisle after 41 weeks Siege de∣livered up by Sir Thomas Glenham to the Scots. July. The Kings Forces defeated at Langport, about 200 slain, and 1400 taken: Pomfret Castle, Bridgwater, Scarborough and Bath delivered to the Parliament. Aug. The Parliament Quarters beaten up at Tame. Sherburn Castle taken by the Parliament. And the Scots defea∣ted at Kilsieth in Scotland by Mon∣tross. Sept. Bristol surrendred to the Parlia∣ment. Montross defeated at Philliphaugh
in Scotland, and the Kings Forces were worsted at Routon-heath near Chster. Oct. Bassing house taken by Cromwell, and in it the Marquess of Winchester, and the Lord Digby defeated at Sherborn in York-shire. Novemb. The King returned to Oxford. Bolton and Beeston Castles yeilded. Decemb. Latham house delivered by the Kings order, after a second siege of a∣bove two years; and Hereford surpriz∣ed by the Parliamentarians, before which place the Scots in August before had lost about a thousand men. Jan. Wormleighton house burnt, and Dartmouth itormed and taken by the Parliament. Febr. Belvoire Castle, and Westchester delivered to the Parliament. Torring∣ton stormed by them: and Lanceston, Saltash, and Lize quitted by the King, with Foy and Mount Edgecombe. March. Lord Ashly defeated near Stow, and Denning surrendred to the Parlia∣ment. 1646. Aprill. Ruthen Castle, Exceter, St. Michael's Mount, Dunster Castle and Woodsteck yielded. Corfe Castle taken
by Stratagem; and the King quits Oxford in Disguise. May. Oxfords second siege, the King re∣pairs to the Scots at Southwel, and thence to Newcastle: Banbury and Radnor surrendered. June. Carnarvan Town and Castle, Lud∣low, Borstal, Oxford, and Farringdon all yielded to the Parliament. July. Litchfield, Worcester, Wallinford Castle, Gothridge, and Pendennis the like: and Conway taken by Storm. Aug. Ragland house surrendered by the Marquess of Worcester. Sept. Scilly Island and Castle, also yielded. Octo. Denbigh Castle also yeilded. Novem. General Fairfax marched Tryumphantly to London. Febr. The Scotch Army (having first sold the King for two hundred thousand pounds) marched into Scotland: and the King sent Prisoner to Holmby by the Parliament. And now the King's Enemies having gotten him in their Power, remove him from place to place, and at length into the Isle of Wight, there to be guarded by Collonell Hammon and the Merciless Waves of the Sea; and here he writ that
excellent Book called Icon Basilicon, and afterwards coming to a Treaty of Peace, the King so far condescended, as that it was then Voted Satisfactory; after which the Army and those of the Parliament, who had all this time aimed at self Interests, began to display themselves in their Co∣lours; turning out all such Members of the House of Parliament as they suspected: and conveyed the King to Hurst Castle, and afterwards to Windsor; during which proceedings several Bickerings and Ingagements had happened between the Royallists and Parliamentarians; the Roy∣al party every where to going wrack, espe∣cially at Maidstone, Pontefract, Bow, Stratford, Kingston and Preston, where the Scotch Army received a great Over∣throw, loosing a world of men. And lastly, at Colchester where those two gallant Gentlemen, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle were shot to Death after Quarter given, contrary to the Law of Arms. And now the Army, and those Mem∣bers then left in the House (after the o∣thers were Secluded) devised and ere∣cted a new unheard of Tribunal, called a High-Court of Justice, to take Cognizance of the King's Cause: one Bradshaw a Ser∣jeant
at Law: being made President thereof: and the King being called before this new Erected Authority, was there accused of several Crimes, as, That he gave Cause of the Cruel Blood-shed in England and Ire∣land: That he had born Arms against the Parliament: That he had given Commissi∣on to his Son and others to Wage War; and, Therefore he was pronounced a Traytor, a Tyrant, and an Enemy to the Common∣wealth of England: The King refused to answer to the Charge, or to acknowledg the Court, being several times brought before them; and urged thereunto; at length upon the 27 day of January, An∣no 1648. They pronounced Sentence a∣gainst him; That he, the said Charles Stew∣art was faln from all Dignity, was guilty of High-Treason, and was to be put to Death, by severing his Head from his Bo∣dy, for being a Tyrant, a Murtherer, and an Enemy to the Common-wealth; the Sentence being read, the Court stood up in Confirmation of it, as the Act and Re∣solution of the whole Court; and the King offering to speak something, the President would not permit him, but Commanded him to be carried away, and conveyed to Whitehall. And now this Wicked Sentence thus
Pronounced, they shortly after proceeded to Execution, although the Holland Em∣bassadors Adrian Paw and Albertus Jo∣achimus, with the Scots also sought to di∣swade them from it: but all would take no place with them, they thirsting after the Blood of this Pious Prince; and so on Tuesday the 30 day of January, Anno 1648, was the Scaffold erected, just before White-hall the King's Banquetting-house, from which Scaffold the King made his last Speech, professing his Innoceney: and after by a disguised Executioner had his Head chopt off at one Blow; and even his Enemies wept in private for that they had done in publick: It being an Insolence without President; and a Murther in the highest degree detestable, in regard both of the quality, and of the Person, being acted by Rebellious Subjects upon the Person of their lawful Prince, and more∣over a Prince in himself of a most exempla∣ry Tenderness and Virtue. His Body was put in a Coffin of Black Velvet, and car∣ried to his House at St. James's, and there put in Lead, and, about the seventh day of February after, it was delivered to two of his Servants to Bury: where at Windsor in St. George's Chappel it was Interred in the presence of the Duke of Richmond, the
Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls Lindsy and Southampton, and Dr. Ju∣xon with several others: on the Breast of the Corps was sawdered a small piece of Lead, about two foot long, and two inches broad, in which was inscribed KING CHARLES 1648. This Charles the First was King of Eng∣land, Scotland, France and Ireland: he was the Second Son of King James by Ann his Queen, who was Daughter to Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and Norwigia: He began his Reign on Sa∣turday the 27 day of March, Anno 162 reigned 23 years, 10 months, and 3 days, and was the 45 sole Monarch of England: He was beheaded on Tuesday the 30 day of January (as is shewed before) Anno 1648, being in the 24 year of his Reign, and 49 year of his Age. His Body was bu∣ried at Windsor.
CHAP. XXXV. Of King Charles the Second. KING Charles the First being Bar∣barously Murthered, the Parlia∣ment now began to lop of several Nobles heads, and other of the late King's Fa∣vourites, as Duke Hamelton, Lord Capell, and the Earl of Holland; and now they thought to have intailed their Sitting from Generation to Generation, never intend∣ing to rife again by a Dissolution: and to this intent they put out an Act, whereby they took all (as they thought, either Right or Hope of Succession from Charles the Second: and likewise disinabled all the rest of his Brothers and Sisters from Inhe∣riting any thing in England: and they caused the King's Arms to be pulled down every where; and in their places were set up the Cross and Harp, which they called the States Arms; the King's Pi∣cture also in the old Exchange they cau∣sed to be defaced, and the following In∣scription set behind the head of it in Gold Letters.
Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae Restitutae Primo, Anno 1648. January 30. They likewise caused the Titles of all Process at Law to be altered, and in stead of Carolus Dei Gratia, &c. they put in Custodes Libertatis Angliae, &c. and caused the Court of King's Bench to be called by the name of the Ʋpper-Bench: They made also a new Stamp for Money, with the Cross on one side thereof, and the Cross and Harp on the other side, and the Circumscription on the one side was The Common-wealth of England, and on the other side God with us. And there was also a new great Seal made. And now the Lord Fairfax having laid down his Commission, the Parliament made Oliver Cromwell their General, who was so Fortunate in all his Enterprizes, that in a few years time he brought Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland into Subjecti∣on: truth is, if his Cause had been Ho∣nourable and Just, he would have been as much Honoured by Posterity for his Val∣lour, as he is hated by all good Subjects for his Disloyalty and Inhumanity to his Sovereign Lord and Master the King. And now his Majesty being in France, he hoped to get Aid there, but found none;
yet his Friends here in England Proclaim∣ed him King, the Earl of Ormond and Lord Inchequin caused him also to be Pro∣claimed King in Ireland. And now the Parliament proceeded to make Sale of the King and Queen's Lands, not sparing their Houses; whose Purcha∣sers gained no small Summs by them, ma∣king Money of the Leads, Glass, Iron, Timber and Stones of the same Houses: the Bishops with the Deans and Chapters Lands also received the same Doom, and most of the Castles in England were by the Parliament's Order demolished and thrown down: and all Persons were expel∣led from places of Trust either in Church or State, which would not Subscribe to the present Government then Established by them. And now his Majesty was Proclaimed in Scotland, and after great Debate had among them there, at length they agree on some Propositions to be sent to the King, who was then at the Isle of Jersie, and Mr. Windram Laird of Libberton was ap∣pointed Messenger: The Heads of which Propositions were, 1. That his Majesty should sign the So∣lemn League and Covenant. 2. That he should pass divers Acts of
Parliament, which were concluded on in their two last Sessions of Parliament in Scotland. 3. That he should be pleased to recall the late Commissions, given to Mount∣tross. 4. That he should put away all Papists from him. 5. That he would appoint some place about Holland to Treat with their Comissi∣oners. And 6. That he would be graciously pleased to give a speedy Answer to their Desires. These Propositions coming to the King, they were very stifly debated Pro and Con, and after much Consultation, at last Sir William Flemming was sent Agent to the Committee of the Estates in Scotland, till such as the Laird Libberton could be dis∣patched: who shortly after followed with a Letter and Instructions by word of Mouth to the Committee of Estates, and Breda in Holland was appointed for the place of a solemn Treaty; and after great debates by the Committee of Estates and Kirk in Scotland, at long run it was con∣cluded, that the Earl of Castles, the Lord Lothian, Burly and Libberton, Sir John Smith, and Mr. Jeoffries, should go Com∣missioners
for the Estates; and Mr. Broa∣dy, Lauson and Wood for the Kirk: and these having received their Commissions, met the King at Breda, where, after their Speeches made to his Majesty, they then delivered their Propositions, much to the same effect of those already men∣tioned. Now, during this Treaty, the Marquess of Montross was seized in Scotland, where he was with a most barbarous inhumanity, exposed to all the severness imaginable: a Gibbet set up for him, of a height extraor∣dinary, where he was hanged, and then quartered; with all the circumstances of a solemn and a deliberate cruelty and ma∣lice, to the eternal infamy of that Faction, which would, in the very instance of an overture, and Treaty of accord, proceed to so unheard of an outrage upon the Per∣son of so loyal a Subject to his and their Sovereign. This was the fatal and Tra∣gical Event of his Majesties Affairs in Scot∣land. Upon the Report of this News at Breda, the King was much Troubled, and all the Treaty had like to have broken off upon it; but yet the King at length, through the ne∣cessity of his Affairs, concluded the Treaty by condescending to most of the Propositions
and this Conclusion being carryed to Eden∣borough, after much Debate, it was Resolved another Message should be sent to invite the King over, but the Parliament here in Eng∣land, having notice of all those proceedings in Scotland, prepared an Army thereupon to Invade Scotland, under the Command of their General Oliver Cromwel, and they had also about this time put out an Act for the bringing all Proceedings at Law into the English Tongue, and Secretary hand; which continued so for about some ten years. And about this time also their Admiral General Blake took, sunck and burnt most of Prince Ruperts Fleet, which was a great hurt to the Kings Affairs. And now the King being arived at Spey in the North of Scotland, some Lords were sent down to accompany him to Edenborough; as he came along he was entertained with the general Joy of all the People, and at Ab∣berden he was presented with 1500 pounds, which thing was ill taken by the Commitee of Estates and Kirk; and therefore they sent their Injunction to prohibit other places from doing the like: and the King being now come to Edenborough, he was again proclaimed King on the 15 of July Anno 1650, but his Coronation was defer∣red
by reason of the then Troubles, for the English Army was upon their Borders; so the Scots now began to think how they might defend themselves, and therefore they marched under the Command of Montgomery, and set upon the English at Musclebrough, but were worsted, and at Dunbarr the English wholly routed them and gained the Pass there: this newes was brought to the King at St. Johnstons, much about the same time when the death of his Sister the Princess Elizabeth was brought to him: so shortly after this he left the States of Scotland and repaired into the North of that Kingdom, being no longer able to endure the Affronts put upon him. And now, besides the danger of the Eng∣lish Army then in the Bowels of Scotland, they themselves were yet devided into three Partys, so that nothing but ruin could be expected among them: but the King re∣turning with Montgomery to St. Johnstons again, they were then all reconciled among themselves, and the King on the first day of January Anno 1650, was Crowned at Scoon. And now the King set up his Standard at Abberdeen, and resolved himself to be Generalissimo of the Scoth Army: and about this time was Sir Henry Hyde beheaded
at London for his Loyalty; and not long af∣ter Captain Brown Bushel received the like Doom, for performing some signal Services for the King. And the King now began to Fortifie Sterling, to which place he afterwards re∣moved his Court, and the English drew nigher and nigher every day, and had sur∣prized the Earl of Eglington, and one of his Sons: but whilest things were thus in A∣gitation in Scotland, a Plot was discove∣red in England against the Parliament, most of which Plotters were Presbyteri∣ans, and two of them, being Ministers, viz. Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Love were be∣headed for their Treason as the Parlia∣ment called it: now Cromwell perceiving that he could not draw the Scots to a Field Battel, presently transported over the Fife 1600 Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse, who with the help of Lambert and Okey routed Sir John Brown's Forces, took him, and several other persons of Quality, Prisoners, and slew two thousand upon the place, and took near 120 Prisoners. Now the King, seeing the English pre∣val so fast, thought it best to acquit Scot∣land, and so marched for England, begin∣ning his march the last day of July, Anno 1651, Cromwell seeing this, sent Lambert
after them with a select party of Horse to fall upon their Rear, and himself with the rest that could be spared followed, and the Parliament also hearing of the King's March, interdicted all Aid and Assistance either of men or money to be given to his Majesty, under the penalty of High-Trea∣son, and they also caused numerous For∣ces to be raised in most Counties in Eng∣land. The King's Army now in England car∣ryed themselves very civilly, yet for all that, the People were so besorted, that they came very slowly into his Assistance, for few or none came during this tedious march; saving the Lore Howard's Son of E∣strich with a Troop of Horse; and now Lambert with his Men having been guided over the Dales and Moors in York-shire got the Advantage of the King's Army in their March, and instead of following them, got before them, and thought to have stopt the King's Army at Warrington-Bridg, but after an hot Dispute and the loss of some men the King at length gained the passage over the Bridg, and coming to Tong Norton, he sent a Trumpeter with his Summons to Collonell Humphry Mack∣worth, Governour of Shrewsbury, to ren∣der up the Town; but he sent the King a
flat denial, giving him the Title only of Commander in chief of the Scottish Ar∣my, in the Superscription of his Letter he sent back: from hence the King marched on to Worcester, where he entered the Town, the Earl of Derby a little before had brought him a supply of 250 Foot and 60 Horse out of the Isle of Man, and was gon into Lancashire in hopes to have gotten more Forces there, but was routed there by Lilborn: and most of his cheif Commanders slain, as the Lord Withring∣ton, Sir Thomas Tilsly, Collonel Trollop, and Collonel Bointon; and some others taken: This misfortune was imputed to the disappointment his Lordship received in Lancashire, to which place his Majesty had ordered him to repair, with assurance that the Presbyterians would frely join with him, in order to his Majesties Restauration; but, coming thither, he found it otherwise, and that they did all they could to hinder any Conjunction, unless he would take the Covenant; which refusing to do, he was forced upon that Engagement before men∣tioned (in Wiggon-lane) where he behaved himself with all possible bravery, and Col. Massy also had his part in the Honor of this occasion. His Majesty all this time was busie
in fortifying of Worcester, in the mean time Major General Lambert, gained the Pass at Ʋpton, where the Bridg was cut down, by causing the Troopers to swim the River upon their Horse-backs, taking their Pistols out of the Holsters and car∣rying them in their hands to save them from wet: and this Attempt was princi∣pally undertaken for saving the Lives of 40 or 50 desperate Fellows who had got o∣ver the Bridge upon a pole of Wood, and were forced into the Church close nigh the Bridg, by Major General Massy's men, where they had all been cut off, if the Troopers had not swum the River, who thereby not only saved the said men, but also put Major General Massy and his men to the Retreat, and so the Royallists were forced to quit the Town, and leave the pass to the Parliamentarians, who quickly made a Bridg of Boats over the River: and now Cromwel joining with the rest of the Forces against the King, af∣ter some Sallies out of the Town a∣gainst them, at length the King, in the Front of his men sallied out of the Town, on the third day of September, Anno 1651, and so valiantly charged Cromwell's Life Guard, that they were forced to retire, till seconded by fresh Forces, and then they
put the Royal party to the Retreat; and the King had his Horse twice shot under him, and not able to rally again, they were for∣ced to fly into the Town; where the Crom∣wellian party entered pell mell with them, and then the Cry went, Save the King, Save the King: And now the King, seeing all gone, with some Nobles and Ser∣vants, with much difficulty, got away; and coming to a Farmers House in the Borders of Staffordshire, there he disrobed him∣self, and for want of a pair of Scissars had his Hair cut off with a Knife; and so he, with the Company of one Friend (who brought him Provision towards Night) be∣took himself into a Wood, about 4 miles from Woolverhampton, where he made an Oak his Pallace, and the Soldiers all this while were hunting about, like Blood∣hounds for the King, a Thousand pound being the promised Reward of those that could take him. But some few dayes after he was conveyed to the House of one Mris Jane Lane, who proved a faithful and loyal Subject to him, and was a chief Instrument in his conveyance beyond Seas; which after many Dangers past, he at length attained, landing at new-Haven in France. In the Battel at Worcester it is supposed there was about 3000 slain,
and 700 taken Prisoners. The Parlia∣ment, to manifest their joy for this Victo∣ry, caused dayes of Publick Thanksgiving to be made, and hung up all the Scotch Co∣lours in Westminster-Hall: and not long after this the Earl of Derby was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire. And now the King being safely gotten to Paris; from thence after a while the King removed to St. Germains and did confer▪ with the Duke of Lorrain for the recovery of his Kingdom of Ireland, but it came to nothing; so the King returning again to Paris: during his abode there, his Brother the Duke of Gloucester (who had a long time been detained by the Parliament of England in the Isle of Wight) came to visit him, accompanied from the Hague with Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Richard Greenvile. And not long after, his Quandam Pre∣server Mris Jane Lane being escaped out of England arrived in France, and sent Letters to his Majesty, certifying him of her Arrival, who presently sent Coaches to conduct her to Paris, where his Majesty gave her a large demonstration of his Princely Favour and Bounty. Now whil'st the King was passing away his time thus in France; in the mean time
Oliver Cromwel the 20 of April 1653 dissolved the long-lived Parliament, which had sate twelve years, six months and se∣venteen days, and in derision, they were cryed about the Streets, Parliament men Four a peny. And in this year, and the year preceed∣ing, were five bloody Ingagements at Sea between the English and the Dutch: after the long Parliament dissolved, Oliver cal∣led another Juncto, who after they had sate some small time to little purpose, they resigned up their Power again into his hand from whom they received it. And now, about the 16 of December, Anno 1653. Oliver Cromwel was sworn Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. and so the Government was now again in a single Person, against which they had all sworn; and in April after the Protector concluded a Peace with the Dutch, whose Aid and Assistance the King had strongly sollicited against him. The King seeing this, he sought a Recon∣ciliation between France and Spain, hoping thereby to further his own Interest; he left France, and departed for Germany, ac∣companied with his Cosin Prince Rupert, taking his first Residence at the Spaw, whi∣ther his Royal Sister the Princess of Orange
came to visit him; now during these pas∣sages Oliver Protector had discovered a Plot in England against his Authority: and some of the Plotters were taken, and two of them▪ viz. Collonel Gerrard and Mr. Vowel suffered Death: Indeed the Prote∣ctor had a cunning way in discovering of Plots, for he had his Inveaglers in several parts of England, who feigned themselves great Favourers of the King's Cause, prickt Gentlemen on into Conspiracies against the Protector, and when they were come to any head, and that the chief were inrol∣led, and sworn, and the day appointed for putting their Intentions in Execution, then forthwith were they discovered to the U∣surper; and so their Estates became Preys to his Coffers, and their Persons to his Mercy, which was but small, their heads being usually their ransoms to this man of Might: upon which account several wor∣thy Gentlemen lost their Lives, for no man could say, his Life was his own, if once Oliver did but frown upon him, for his Will was his Law, and this his Rule,
Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro Ratione vo∣luntas: This is my Will, and this I do Com∣mand; What man is he that dare the same withstand. Great indeed was the Awe the People stood in during his Usurped Authority, for he carried MAGNA CHAR∣TA in his Sword-Hilt, and the Peoples Liberty in his well tempered Blade: and now they began to stir in Scotland again, and the Earl of Glencarn, Menro and Middleton having gotten some Forces to∣gether, intended again to have prosecuted the King's Cause, but they were routed by General Monk and Collonel Morgan. During these Stirs his Majesty in the Company of his Royal Sister had left the Spaw, and taken his Journy to Collen, where he and his Sister were Royally en∣tertained: and shortly after they were In∣vited by the Duke of Newburgh to his Pallace at Dunsel Dorf, where they were Nobly Feasted; and here the King and his Sister parted, she returning for Hol∣land, and his Majesty to Collen.
During these passages the Protector discovered another plot, which should have been a general Rising all over England, whereupon several were taken and execu∣ted and abundance transported beyond Seas, and sold for Slaves. And now the King, with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his Royal Sister the Princess of Orange, with several other Lords and Ladys took their Progress to see the Fair at Franckford, and at Con∣ningstein near Franckford, Christina Queen of Sweeden, and the King, gave one the other a Visit: and his Majesty having made his Abode at Franckford during so long time as he thought good; he then returned a∣gain for Cllen: from whence he was shortly after invited into the Low Countrys by Don John de Austria Governor thereof; whi∣ther his Brother the Duke of York came to him. Cromwell now, according to conditions, sent over 6000 foot Soldiers to aid the French King in his Wars against Flanders: and the English were to have Dunkirk in consideration therof, which afterwards was delivered to them, after some difficulty passed. But during these Stirs beyond Seas, Oliver, by an Assembly, whereof Sir Thomas Witherington was Speaker, was
invested with Purple Robes, and installed in Westminster Hall: after which he Esta∣blished a Pageant house of Lords, most of them of his own Creation, such as John Lord Hewson, and the like: and not long after this, he discovered another Plot, and Sir Henry Slingby, Dr. Hewit, Mr. A∣ston, Mr. Stacy, and Mr. Betly suffered death, the two first beheaded, and the other three hanged, drawn and quartered for being in the said Plot, as Oliver pre∣tended. Now great was the Pomp and State this Protector of England assumed to himself, and as great the state of his Son Henry, whom he had made Lord Deputy of Ireland: he had also appointed Commissioners in most Eminent places in England, for Ap∣probation of Ministers, and given them power to eject Ignorant, Scandalous and Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters, under which notion of Ignorance, many worthy Divines were thrown out of their livings, when the Truth was, Loyalty on their sides and Covetousness on the Adverse side was the principal cause of their Eject∣ment: Hugh Peters the Minister was in great favour with the Protector, and served him in place of his Jester; among those Parliaments that were called by this Pro∣tector,
one of them, consisting most of Mechanicks, Enacted that no persons should be Married but by the Justices of Peace, and first to be asked in the Church, or else proclaimed in the Market. And now the Usurped Power and Au∣thority of Oliver drawing to a Period, his Glass being run, at length this Conque∣rour of Three Kingdoms, on the Third day of September, Anno 1658. was forced to yield himself Prisoner to death, who fol∣lowing his own example) admitted neither of bail nor ransom, but made him pay his last breath to his Will; and so in a great Wind he was hurried away into another World. After his death, he was laid in State at Somerset house in the Strand, till the 23 of November after, and then his Funeral was celebrated at a vaster Charge then hath formerly been used for the best Kings in the best of times: he was Inhumed in the Abby at Westminster, but his Resurrection followednot longafter, for he with Bradshaw who condemn'd King Charles the First, were both of them digged out of their Graves, and hanged in Chains at Tiburn that year the King was restored to his King∣domes, Anno 1660. Oliver being now gone, Richard his eldest
Son succeed him, whose head being thought to light, and his shoulders to weak for the Supportation of so weighty a Government, he was quickly thrust out again from his Protectorship: and now Fletwood and Lambert (the chief Instruments in outing of Richard) with the rest of the Army, called the old Parliament (turned out by Oliver) to their Places again, who willing∣ly assumed them: whilest these proceedings were in hand, the Gentlemen in Lanca∣shire and Cheshire, about harvest time 1659, rose under the Conduct of Sir George Booth in defence of their Priviledges, and cause of the King; but Lambert being sent a∣gainst them by the Parliament, he routed them, and Sir George Booth was shortly after taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower, and Lambert was gratified by the Parlia∣ment for this good Service with a thousand pounds. At this time the King, with his Brother the Duke of York were at Callis, ready to have wasted over, if this business of Sir George Booths had taken effect. And now Lambert began to harbour some conceptions of assuming to himself the Government (Oliver having chalked him out the way) and so turned out the Rump Parliament again (for so the peo∣ple
called this Fragment of the old Parlia∣ment) and then erected a New-nothing, of his own called a Committee of Safety; all this made well still for the King's Cause: and now Lambert takes his March into the North as far as Newcastle, intending to Fight General Monk, and so become sole Lord and Master of all: but when he came there his men were unwilling to In∣gage, and in the mean time the Rump had gotten together again (seven times a worse Devil then before) and dissolved his Com∣mittee of Safety, and within a short space, they inticed all his Soldiers to desert and leave him, so that he was left to shift for himself. And the Rump now invited General Monk to March with his Army to London, which accordingly he did, and was received with much joy, but he was no sooner come, but the Rump set him on work, to put some Violences upon the City, which he with great danger and peril performed, this gave the Citizens great occasion to think, That he from whom they expected so much good, would prove their Ruin: but he soon gave them proofs of the contrary, by draw∣ing his Troops into the City, in the quality of a Friend, and declaring himself for a free Parliament, which revived their hearts. His
first business was to restore the secluded Members to their places in the House of Commons, upon which the Assembly dis∣solved it self: and Writs were Issued out for a new Parliament, but with such reservation that people were doubtful what the Event would prove: for no Recusant, Cavallier, nor Cavalleir's Son was to sit in the Par∣liament. This healing Parliament (for so it was called) presently after they were set, began to vote for the King, and great Debates there were about it, but at length it was carry'd for the King: and so the States Arms were pulled down every where, and the Kings Arms set up, and his Majesty on Tuesday the 8 day of May, Anno 1660. was proclaimed King at Whitehall-gate, and in the City with great Pomp, Bells ringing, Bonefires burning, and the Conduits flowing with wine as the Peoples hearts did with gladness. And now News was carryed, and Commissioners were sent to the King to desire his return to his Kingdoms and Crown, he being then at Breda in Holland: shortly after which he prepared for England, and on the 29 day of May 1660. landed at Dover, accompanied with his two Brothers James Duke of York, and Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and some Lords and Gentlemen of his Attendance: he was met by Ge∣neral Monk and other Nobles, and the General kneeling down upon the ground, the King took him up, and dignified him with the George and Garter; himself putting the George about the Ge∣nerals Neck, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester tying on the Garter; and so marching to Black Heath in Kent, his Majesty was attended on from thence by the Lord Monk's Army, all armed, and Swords drawn, and the Nobles and Gentry in Cloth of Silver, and other rich Apparrel, and the Lord Mayor of London and Aldermen, and a great Number of Cittizens in Velvet Coats, and Gold Chains about their Necks; and so in a most glorious manner he was conducted through London to Whitehall; and that night several Bonfires were made, which made the night shine like another day, but that at West∣minster was most remarkable, where the Effigies of Oliver Cromwell was set up upon a Pole with the Common Wealth's Arms, an hour or two, and then cast down into the fire and burnt. And now the Parliament being infinitely Satisfied with the King's happy Arrival,
did order that a Bill should be prepared, for keeping a perpetuall Aniversary for a day of Thanksgiving to God, for his great Mercy and Blessing to these Nations in the happy Resturation of his Majesty, and that the 29 day of May should be set appart every year for that purpose. And now began the Judgements of God to overtake many of those Capital Trai∣tors whose hands had been deeply Imbrew∣ed in the late King's blood: and in October following 26 of the them were found guily of high Treason, and nine of them were executed the same Month, (to wit) Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroope, John Carew, John Jones, Gregory Clement, Thomas Scot, John Cooke, Hugh Peters, and Daniel Axtell; so that though divine Vengeance hath, many times Leaden feet, yet when it comes it hath Iron hands: no sooner scarce was the King restored to his Crown, but his chiefest care was to restore the Church to its purity of worship, and so Bishops were again setled in every Di∣ocess, and the Common Prayer restored. And now Mary Princess of Orange, being come over to visit the King her Brother, fell sick of the small pox and dyed, which was no little grief to the King. In January after the King was restored
to his Kingdoms, one Venner a wine Cooper with his Phanatick Proselytes Rebelled, and with a desperate Intention sought to destroy all those that were not of their Opinion, killing a man in Pauls Church-yard, and an Head-borough in Beach Lane; and af∣ter other Mischiefs done, they marched into Cane-wood, and about 3 days after return∣ed, and fell desperately upon the City; and being opposed 22 of the Kings Liege Peo∣ple were slain, and 22 of them, and the rest with much ado were taken and disper∣sed; and Ʋenner their Leader with 11 more of them were executed in several places in the City. And upon the 30 day of this same Moneth, the Carkasses of Oliver Cromwell, John Bradshaw and Henry Ireton, were digged up out of their Graves, and were drawn on Hurdles to Tyburn, and there hanged, and their Carkases being buried under the Gallows, their heads were choped off, and were fixed upon Poles, and set up upon Westminster Hall: not long after this dyed the most prudent Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester the King's Brother, to the great grief of all true English men: and upon the 23 day of Aprill, Anno 1661 being St. George's day, his Majesty King Charles the Second was Crowned at West∣minster,
with great Splendor and Solem∣nity, having the day before made a Mag∣nificent passage from the Tower through the City of London to Whitehall. And now by God's blessing having pro∣ceeded so far as the Title of this Epitomy makes mention, I shall here Conclude with Saint Peter, Fear God, and Honour the King. And so God grant King Charles the Second a long and happy Reign. And he that will not say Amen with me, Lord, let Hugh Peter's Lot his portion be. FINIS.
A Table of the Kings. A Catalogue of the British Kings and Princes that opposed the Conquest and Government of the Romans. Kings People. Cassibelan Trinobants. Cingitorix Kent. Carvil Kent. Taximagul Kent. Segonax Kent. Senimagues Norfolk Cegontians Norfolk Ancalits, Norfolk Bibroses Norfolk Cassians Norfolk Cunobeline Britains Guiderus Britains Catacratus Britains Togadumnus Britains Arviragus Britains Cogidunus Some Cities Caractacus Silures Prasutagus Icenians Venutius Brigantes Galgacus Calledonians
A Catalogue of the several Roman Empe∣rors who had Rule in Britain. Julius Caesar Augustus Caesar Tiberius Caesar Caius Caligula Claud. Drusius Nero Sergius Galba Marcus Silvius Aulus Vitellius Flav. Vespasian Titus Vespasian Domitian Cocceius Nerva Trajanus Adrianus Antonius Pius Marcus Aurelius Comodus Helvius Pertinax Septimus Severus Bassian. Caracal. Opilius Macrinus Heliogabilus Alexander Sever. Maximinus Jul. Ver. Maximus Gordianus Claudius Puppien. Jul. Philippus Anton. Gordian. Decius Trebonianus Emilianus Valerianus Galienus Flav. Claudius Quintilius Aurelianus Tacitus Florianus Marcus Aurelius Dioclesian Constan. Clorus Constan. Galer. Constan. Magnus Julius Apostata Jovinianus Valentinianus Gracianus Maximus Valen. Theodosius I. Arcadius Theodosius II.
A Catalogue of the Saxon Kings, during the Heptarchy: and first of the Kingdom of Kent. I. Kent Kingdom. Hengist Eske Imerick Ethelbert Edbald Ercombert Egbert Lothaire Edrick Withred Edbert Elthelbert Alrick Octa Ethelbert Cuthred Baldred II. South Saxons Kingdom. Ella Cissa Ethelwolf Barthun III. West Saxons Kingdom. Cherdick Kenrick Chewlin Chearlick Chelwolfe Kingils Kenwald Eskin Kentwin Ceadwald Ine Ethellard Cuthred Sigesbert Kenwolfe Brithrick Egbert.
IV. East Saxons Kingdom. Erchenwine Sledda Sebert Sered Sigesbert Sigebert Swithelm Sighere Sebba Sigherd Seoffrid Offa Sellerd Suthred V. Northumberland Kingdom. Ida & Ella Adda Elappea Theodwald Frethulfe Theodrick Ethelrick Ethelfride Edwine Osricke Oswald Oswye Egfride Alfride Osredd Kenred Oswick Celnulf Egbert Oswolf Edilwald Alured Ethelred Alfwald Osrod VI. Mercia Kingdom. Crida Wibba Ceorle Penda Peada Wolfere Ethelred Kenred Chelred Ethelbald Offa Egfride Kenwolfe Kenelme Colwolfe Brnulfe Ludecan Withlafe Barthulf Burdred.
VII. East-Angles Kingdom. Ʋsfa Titulus Redwald Erpenwald Sigebert Egrick Anna Ethelbert Edelwald Aldulf Elswolf Beorne Ethelred Ethelbert Edmund A Catalogue of the British Kings that withstood the Saxons Conquest. Vortigern Vortimer Aurelius A. Ʋter Pend. Arthur Constantine Conatus Vortiporus Canonus Careticus Cadwan Cadwallo Cadwallader. A Catalogue of those Saxon Kings who were accounted Petty Monarchs. Chewline Ethelbert Redwald Edwine Oswald Oswye Wolfere Ethelred Kenred Chelred Ethelbald Offa, Egfride Kenwolfe
The Kings Reigns. A Table shewing the years of the Kings Reigns, beginning at Egbert the West Sa∣xon, the first Sole Monarch, and ending with Edward the Confessors: together with the years of Christ answering to every years of their Reigns: but Note that upon the death of some of these Kings following, there was a kinde of Inter-Regum sometimes before the Suc∣cessor began fully to Rule. Egbert began his Reign An∣no 819. Anno Reg. An. Dom 1 820 2 821 3 822 4 823 5 824 6 825 7 826 8 827 9 828 10 829 11 830 12 831 13 832 14 833 15 834 16 835 17 836 Ethelwolf be∣gan his Reign Anno 837. A. R. A. D. 1 838 2 839 3 840 4 841 5 842 6 843 7 844 8 845 9 846 10 847 11 848 12 849 13 850 14 851 15 852 16 853 17 854 18 855 19 856 20 857 Ethelbald be∣gan his Reign Anno 857. A. R. A. D. 1 858 2 859
Ethlebert be∣gan his Reign Annoo. 86. A. R. A. D. 1 861 2 862 3 863 4 864 5 865 Etheldred, be∣gan his Reign, Anno. 866. A. Reg. An. Dom. 1 867 2 868 3 869 4 870 5 871 6 872 Elfred began his Reign An∣no 872. An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 873 2 874 3 875 4 876 5 877 6 178 7 879 8 880 9 881 10 882 11 883 12 884 13 885 14 886 15 887 16 888 17 889 18 890 19 891 20 892 21 893 22 894 23 895 24 896 25 897 26 898 27 899 28 900 29 901 Edward be∣gan his Reign Anno 901. A. R. A. D. 1 902 2 903 3 904 4 905 5 906 6 907 7 908 8 909 9 910 10 911 11 912 12 913 13 914 14 915 15 916 16 917 17 918 18 919 19 920 20 921 21 922 22 923 23 924 24 925 Ethelstan began his Reign An∣no. 925. AR. A. D. 1 926 2 927 3 928
4 929 5 930 6 931 7 932 8 933 9 934 10 935 11 936 12 937 13 938 14 939 15 940 Edmund be∣gan his Reign An∣no 940. A. R. A. D. 1 941 2 942 3 943 4 944 5 945 6 946 Edred began his Reign Anno 946. A. R. A. D. 1 947 2 948 3 949 4 950 5 951 6 952 7 953 8 954 9 955 Edwy began his Reign Anno 955. A R. A D. 1 956 2 957 3 958 4 959 Edgar began his Reign, Anno 959. A. R. A. D. 1 960 2 961 3 962 4 963 5 964 6 965 7 966 8 967 9 968 10 969 11 970 12 971 13 972 14 973 15 974 16 975 Edward began his Reigne, Anno 975. A R. A. D. 1 976 2 977 3 978 4 979 Ethelred began his Reign, An∣no 979. 1 980 2 981 3 982 4 983 5 984 6 985 7 986
8 987 9 988 10 989 11 990 12 991 13 992 14 993 15 994 16 995 17 996 18 997 19 998 20 999 21 1000 22 1001 13 1002 24 1003 25 1004 26 1005 27 1006 28 1007 29 1008 30 1009 31 1010 32 1011 33 1012 34 1013 35 1014 36 1015 37 1016 Edmund I∣ronside began his Reign, Anno 1316. A. R. A. D. 1 1017 Canutus, the Dane began his Reign Anno 1017. A. R. A. D. 1 1018 2 1019 3 1020 4 1021 5 1022 6 1023 7 1024 8 1025 9 1026 10 1027 11 1028 12 1029 13 1030 14 1031 15 1032 16 1033 17 1034 18 1035 Harrold I. began his Reign, Anno 1036. A. R. A. D. 1 1037 2 1038 3 1039 4 1040 Hardicanute, began his Reign Anno. 1040. A. R. A. D. 1 1041 2 1042 Edward Con∣fessor began his Reign Anno 1042 A. R. A. D. 1 1043 2 1044 3 1045 4 1046 5 1047 6 1048 7 1049 8 1050 9 1051 10 1052
11 1053 12 1054 13 1055 14 1056 15 1057 16 1058 17 1059 18 1060 19 1061 20 1062 6 mon. 27 dayes. Harrold II. began his Reign, Anno 1065. This King Reigned but some 9 months, and nine dayes, and then yeilded up both his Life and Kingdom to William the Conque∣rour.
A TABLE shewing the beginning and ending of every Kings Reign from the Norman Conquest to this present year 1675. Together with the years of Christ answering to every year of their Reigns, the year beginning the 25 of March: but Note that the Months and odd dayes of every Kings Reign, are ac∣connted according to the Callender, and not according to 28. dayes to the Month, which hath so often occasioned the vari∣ance between one Table and another, scarcely two of them agreeing, in their Computatin, as to the odd Months and dayes of every Kings Reigns. William the Conquerer began his Reign Octo∣ber 14. Anno 1066. A. R. A. D. 1 1067 2 1068 3 1069 4 1070 5 1071 6 1072 7 1073 8 1074 9 1075 10 1076 11 1077 12 1078 13 1079 14 1080 15 1081 16 1082 17 1083 18 1084 19 1085 20 1086 10. mon. 26. dayes. William Ru∣fus began his Reign 9 Sep∣tember, Anno 1087. A. R. A. D. 1 1088 2 1089 3 1090 4 1091
5 1092 6 1093 7 1094 8 1095 9 1096 10 1097 11 1098 12 1099 Henry the first began his Reign, Aug. 1. Anno 1100. A. R. A. D. 1 1101 2 1102 3 1103 4 1104 5 1105 6 1106 7 1107 8 1108 9 1109 10 1110 11 1111 12 1112 13 1113 14 1114 15 1115 16 1116 17 1117 18 1118 19 1119 20 1120 21 1121 22 1122 23 1123 24 1124 25 1125 26 1126 27 1127 28 1128 29 1129 30 1130 31 1131 32 1132 33 1133 34 1134 35 1135 4. mon. 1. day. Stephen began his Reign 2. December, Anno 1135. A R. A. D. 1 1136 2 1137 3 1138 4 1139 5 1140 6 1141 7 1142 8 1143 9 1144 10 1145 11 1146 12 1147 13 1148 14 1149 15 1150 16 1151 17 1152 18 1153 10 mar. 23 days. Henry the Second be∣gan hs Reign 25. October, Anno 1154. A. R. A. D. 1 1155 2 1156 3 1157 4 1158 5 1159 6 1160 7 1161
8 1162 9 1163 10 1164 11 1165 12 1166 13 1167 14 1168 15 1169 16 1170 17 1171 18 1172 19 1173 20 1174 21 1175 22 1176 23 1177 24 1178 25 1179 26 1180 27 1181 28 1182 29 1183 30 1184 31 1185 32 1186 33 1187 34 1188 8. mon. 11. dayes. Richard the First began his Reign July 6, An∣no 1189. A. R. A. D. 1 1190 2 1191 3 1192 4 1193 5 1194 6 1195 7 1196 8 1197 9 1198 9. mon 0 days. John began his Reign April 6. Anno 1199. A. R. A. D. 1 1200 2 1201 3 1202 4 1203 5 1204 6 1205 7 1206 8 1207 9 1208 10 1209 11 1210 12 1211 13 1212 14 1213 15 1214 16 1215 17 1216 6 mon. 13. days. Henry the Third, began his Reign 19. October Anno 1216. A. R. A. D. 1 1217 2 1218 3 1219 4 1220 5 1221 6 1222 7 1223 8 1224 9 1225 10 1226 11 1227
12 1228 13 1229 14 1230 15 1231 16 1232 17 1233 18 1234 19 1235 20 1236 21 1237 22 1238 23 1239 24 1240 25 1241 26 1242 27 1243 28 1244 29 1245 30 1246 31 1247 32 1248 33 1249 34 1250 35 1251 36 1252 37 1253 38 1254 39 1255 40 1256 41 1257 42 1258 43 1259 44 1260 45 1261 46 1262 47 1263 48 1264 49 1265 50 1266 51 1267 52 1268 53 1269 54 1270 55 1271 56 1272 0. mon. 28 days. Edward the First began his Reign 16 November, Anno 1272. A. R. A. D. 1 1273 2 1274 3 1275 4 1276 5 1277 6 1278 7 1279 8 1280 9 1281 10 1282 11 1283 12 1284 13 1285 14 1286 15 1287 16 1288 17 1289 18 1290 19 1291 20 1292 21 1293 22 1294 23 1295 24 1296 25 1297 26 1298 27 1299 28 1300 29 1301 30 1302 31 1303 32 1304 33 1305 34 1306 7. mon. 21 days.
Edward the Second be∣gan his Reign July, the 7 Anno 1037. A. R. A. D. 1 1308 2 1309 3 1310 4 1311 5 1312 6 1313 7 1314 8 1315 9 1316 10 1317 11 1318 12 1319 13 1320 14 1321 15 1322 16 1323 17 1324 18 1325 19 1326 6. mon. 18. days. Edward the Third began his Reign 25 January Anno 1325. A. R. A. D. 1 1327 2 1328 3 1329 4 1330 5 1331 6 1332 7 1333 8 1334 9 1335 10 1336 11 1337 12 1338 13 1339 14 1340 15 1341 16 1342 17 1343 18 1344 19 1345 20 1346 21 1347 22 1348 23 1349 24 1350 25 1351 26 1352 27 1353 28 1354 29 1355 30 1356 31 1357 32 1358 33 1359 34 1360 35 1361 36 1362 37 1363 38 1364 39 1365 40 1366 41 1367 42 1368 43 1369 44 1370 45 1371 46 1372 47 1373 48 1374 49 1375 50 1376 4 mon. 26 days.
Richard the Second be∣gan his Reign June 21. An. 1377. A. R. A. D. 1 1378 2 1379 3 1380 4 1381 5 1382 6 1383 7 1384 8 1385 9 1386 10 1387 11 1388 12 1389 13 1390 14 1391 15 1392 16 1393 17 1394 18 1395 19 1396 20 1397 21 1398 22 1399 3. mon. 8. dayes. Henry the Forth began his Reign, 29 September, Anno 1399. A. R. A. D. 1 1400 2 1401 3 1402 4 1403 5 1404 6 1405 7 1406 8 1407 9 1408 10 1409 11 1410 12 1411 13 1412 5. mon. 19. days Henry the Fifth began his Reign, 20 March Anno 1412. A. R. A. D. 1 1413 2 1414 3 1415 4 1416 5 1417 6 1418 7 1419 8 1420 9 1421 5. mon. 11. days Henry the Six beganhis Reign 31 Au∣gust Anno 1422. A. R. A. D. 1 1423 2 1424 3 1425 4 1426 5 1427 6 1428 7 1429 8 1420 9 1431 10 1432 11 1433 12 1434 13 1435 14 1436 15 1437 16 1438
17 1439 18 1440 19 1441 20 1442 21 1443 22 1444 23 1445 24 1446 25 1447 26 1448 27 1449 28 1450 29 1451 30 1452 31 1453 32 1454 33 1455 34 1456 35 1457 36 1458 37 1459 38 1460 6. mon 3 days Edward the Fourthbegan his Reign 4 March, Anno 1460. A. R. A. D. 1 1461 2 1462 3 1463 4 1464 5 1465 6 1466 7 1467 8 1468 9 1469 10 1470 11 1471 12 1472 13 1473 14 1474 15 1475 16 1476 17 1477 18 1478 19 1479 20 1480 21 1481 22 1482 1. mon. 5 days. Edward the Fifth began his Reign 9 April, Anno 1483. A. R. A. D. 2 mon. 13 days. Richard the Third began his Reign June 22, Anno 1483. A. R. A. D. 1 1485 2 1486 2. mon. 0. days. Henry the Se∣venth began his Reign 22. August Anno 1485. A. R. A. D. 1 1487 2 1488 3 1489 4 1490 5 1491 6 1492 7 1493 8 1494 9 1495
10 1495 11 1496 12 1497 13 1498 14 1499 15 1500 16 1501 17 1502 18 1503 19 1504 20 1505 21 1506 22 1507 23 1508 8. mon. 0. days. Henry the Eight began his Reign 22 April, Anno 1546. A. R. A. D. 1 1510 2 1511 3 1512 4 1513 5 1514 6 1515 7 1516 8 1517 9 1518 10 1519 11 1520 12 1521 13 1522 14 1523 15 1524 16 1525 17 1526 18 1427 19 1428 20 1429 21 1430 22 1431 23 1532 24 1533 25 1534 26 1535 27 1536 28 1537 29 1538 30 1539 31 1540 32 1541 33 1542 34 1543 35 1544 36 1545 37 1546 9. mon. 6 days Edward the Sixt began his Reign January 28 Anno 1546. A. R. A. D. 1 1547 2 1548 3 1549 4 1550 5 1551 6 1552 5. mon. 8. days. Q. Mary, be∣gan her Reign July 6 Anno 1558. A. R. A. D. 1 1553 2 1555 3 1556 4 1557 5 1558 9. mon. 11. days.
Q. Elizabeth began her Reign, Nov. 17. An 1558. A. R. A. D. 1 1559 2 1560 3 1561 4 1562 5 1563 6 1564 7 1565 8 1566 9 1567 10 1568 11 1569 12 1570 13 1571 14 1572 15 1573 16 1574 17 1575 18 1576 19 1577 20 1578 21 1579 22 1580 23 1581 24 1582 25 1583 26 2584 27 1585 28 1586 29 1587 30 1588 31 1589 32 1590 33 1591 34 1592 35 1593 36 1594 37 1595 38 1596 39 1597 40 1598 41 1599 42 1600 43 1601 44 1602 4. mon. 7. days.   James began his Reign 24. March Anno 1602. A. R. A. D. 1 1603 2 1604 3 1605 4 1606 5 1607 6 1608 7 1609 8 1610 9 1611 10 1612 11 1613 12 1164 13 1615 14 1616 15 1617 16 1618 17 1619 18 1620 19 1621 20 1622 21 1623 22 1624 0. mon. 3. days   Charles the First began his Reign 27 March, Anno 1625. A R. A D 1 1626 2 1627 3 1628 4 1629 5 1630 6 1631 7 1632
8 1633 9 1634 10 1635 11 1636 12 1637 13 1638 14 1639 15 1640 16 1641 17 1642 18 1643 19 1644 20 1645 21 1646 22 1647 23 1648 10. mon. 3. days.   Charles the Second began his Reign Ja∣nuary 30 Anno 1648. A. R. A. D. 1 1649 2 1650 3 1651 4 1652 5 1653 6 1654 7 1655 8 1656 9 1657 10 1658 11 1659 12 1660 13 1661 14 1662 15 1663 16 1664 17 1665 18 1666 19 1667 20 1668 21 1669 22 1670 23 1671 24 1672 25 1673 26 1674 27 1675
A Table of Dimensions. The Dimension of England, Scotland and Ireland with the Island of Man Anglesey, Wight, Garnesey, Jersie, and Farn are most comonly reckoned and taken to be as followeth: England Miles Is accounted to bee in Length about 0386 And in Bredth it is reckoned 0279 The Circumference is reckoned 1532 Scotland Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0480 And it is said to be in Bredth 0165 The Circumference is reckoned 1100 Ireland Miles Is accounted to be in Length about 0303 And in Bredth it is reckoned 0112 The Circumference thereof is 0948 Man Island Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0029 And it is said to be in in Bredth 0009 The Circumference is reckoned 0082 Anglefey Miles Is accounted to in Length about 0020 And in Bredth it is reckoned 0017 The circumference thereof is 0070
Wight Island Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0020 And it is said to be in Bredth 0012 The Circumference is reckoned 0060 Garnsey Miles Is accounted to be in Length about 0013 And in Breadth it is reckoned 0009 The Circumference thereof is 0036 Jersie Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0010 And it is said to be in Bredth 0006 The Circumference is reckoned 0038 Farn Island Miles The Length thereof is accounted 0005 And in Breadth it is reckoned 0005 The Circumference thereof is 0015
A Catalogue of Bishopricks. An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Bi∣shopricks in England and Wales, with the Counties, and number of Parishes in each Diocess; and how many of them are Impropriate: likewise the valuation of each Bishoprick in the King's Books, and how the Clergies Tenths are rated for each of them. Province of Canterbury. Bish. & Count Par. Imp. 257. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Canterbury hath Kent part. l. s. d. q. 2816. 17. 09. 01. 0651. 18. 02. 01 Saint Asaph hath Denby part Flint part Montgom. p. Merioneth. p Shropsh. part Par. Imp. 121. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0187. 11. 06. 00. 0186. 19. 07. 03. Bangor hath Carnarvon Anglesey Denbigh part Montgom. p. Merioneth p. Par. Imp. 107. 036. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0131. 16. 04. 00. 0151. 14. 03. 01
Bish. Count. Par. Imp. 388. 160. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Bath & Wells hath Somerset-sh. l. s. d. q. 0533. 01. 03. 00. 0353. 18. 00. 03. Bristol hath Bristol City Dorset shire Par. Imp. 236. 064. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0338. 08. 04. 00. 0353. 18. 00. 03. Chichester hath Sussex. Par. Imp. 250. 112. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0677. 01. 00. 03. 0287. 02. 00. 03. Coventry & Litchfield hath Derbyshire Staffordsh. Warwick-p. Shrops. part. Par. Imp. 557. 250. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0559. 18. 02. 03. 0590. 16. 11. 01. Ely hath Cambridg-s. Elye-Isle. Par. Imp. 141. 075. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 2134. 18 05. 03. 0384. 14. 09. 01.
Bish. & Coun. Par. Imp. 308. 120. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. St. Davids hath Pembrook sh. Cardigan sh. Carermarth. Radnorshire Brecknock s. Monmouth p Hereford p. Montgom. p. Glamorg. p. l. s. d. q. 0457. 01. 10. 13. 0336. 14. 10. 00. Exceter hath Devonshire Cornwal Par. Imp. 604. 239. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0500. 00. 00. 00. 1200. 15. 02. 00. Gloucester hath Gloucestersh. Par. Imp. 267. 125. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0315. 17. 02. 00. 0358. 15. 00. 00.
Bis. & Count. Par. Imp. 313. 136. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Hereford hath Herefordsh. Shropsh. p. l. s. d. q. 0768. 10. 06. 03. 0340. 02. 02. 02. Landaffe hath Glamorgan p Monmoth p. Par. Imp. 107. 098. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0154. 14. 01. 00. 0155. 05. 04. 00. Lincoln hath Lincolnshire Leicestersh. Bedfordshire Buckingh. sh. Huntington Hartford p. Par. Impr. 1255. 577. Cler. Tenth Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0894. 10. 01. 02. 1751. 14. 06. 00. London hath Middlesex Essex Hartford p. Par. Imp. 622. 189. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1119. 08. 04. 00. 0821. 15. 01. 00.
Bish. & Count Par. Imp. 1181. 385. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. Norwich hath Norfolk Suffolk l. s. d. q. 0899. 18. 07. 02 1117. 13. 00. 02 Oxford hath Oxfordsh. Par. Imp. 195. 088. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0354. 16. 04. 02. 0255. 08. 00. 00. Peterborough hath Northampt. Rutlandshire Par. Imp. 293. 091. Cler. Tenth. Vall. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0414. 19. 11. 00. 0520. 16. 08. 00. Rochester hath Kent part Par. Imp. 098. 036. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0358. 03. 02. 01. 0222. 14. 06. 03.
Bish. & Coun. Par. Imp. 544. 109. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. Salisbury hath Bark-shire VViltshire l. s. d. q. 1367. 11. 08. 00. 901. 08. 01. 00. VVorcester. hath VVorcester-sh Warwick p. Par. Imp. 241. 071. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1049. 17. 03. 03. 0228. 00. 0. 00. VVinchester hath Surry Southampton Isle of Wight Isle of Jersy Isle of Garnsy Sark & Ald. Par. Imp. 362. 131. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 2793. 04. 02. 03. 0846. 01. 00. 00.
Province of York. Bis. & Count. Par. Impr. 581. 336. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. York hath York-sh. part Nottinghsh. l. s. d. q. 1609. 19. 02. 00. 1113. 17. 09. 03. Carlile hath Cumberlan. p Westmerl. Par. Imp. 093. 018. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 530. 04. 11. 02. 0161. 01. 07. 02. Chester hath Cheshire Lancashire Yorkshire p. Cumberl. p. Par. Imp. 256. 101. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 0420. 01. 08. 00. 0435. 12. 00. 00. Durham hath Durham Northumb. p York-shire p. Par. Imp. 135. 087. Cler. Tenth. Val. Bish. l. s. d. q. 1821. 01. 05. 01. 0385. 05. 06. 02. Man hath Isle of Man Par. 017  
An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Citties in England, and the Counties in which they are placed, with the Elevation of the Pole for each City. Cities Counties Ele. of the Pole Bathe Somersetshire   Bristol Somersetshire 51. D 32 M Carlisle Cumberland 55. D 01 M Chester Cheshire 53. D 58 M Canterbury Kent 51. D 25 M Chichester Sussex 50. D 56 M Colchester Essex 52. D 14 M Coventry Warwick-sh. 52. D 30 M Durham Durham 54. D 48 M Exeter Devonshire 50. D 01 M Gloucester Gloucestersh. 52. D 14 M Hereford Herefordsh. 52. D 27 M Lincoln Lincolnshire 53. D 15 M London Middlesex 51. D 45 M Litchfield Staffordshire 53. D 00 M Norwich Norfolk 52. D 55 M Oxford Oxfordshire 51. D 54 M Rochester Kent 51. D 24 M Salisbury Wiltshire 51. D 10 M Wells Somersetshire 51. D 20 M Westminster Middlesex 51. D 45 M Winchester Hampshire 51. D 10 M Worcester Wocestershir 52. D 20 M Peterburou Northampt. 52. D 35 M York York-shire, 54. D 00 M
A Catalogue of Shires. An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Shires in England and Wales, with the Number of Cities, Bishopricks, Parishes, Hun∣dreds, Market Towns and Riers in each Shire. Shires Cit. Bi. Par. hum. M. R. Anglesey 00 00 074 06 02 08 Bark-shire 00 00 140 20 12 03 Bedfordshire 00 00 116 09 10 01 Breknock-sh. 00 00 061 06 03 27 Buckinghams. 00 00 185 08 11 02 Caernervonsh 00 01 068 07 05 17 Cambridgsh. 00 01 163 17 08 01 Cardiganshire 00 01 064 05 04 26 Carmarthens. 00 00 087 06 06 28 Cheshire 01 01 086 07 13 09 Cornwall 00 00 161 09 22 07 Cumberland 01 01 058 00 09 20 Darbyshire 00 00 106 06 08 13 Denbighshire 00 00 057 12 03 24 Devonshire 01 01 394 33 37 23 Dorcetshire 00 00 248 34 18 04 Durham 01 01 118 00 06 11 Essex 01 00 415 20 21 07 Flintshire 00 01 028 05 01 04 Glamorgings. 00 01 118 10 06 16 Gloucestersh. 01 01 208 30 20 12 Hampshire 01 01 253 37 18 04 Hartfordsh 00 00 120 08 18 01 Herefordsh. 01 01 176 11 08 13
Huntingtons. 00 00 079 04 06 02 Kent 02 02 398 66 17 06 Lancashire 00 00 036 06 15 33 Leicestershire 00 00 200 06 12 01 Lincolnshire 01 01 630 31 30 09 Merionethsh. 00 00 037 06 03 26 Middelsex 02 01 073 07 04 01 Mongomerysh 00 00 047 07 06 28 Monmouthsh. 00 00 127 06 06 15 Norfolk 01 01 660 00 26 03 Nothmaptons. 01 01 326 20 10 05 Nottinghams. 00 0 168 08 08 21 Nortumberl. 00 00 046 00 05 21 Oxfordshire 01 01 280 14 10 03 Radnorshire 00 00 052 06 04 13 Rutlandshire 00 00 048 05 02 00 Shropshire 00 00 170 15 14 18 Somersetshire 03 02 385 42 33 09 Stafordshire 01 01 130 05 13 13 Suffolk 00 00 575 22 28 02 Surry 00 00 140 13 08 01 Sussex 01 01 312 65 18 02 Warwickshire 01 00 158 09 15 07 Westmorland 00 00 026 00 04 08 Wiltshire 01 01 304 29 19 05 Worcester-sh. 01 01 152 07 10 05 Pembrooksh. 00 00 145 07 05 06 York-shire. 01 01 563 31 46 36 Isle of Man. 01 01 017 00 05  
A Catalogue of Colledges and Halls. An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Colledges and Halls in the Two Univer∣sitys of England, Cambridge and Oxford, with the names of the Founders thereof, and years wherein they were Founded. Col. and H. Uni. Founders Names. A. D. Albane, H. Ox.     All Souls, C. Ox. Henry Chichely Arch. B. Cant. 1437 Bayliol, C. Ox. John Bayliol King of Scots, 1263 Brasen-Nose, C. Ox. Will. Smith B. of Lincolne 1513 Broadgate, H. Ox.     Caius, C. Cam. John Caius Doctor in Physick, 1557 Christs Church. Ox. Tho. Woolsey Arch. B. of York, 1526 Christs, C. Cam. Q. Margaret Grand Mo. to K. H. eight, 1506 Clare, H. Cam. Eliz. daughter to Gil. Clare Earl of Leicester. 1326
Cor. Christi, C. Cam. Jo. of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, 1344 Cor. Christi, C. Ox. Rich. Fox B. of Winchester, 1516 Edmund, H. Ox.     Emanuel, C. Cam. Sir Walter Mildmay, 1588 Exceter, H. Ox. Walt. Stapleton B. of Exceter, 1316 Gloucester, H. Ox.     Hart, H. Ox. Walt. Stapleton B. of Exceter, 1316 Jesus, C. Cam. John Alcock B. of Elye, 1501 Jesus, C. Ox.  Hugh Price Doctor of Laws.   St. Johns, C. Cam. Q. Margaret Grand Mother to K. H. eight, 1506 St. Johns C. Ox. Sir Tho. White, Lord Major of London, 1557 Katharine, H. Cam. Dr. Woodlack Provost of Kings Col. 1459 King's C. Cam. King Henry the sixt, 1441 Lincoln, C. Ox. Richard Fleming B. of Lincoln, 1420
Magdalen, C. Lord Awaey 1509 Magdalen, C. Ox. Will. Wainfleet B. of Winchester 1456 Magdalen, H. Ox. Will. Wainfleet B. of Winchester 1456 Martin, C. Ox. Walt. Martin B. of Rochester 1276 St. Marys, H. Ox.     New, C. Ox. Will. Wickham B. of Winchester 1375 New Inn, Ox.     Oriell, C. Ox. Adam Brown 1323 Pembrook. H. Cam. Mary, Countess of Pembrook, 1343 Peter House, Cam. Hugh Balsam B. of Ely. 1280 Queens, C. Cam. Margaret, K. Henry the sixt's Queen, 1448 Queens, C. Ox. Robert Egglesfield 1349 Sigebert, C. Cam. Sigebert King of the East Angels 0637
Trinity, C. Cam. King Henry the eight 1546 Trinity, C. Ox. Sir Thomas Pope Knight. 1556 Trinity, H. Cam. William Bateman, 1354 University, C. Ox. Elfred, sixt Monarch of Saxon▪ 0872 Wadham, C. Ox.   1613 White, H▪ Ox.    
A Catalogue of the Inns and Court. A Catalogue of the several Houses and Inns of Court and Chancery, in London and Westminster. Na. of the Inns. The use of the several Inns. Serjeant's Inn in Fleetstreet, and Serjeants Inn in Chancery-Lane. In these 2 Inns the Re∣verend Judges of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, with the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, and Serjeants at Law have here there se∣veral Lodgings. Inner Temple Middle Temple Lincolns Inn Grayes Inn These four are Inns of Court, and herein do reside the learn'd Coun∣cellors and Pleaders of the Common Law of England, with the Stu∣dents of the same. Cliffords Inn Davies Inn Barnards Inn These eight are called Inns of Chancery, and in them are Resident
Furnifalls Inn Staples Inn Clements Inn New Inn Lyons Inn the Attornys, and Pra∣ctitioners of the Law, and some Students are admitted also in these Inns, for 2 or 3 years sometimes, before they be admitted into the Inns of Court above∣mentioned. Six Clerks-Office. This Office properly belongs to the Six Clarks in Chancery, and their Clerks. Cursiters Office, This Office belongs to the 24 Cursiters, who make out Original Writs in all the Coun∣tys in England.
A Catalogue of Burroughs. An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Citys and Burrough Towns in England and Wales, with the Countys in which each of them are scituated, and how many Burgesses they send to the Parlia∣ment. Burroughs Countys N. B. Abingdon Berks 01 Admonsham Bucks 02 St. Albons Hartford 02 Alborough Suffolk 02 Alborough York 02 Alesbury Bucks 02 Andover Hants 02 Appleby Westmer. 02 Arrundel Sussex. 02 Ashberton Devon. 02 Banbury Oxford 01 Barnestable Devon. 02 Barwick Tweed. Northum. 02 Bathe City Somers. 02 Bedford Bedford. 02 Berealston Devon. 02 Bewdlye Worc. 01 Beverlye Yorksh. 02 Bewmoris Anglesey 01 Bishopps Castle Salops 02
Blechinley Surry 02 Bodmin Cornwall 02 Bodwin Wilts. 02 Bossiney Cornwall 02 Boston Lincoln 02 Brackley Northamp. 02 Branber Sussex 02 Brecknock Brecon. 02 Brideport Dorcets. 02 Bridgenorth Salops. 02 Bridgewater Somers. 02 Bristol City Somers. 02 Buckingham Bucks. 02 Burrough bridg Yorks. 02 Calne Wills. 02 Cambridge Cambr. 04 Canterbury C. Kent 02 Cardigan Cardig. 01 Cardiff Glamor. 01 Caermarthen Gaermer. 01 Caernervon Caerner. 01 Carlisle City Cumbl. 02 Castlerising Norfolk 02 Chichester City Sussex 02 Chipenham Wilts. 02 Chipenwicomb Bucks. 02 Chester City Cheshire 02
Christs Church Hants 02 Cirencester Glouc. 02 Clifton Devon 02 Clitherow Lancast. 02 Cockermouth Cumbl. 02 Colchester City Essex 02 Comelford Cornwall 02 Corfe Castle Dorcet. 02 Coventry City Warwick. 02 Cricklade Wilts. 02 Denbigh. Denbigh. 01 Derby Derbysh. 02 Devizes Wilts. 02 Dorchester Dorcet. 02 Dowton Wilts. 02 Droitwich Worc. 02 Dunhivid Cornwall 02 Dunwich Suffolk 02 Durham City Durham 02 East Grinstead Sussex 02 East Lowe Cornwall 02 East Retford Nonting. 02 St. Edmundsbury Suffolk 02 Evesham Wore. 02 Exeter City Devon. 02 Flint Flints. 01 Fowey Cornwall 02
Gatton Surry 02 Gloucester C. Glouc. 02 Grantham Lincol. 02 Grawpound Cornwall 02 Grimsby Lincoln. 02 Guilford Surry 02 Haslemore Surry 02 Harwich Essex 02 Haverford West Pembrooke. 01 Heitsbury Wilts. 02 Helston Cornwall 02 Hereford City Herefordsh. 02 Hertford Hertfordsh. 02 Hiddon Yorksh. 02 Higham Ferries Northamp. 01 Hindon Wilts. 02 Honyton Devon. 02 Horesham Sussex 02 Hull Yorksh. 02 Huntington Hunt. 02 St. Jermins Cornwall 02 St. Ives Cornwall 02 Ilchester Somers. 02 Ipswich Suffolk 02 Kellington Cornwall 02 Kings Lynn Norfolk 02 Knarseborough Yorksh. 02
Lancaster Lanc. 02 Leicester Leic. 02 Lempster Hereford 02 Leskard Cornwall 02 Lewes Sussex. 02 Lincoln City Lincoln. 02 Litchfield City. Stafford. 02 Liverpoole Lanc. 02 London City Mids. 04 Loswithall Cornwall 02 Ludlowe Sallop. 02 Lugarsall Wiltsh. 02 Lymington Hants. 02 Lym Regis Dorcet. 02 Maidston Kent 02 Maldon Essex 02 Malmsbury Wiltsh. 02 Malton Yorksh. 02 Marborough Wils. 02 Marlow Bucks. 02 Mawes Cornwall 02 Melcome Regis Dorcet. 02 Midhurst Sussex 02 Michaell Cornwall 02 Milborne Port Somers. 02 Minehead Somers. 02 Montgomery Montgom. 01
Morpeth Northumb. 02 Munmouth Munmouth. 01 Newcastle Tine Northumb. 02 Newcast. un. Lin. Stafford. 02 Newport Cornwal 02 Newport Hants. 02 New sarum Wilts. 02 Newark Nott. 02 New shoreham Sussex 02 Newton Lanc. 02 New Town Hants. 02 New Windsor Berks. 02 New Woodstock Oxford. 02 North Allerton Yorks. 02 Norwich City Norfolk 02 North-hampton Northam. 02 Nortingham Nttingh. 02 Okehampton Devon. 02 Old Sarum Wilts. 02 Oxford Suffolk 02 Oxford C. U. Oxord 04 Pembroke Pembro. 01 Pemyn Cornwall 02 Peterborough Northam. 01 Peterfield Hants. 02 Plymouth Devon. 02 Plympton Devon. 02
Pomfreit Yorksh. 02 Poole Dorcet 02 Port Pigham Cornwall 02 Portsmouth Hant. 02 Preston Lanc. 02 Queenborough Kent 02 Radnor Radnor. 01 Reading Berks. 02 Richmond Yorksh. 01 Rippon Yorksh. 02 Rochester City Kent 02 Rygate Surry 02 Salop Salopps. 02 Saltash Cornwall 02 Scarborough Yorksh. 02 Shaston Dorcet. 02 Southampton Hants. 02 Southwark Surry. 02 Stafford Staffordsh. 02 Stockbridge Hants. 02 Stamford Lincol. 02 Sudbury Suffolk 02 Steyning Sussex 02 Tamworth Stafford 02 Taunton Somers. 02 Tarestock Devon. 02 Tewkesbury Glouster. 02
Thetford Norfolk 02 Thirske Yorksh. 02 Tiverton Devon 02 Totnes Devon. 02 Tregonye Cornwall 02 Truro Cornwall 02 Wallingford Berks. 02 Wareham Dorcet 02 Warwick Warwicksh. 02 Wells City Somers. 02 Wendover Bucks. 02 Wenlock Salop. 02 Weoblye Hereford. 02 Westbury Wilts. 02 Westminster C. Midds. 02 Weymouth Dorcet. 02 Whit-Church Hants. 02 Wigam Lanc. 02 Wilton Wilts. 02 Whinchester C. Hants. 02 Wootonbasset Wilts. 02 Yarmouth Hants. 02 Yarmouth Norfolk 02 Worcester C. Worc. 02 York City Yorksh. 02
These eight Burroughs following are called Cinque ports. Dover Kent 02 Hasting Sussex 02 Heythe   02 Rumnye. Kent 02 Rye Sussex 02 Sandwich Kent 02 Seaford Sussex 02 Winchelsey. Sussex 02 Note that the Citizens and Burgesses for the Citys and Burroughs before men∣tioned, in the whole amount unto 417. over and above which number, there are also for the 39 shires in England 78 Knights of the shires, and 14 for the 13 shires in Wales, which added to the former num∣ber, do amount unto 509 being the com∣pleate and full Number of the House of Commons in Parliament.
A Catalogue of the Peers. A Catalogue of the Peers of England, ac∣cording to their Precedence. Dukes. JAmes Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ʋlster, Lord High-Admiral of Eng∣land, the Kings only Brother. Rupert Duke of Cumberland, and Earl of Holderness. The Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; the Lord Treasu∣rer, and the Lord Privy-Seal, take place before all the other Dukes. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. Francis Seymour Duke of Somerset. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. Christopher Monk Duke of Albemarle. James Scot Duke of Monmouth. William Cavendish Duke of Newcastle. Marquesses. Charles Pawlet Marquess of Winchester. Henry Somerset Marquess of Worcester. Henry Pierre-point Marquess of Dor∣chester.
Earls. These three take place in respect of their Offices. The Lord High Chamberlain of England. The Lord Steward of the Kings Houshold. The Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Hous∣hold. Aubry de Vere Earl of Oxford Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury Anthony Grey Earl of Kent William Stanly Earl of Derby John Manours Earl of Rutland Theopilus Hastings Earl of Huntingdon William Russel Earl of Bedford Philip Herbert Earl of Pembrook Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham James Howard Earl of Suffolk Richard Sackville Earl of Dorset James Cecil Earl of Salisbury John Cecil Earl of Exceter John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester James Compton Earl of Northampton Robert Rich Earl of Warwick and Holland William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire Basil Fielding Earl of Denbigh George Digby Earl of Bristol Charles Sackvill Earl of Middlesex Robert Rich Earl of Holland and Warwick Gilbert Holles Earl of Clare
Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook Charles Fane Earl of Westmerland Robert Montague Earl of Manchester Charles Howard Earl of Bark-shire John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave William Ley Earl of Marlborough Thomas Savage Earl of Rivers Robert Berty Earl of Lindsey John Cary Earl of Dover Charles Knollys Earl of Banbury Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough Henry Grey Earl of Stamford Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarven Mountjoy Blount Earl of Newport Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield Nicholas Tufton Earl of Thanet Thomas Weston Earl of Portland William Wentworth Earl of Strafford Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland Nicholas Leak Earl of Scarsdale John Wilmot Earl of Rochester Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich James Butler Earl of Brecknock Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon Arthur Capell Earl of Essex Robert Brudenel Earl of Cardigan Arthur Annesly Earl of Anglesey John Greenvil Earl of Bath
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle William Craven Earl of Craven Robert Bruce Earl of Alesbury Richard Boyle Earl of Burlington Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington Anthony Ashly-Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury Charles Fitz-roy Earl of Southampton Henry Fitz-roy Earl of Euston George Fitz-roy Earl of Northumberland Henry Howard Earl of Norwich William Herbert Earl of Powys Henry Francis Lee Earl of Lichfield Charles Fitz Charles Earl of Plymouth Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex Thomas Osborn Earl of Danby John Maitland Earl of Guilford. Viscounts Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. Francis Brown Viscount Montague. James Fiennes Viscount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Viscount Conway. Baptist Noel Viscount Campden. William Howard Viscount Stafford. Thomas Bellafis Viscount Faulconbridg. John Mordant Viscount Mordant. George Savil Viscount Hallifax. Robert Paston Viscount Yarmouth. Francis Newport Viscount Newport of Bradley
Barrons. George Nevil Lord Abergavenny. James Touchet Lord Audly. Charles West Lord de la Ware. George Berkley Lord Berkley. Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Mon∣tegle Cogniers Darcy Lord Darcy and Meynell William Stourton Lord Stourton Henry Lord Sandys de la Vine. Benjamin Mildmay Lord Fitzwater Thomas Windsor Lord Winsor. Winfild Cromwel Lord Cromwel Ralph Eure Lord Eure. Philip Wharton Lord Warton William Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham William Pagett Lord Pagett Dudley North Lord North. William Bruges Lord Shandois James Berty Lord Norris William Petre Lord Petre Digby Gerrard Lord Gerrard of Gerrard Bromley Charles Stanhop Lord Stanhop Henry Arundel Lord Arundel of War∣dour Christopher Roper Lord Tenham Robert Grevill Lord Brook
Edward Montague Lord Montague of Boughton. William Grey Lord Grey of Wark. John Roberts Lord Roberts John Lovelace Lord Lovelace John Pawlett Lord Pawlett William Maynard Lord Maynard George Coventry Lord Coventry James Lord Howard of Esrick Charles Mohun Lord Mohun William Boteler Lord Boteler Edward Herbert Lord Herbert of Cher∣bury Francis Seymour Lord Seymour Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stonely Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton Richard Byron Lord Byron Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan Charles Smith Lord Carington William Widdrington Lord Widdrington Humble Ward Lord Ward Thomas Culpeper Lord Culpeper Isaac Astley Lord Astley John Lucas Lord Lucas John Bellasis Lord Bellasis Edward Watson Lord Rokingham Charles Gerard Lord Gerard of Brandon Gilbert Sutton Lord Lexinton Charles Kirkhoven Lord Wotton Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale
William Croft Lord Croft John Berkly Lord Berkly of Stratton Denzil Holles Lord Holles Charles Cornwalis Lord Cornwalis George Booth, Lord de la Mere Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend John Crew Lord Crew John Freschevile Lord Freschevile Richard Arundel Lord Arundel of Trerice Thomas Butler Lord Butler of More Park Thomas Clifford Lord Clifford of Chud∣leigh Lewis de Duras Baron Duras of Holdenly Richard Butler Baron of Weston Charles North Baron Grey of Rollston Heneage Finch Baron of Daventry. A Catalogue of the Lords Spiritual ARch-Bis. of Canterb. Gilbert Sheldon Arch-Bishop of York Richard Stern. St. Asaph Isaac Barrow. Bangor Humphry Lloyd. Bath and Wells Peter Mew. Bristol Guy Carleton. Carlile Edward Rainbow. Chester John Pearson.
Chichester Dr. Bredyoke Coventry and Litchfi. Thomas Wood. St. Davids William Lucy. Durham Nathaniel Crew. Ely Peter Gunning. Exeter Anthony Sparrow Glocester John Prichard. Hereford Herbert Croft Llandaff William Lloyd Lincoln Thomas Barlow London Hump. Hinchman Norwhich Edward Reynolds. Oxford Henry Compton. Peterburrogh Joseph Henshaw. Rochester John Dolben Salisbury Seth Ward. Winchester George Morley. Worcester Walter Blandford.
The Contents of the se∣veral Chapters. CHAP. I. Of the Scituation of Britain, with its Ly∣mits, together with some of the old Cu∣stoms practised amongst the Britains, and the several names of the Island, when first Inhabited, &c. pag. 1 CHAP. II. Of the antient Inhabitants of Britain, and the Cities of their possessions, as they were called by Ptolomy, and of∣ten since mentioned in the Roman Wri∣ters, together with the names of such Brittish Princes as opposed the Romans Conquest. 9 CHAP. III. Of the Roman Emperors, and their Depu∣ties who ruled over, and continued the Britains under their Subjection. 16 CHAP. IV. Of the Conquest of Britain by the Saxons, as also of the Commencement and Conti∣nuance
of their several Kingdoms there∣in during the Heptarchy, with the Names of the Kings Ruling in each Kingdom. 35 CHAP. V. Of the British Princes, who withstood the Saxons Conquest, being accounted 13▪ 61 CHAP. VI. Of the Saxon Princes who incroached up∣on one anothers Territories, and so be∣came petty Monarchs of some certain Countries only in Britain, They being ac∣counted 14 in number. 70 CHAP. VII. Of those 15 Saxon Princes, who were ac∣counted sole Monarchs of this King∣dom of ENGLAND. 80 CHAP. VIII. Of the Danes and their Conquest of England, with the memorable Accidents happen∣ing during the times of those three Danish Monarchs who ruled here. 97 CHAP. IX. Of the Saxons Re-entry again to the Monar∣chy of England, after the Danes Con∣quest. 102 CHAP. X. Of England's Conquest by the Normans; and first of William the Conqueror. 110
CHAP. XI. Of King William the Second commonly called Rufus. 121 CHAP, XII. Of King Henry the first, commonly called Beauclark, for his Learning. 126 CHAP. XIII. Of King Stephen, sometimes called Ste∣phen of Bloyce. 134 CHAP. XIV. Of King Henry the Second, sometimes called Henry Fitz-Empress. 142 CHAP. XV. Of King Richard the first, commonly called Richard Courdelion. 149 CHAP. XVI. Of King John, commonly termed by his Father, John Lackland. 155 CHAP. XVII. Of King Henry the Third, commonly cal∣led Henry of Winchester. 162 CHAP. XVIII. Of King Edward the First, commonly cal∣led Long-Shanks. 176 CHAP. XIX. Of King Edward the Second, commonly called Edward of Carnarvan. 181 CHAP. XX. Of King Edward the Third, common called Edward of Windsor. 188
Of King Richard the Second commonly cal∣led Richard of Bourdeaux. 197 CHAP. XXII. Of King Henry the Fourth, common∣ly called Henry of Bullingbrook. 206 CHAP. XXIII. Of King Henry the Fifth, commonly called Henry of Monmouth. 214 CHAP. XXIV. Of King Henry the Sixth, commonly cal∣led Henry of Windsor. 200 CHAP. XXV. Of King Edward the Fourth. 216 CHAP. XXVI. Of Edward the Fifth. 252 CHAP. XXVII. Of King Richard the Third. 258 CHAP. XXVIII. Of King Henry the Seventh. 267 CHAP. XXIX. Of King Henry the Eight. 278 CHAP. XXX. Of King Edward the Sixth. 298 CHAP. XXXI. Of Queen Mary. 303
CHAP. XXXII. Of Queen Elizabeth. 311 CHAP. XXXIII. Of King James. 324 CHAP. XXXIV. Of King Charles the First. 330 CHAP. XXXV. Of King Charles the Second. 356 FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, lately Printed and to be sold by Thomas Basset, at the George near Cliffords-Inn in Fleet street. 1. A Treatise of Money, or a Discourse of Coin and Coinage the first In∣vention, Use, Matter, Forms, Proporti∣ons and Differences Antient and Modern: with the Advantages and Disadvantages, of the Rise or Fall thereof in our own or neighboring Nations, and the Reasons: with a short account of our Common Law therein, also Tables of the value of all sorts of Pearls, Diamonds, Gold, Silver and other Mettals. by R. Vaughan, Esq price bound 18 pence, Printed 1675. 2. A help to English History, contain∣ing a succession of all the Kings of England, the English, Saxons and Britains; the Kings and Princes of Wales, the Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight: as also
of all the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Bishops thereof, with the Description of the places from whence they had their Ti∣tles; together with the names and ranks of the Viscounts, Barons and Baronets of England, By Peter Heylin, D. D. and since his Death continued to this present year 1675, with the Coats of Arms of the Nobility Blazon'd in twelves, price bound 4 s. Printed 1675. 3. The Egyptian History, treating of the Pyramids, the Inundation of the Nile, and other Prodigies of Egypt, ac∣cording to the opinions and traditions of the Arabians: written originally in the ARABIAN Tongue by Murtadi, the Son of Gaphiphus; Rendered into French by Mounsier Vattier, Arabick Professor to the King of France, and thence Faith∣fully done into English by J. D. of Kidwell▪ in octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 4. A Rational Method for proving the truth of the Christian Religion▪ as it is pro∣fessed in the Church of England; by Gelbert Burnet, price bound 1 s. Printed 1675. 5. The practical Christian consisting of Meditations and Psalms, illustrated with Notes, or Paraphrased, relating to the House of Prayer, the ordinary actions of day and night, and several dispositions of men, by R. Sherlock price 2 s. Printed 1675.
6. The Modern Pleas for Comprehen∣sion, Tolleration, and the taking away the Obligation to the renouncing of the Cove∣nant, considered and discussed. By Dr. Tom∣kins, in octavo, Price 2 s. Printed 1675. 7. The Russian Impostor, or the Hi∣story of Muscovy under the Usurpation of of Boris, And the Imposture of Demetrius, in octavo, Price 2 s. 8. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that charge is justified; and the Pretended Refutation of Dr. Stillingfleet's Discourse is answer'd by Daniel Whitby, D. D. in octavo, price 3 s. 6d. 9. Liber Placitandi, a Book of special Pleading's, by W. Thomson Esquire in Folio. 10. The Reports of Sir William Jones in folio, Price 16 s. printed 1675. 11. The Reports of Henry Rolle Ser∣jant at Law▪ in folio, Price 12 s. printed 1675. 12. Formulae bene Placitandi. A book of Entries, containing variety of choice Presi∣dents of Counts, Declarations, Informati∣ons, &c. in two parts, in folio; the second E∣dition corrected, by W. B. Price 22 s. re∣printed 1575.
