N611 R5658 12986587 96208
A New DECLARATION OF THE Confederate Princes AND STATES, AGAINST LEWIS the FOURTEENTH, King of France, and Navarr. Delivered in a Late Audience at Versailles, July the 15th, 1689. Translated out of French. —Trifidâ fumantia flammâ Corpora dant tumulo, signant{que} hoc Carmine Saxum Hic Situs est Phaeton, currus auriga Paterni Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen exidit ausis — Ovid. Metam. Lib. 2. Licensed and Entred according to Order. LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Maiden-Head over-against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street. 1689.
THE Translator's Preface TO THE READER. THE following Remonstrance comes not from a common mercenary Pen, or from any private Person inflam'd by the present Conduct of France, it abounds with too many Intrigues, and Secrets of the Cabinet, and is inrich'd with too Authentick Memoirs, to be the Work of any other Writer, then a great Minister of State imploy'd in the Confederate Ser∣vice, and for the Publick Good of Christendom. He lays o∣pen the vicious Methods of the French Councels, fatally corrup∣ted with the Machivellian Maxime, Of sticking at nothing to gain a Point; which having crawl'd on this side of the Alps, like a venemous sort of Vermine, infests the Courts and Closets of Great Men; hence springs all the modern Treachery and Barbarity, which sets the World on fire, and turns the beauti∣ful Frame of things into a Chaos. Aristotle's Morals, Tul∣ly's Offices, and the Bible, the good Old Guides of our Ance∣stors, serve now only to render a Man Ridiculous, a Cully, and a Beggar. A better Lesson may be taught these new States∣men, out of an Italian Master of as elevated a Genius, and of as subtile Thought, as their clear Florentine Wit Nicolo Machivelli,
I mean Padre Paolo, who gives the following Instructions to the wisest Body of Men that ever compos'd a Government, since the Glorious Ages of Athens and Rome: His Words follow: In all Occurrences where the Publick Faith is engag'd, let it be inviolably kept, without minding any present ad∣vantage that might accrue by the breaking of it, for that is but momentaneous: Whereas the benefit of keeping Faith is Eternal; and a Prince that breaks his Word, must in∣vent a New Religion to make himself be believ'd another time, seeing the Oaths he made in the Religion he profes∣ses, have not been able to bind him. The Opinion of Padre Paolo, given to the Lords the Inquisitors of State, &c. p. 24. This pestilential Principle of Dissimulation, and using all manner of immoral means to compass the End, is the great Ar∣canum of the Jesuits, and the chief Spell of all their Inchant∣ments, whereby they take greater advantages over that part of Mankind which steers a Course of Vertue, then the Rooks and Sharpers here about the Town do over the fair Gamesters, with their false Dice, and Cards, and Flattery. 'Tis this pernicious Doctrine that so long wheedled and decoy'd the credulous and good-natur'd People of England; but at last broke all the late Juglers at White-Hall: yet it still moves on the Springs and Wheels at Versailles with such a rapidity and heat, that the World never saw such a Combustion, since Phaeton put it all into Flames, and Heaven knows when we shall see it quench'd.
NEW DECLARATION OF THE Confederate Princes and States, AGAINST Lewis the XIV. ALL Laws Divine and Human, which have given Authority to Magistrates over the People, have always meant, that Justice was the foundation of Government, which must be distinguish'd from Tyranny; and whereas it cannot subsist or operate without Truth, therefore it is necessary that she should make one of the Embassy, and go freely to the Thrones of the greatest Monarchs, swell'd either with Ambition, painted with Flattery, or blinded with Interest. Justice demands Truth to be always admitted to plead her Cause against Calumny, Envy, Treachery, and the rest of the Vices, which are always making War upon her in the Courts of Princes, especially in That of Your Majesty, under the Protection of a violent unmerciful Minister, as much an Enemy to Innocence, as a Friend to Oppressi∣on. 'Tis therefore by the Order of this Justice, with∣out which Kingdoms are but Wildernesses and Shambles, that Truth presents her self to the Audience of Your Most Christian Majesty, to demand, in the Name of Christen∣dom,
the reasons of your Perjuries, Violations of solemn Treaties, without the least pretence; of your many Massacres committed by surprize, your profaning the most Sacred Things; and, after Capitulations, pillaging, burn∣ing of Cities, Churches, Monasteries, Colleges, Palaces, and laying waste whole Countreys; your Soldiers ravish∣ing up and down, without distinction of Age or Qua∣lity. Europe (Sir) asks you the reason why so many Orphans are made, and so many Infants crush'd under the Ruins, or devour'd by the Flames? She demands the reasons of many more of your execrable Barbarities, which cannot be express'd, the very thoughts whereof would fill with horrour the most Savage Nations, and the sworn Enemies of God Almighty; the Rivers of Tears, the Sighs and Groans of Millions of Christians, cry to Heaven for Vengeance, which the Just God re∣serves for you. Your Birth (Sir) after which your People groan'd many years, has acquir'd you the Name of The Son of God: Your regulations of the Finances, your seizing all the Properties of your Subjects, has given you the Title of Just. The Usurpations and Extensions of your Limits, between the Rhine, the Moselle, and the Maes, in time of Peace, by all sorts of pretences of Dependances, An∣nexions, Re-unions, decreed in your own Chambers, have given occasion to weak Pens to style you Invincible, without ever drawing your Sword. Flattery has erected you a Statue at Paris, in the place call'd Victoires, and by the Inscription (which never any Christian Monarch was yet so vain to assume,) proclaims you Hemo Immortalis. The same Court-Parasite has adorn'd it with Lamps and Incense, appropriated to the Divinity, zealous of his Ho∣nour, and who will not suffer any Rival: History affords many Examples of this; Josephus in his 17th Book of An∣tiq.
Acts of the Apostles Chap. 12. Herod array'd in royal apparel, sate upon his Throne, and made an Oration unto them; the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a Man; and immediately the Angel of the Lord smote Herod, because he gave not God the Glory, and he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost; turning about to his Flatterers, and saying, mn quem Deum immor∣talem salutastis, jam mortalis vitam relinquere jubeor, & fatali necessitate vestrum arguere mendacium. Alas! Your Most Christian Majesty carries too many Proofs about you, that your Body is not immortal; flaming Comets begin first to burn and waste away at the Tail; all your Lustre and Blaze serves only to discover and lay open the bloody Scenes of your Life. Christendom was once in hopes, that Your Majesty would have studied and imitated the commendable Actions of some of your most Glorious Ancestors, especially those of St. Louis, who hating nothing more than the coveting his Neighbour's Goods, contented himself with that Kingdom which God Almighty and his People had entrusted him with: He em∣ploy'd much of his time in pacifying and healing the dif¦ferences of his Neighbours, without raising new ones at the same time, or taking any advantage at their Quarrels: He sacrific'd his Royal Person, to chastise the Infidels, and to defend Christendom; whereas Your Majesty has conduct∣ed the Turks to the very Walls of Vienna, and laid ready at the same time upon the Frontiers, to fall in for the prey of the whole Empire. One of Your Majesty's Predecessors, King Clovis, who had done such great Actions, that they pass'd for Miracles, at last blasted all his Glory, by breaking his Faith and Al∣liance with Alarick King of the Vice-Goths: He complain'd of the Limits, and of the diversity of Religion (a Pretext which Your Majesty's Ministers often make use of to move
the Springs and Wheels of their wicked Machines); yet the French Historians brand him with the Epithets of Ambitions, Envious, Cholerick, Revengeful, and Bloody. Clotaire, another of your Predecessors, had no other God (says the Historian Etienne Pasquier) but his own Will and Passion. Dagobert, who is famous in the Chronicles of France for founding Churches and Monasteries, sully'd all his Merit by robbing Peter to pay Paul: He took away the fine Gates of the Church of St. Hilary at Poitiers, and plac'd them before that which he was building at St. Denis. Your Majesty has done the same, in forcing away in time of Peace the Knights of the Teutonick Order, and those of Malta, from their Estates and Commands in the Empire, and in driving away from your Court in a most ignomi∣nious manner the Envoys of the Grand Masters, contrary to the Faith and Honour of publick Treaties made with them, who came only to demand their Right of Lewis the Just: Your Majesty has depriv'd them of their Reve∣nues, whilst the brave Knights are fighting in Hungary and the Morea for the Honour of Christendom; and you pre∣tend to employ their Patrimony for the raising and in∣creasing the Foundations of your devoted Knights of St. Lazarus. Lothaire is represented by the French Histo∣rians as the most corrupt and worst Prince that ever reigned, because he had ravaged the Church, ransack'd the Ecclesiasticks, broke his Oaths, as often as he saw an Ad∣vantage. I have too much Respect for Your Most Christian Ma∣jesty, to apply the Histories of Kings dead so many Ages ago, to the present Calamities of your Reign, tho' it is the Character and Essence of Truth to conceal nothing. I could (Sir) present you with a long Series of other Kings, infamous for the very Vertues of your time; but I had rather be silent, than weary your attention, which
I desire Your Majesty to apply seriousty to what I shall now say with my wonted simplicity and nakedness, without the least Hyperbole. Flattery hath often compar'd Your Majesty, for these last twenty years, to the Sun, as to the Star of Stars, from whom all other Kings borrow their Lustre, and depend as upon the King of kings. The Duke de Feuillade hath erected your Effigies (I suppose by Your Majesty's own secret Order), encompassed with Rays; but he forgot to tell you, That the Father of Light often suffers Eclipses, and is cover'd with Spots, as Your Majesty's Splendor is at present, though your own Mercenary Writers proclaim to all the World, That the most Glorious Actions of Princes past and to come are no more to be compar'd to the least of Yours, than the Planets, the Comets, and Me∣teors, are to the Sun; which piece of Vanity verifies the old Character given of the French, That they act rather by a principle of Transport and Impetuosity, than of Reason and Justice. One Virtuous Action would immortalize Your Maje∣sty better than a thousand Inscriptions, Panegyricks, Me∣dals, Triumphal Arches, Colossus's, &c. Whereas the Universal Afflictions which Christendom suffers by Your Majesty's Orders, are so far from rendring you Homo immortalis, that they begin to revive the ancient Custom and Opinion of the Gauls in your French Subjects, who were of such a Sanguinary Complexion, as to believe, That they could never better appease their Gods, or make them propitious, than by shedding human Blood, and sa∣crificing Men, Women, and Children; which the Heathens (their Enemies) stood amaz'd at.
Europe demands of Your Majesty the reason, Why you commanded the Cardinal d'Estrees to read so many sting∣ing and mortifying Letters to the late Pope; and the Marquess de Lavardin to affront His Holiness (your old Good Father) in his Capital City, where he has as So∣vereign a Power, as Your Majesty in Paris: He aim'd at nothing but to recall Justice and Virtue into Rome, to banish Sacrilegious Villains, Adulterers; to prevent As∣sassiations, and the Escapes of Robbers, Pickpockets, Banditi, Banquerupts, Cheats, &c. He design'd nothing but to take away all occasions of Conspiracies and Riots, all sorts of Debauchery, which cover'd themselves under the Cloak of a pretended scandalous Franchise, and Pro∣tection of a French Ambassador, in contempt of God Al∣mighty and all Equity. This retreat of Malefactors into the Ambassador's Quarters (which reach'd where-ever the Ambassador pleas'd to extend them) look'd like the Appa∣rition in the Scripture, in which Dragons, Serpents, Vi∣pers, and every thing that Nature had made wild and ve∣nomous, were assembled; a Voice from Heaven commanded St. Peter to rise, kill, and devour these Monsters, Acts chap. 10. The French Quarters at Rome were observ'd by all Travellers to be rather a Babylon than a Sanctuary. Grotius relates in one of his Epistles, That your Maje∣sty was born with Teeth, as a second Curius Dentatus, be∣ing a prognostick of many unfortunate Accidents: These Teeth bite, and poison every part of Christendom, snatch∣ing, and catching up and down; especially the City and County of Avignon, the ancient possession of the Popes, where your Majesty's Dragoons plunder'd and imprison'd all that would not renounce the Pope's Supremacy there, even the Churches and Religious Houses themselves. Your Ministers tell your Majesty, That it is not consistent with good Breeding, or Your Majesty's Glory, to have any
of your Commands disputed by the Pope, or any other So∣vereign Princes. Consider, Sir, from whom you have ravished the City and County of Avignon, 'tis from the Church, (your Mother) not from the Pope; therefore the Quarrel with him cannot justify your Conduct in this Robbery. The Heresie of the City and Principality of Orange was your Pretext to invade and usurp them; that Argument ceases in the Case of Avignon; Where is the glory in stealing of Countries unarm'd, unforti∣fi'd, defended by Priests, and poor naked Peasants? Your Majesty never heard of the Story of King Ahab, and Na∣both's Vineyard. Remember, Sir, that the crying of a Goose in the Capi∣tol, awaken'd and stirr'd up Old Rome to drive away the Gaules, the Ancestors of your People; and can your Ma∣jesty be persuaded, that the Bulls and Thunders of the Va∣tican, consecrated to the True God, will make a less noise in the World, and will not raise many of your own Sub∣jects against you, as well as the rest of her Communion, who are already in arms with the Protestant Princes, to chastise your Insolencies, and to let you know that you are mortalis Homo cum fistulâ in Ano. Your Majesty can never expiate for the Injuries done to Odescalchi, and the virulent Calumnies published against his Person by Monsieur Talon. Milan saw the great Theodosius at the feet of St. Ambrose, her Arch-bishop, pouring out Tears, and repenting for his having sack'd Thessalonica. We have not forgot your Bombing, and burning of Oude∣nard, and of Luxemburg, the very Evening of the Nativi∣ty of our Saviour, when the Christian World was rejoy∣cing for the birth of the Prince of Peace and Mercy. The Churches, Palaces, and Religious Houses of Genoa retain the Scars of your Cruelty. Totila was humbled for his Burnings, Ravagings, and Devastations, which were no∣thing
in comparison of yours; that Barbarous Gothick King, although much inrag'd by the Emperor Justinian, and by the loss of his Troops in Lucania, yet chang'd his Resolution of burning Rome, of which he was Master, up∣on the request of Belizaus, Justinian's General. Baronius ad Ann. 547. But your Majesty's Ministers and Generals are deaf to the Complaints of the poor oppressed People, and the Cries of the Innocent, which prove only like fire cast at the Lyons to make them more furious; they excuse themselves with the Royle veut, and stop their ears against the innumerable Complaints sent from all parts since the Westphalian and Pyrenean Treaties, of intolerable violations of Oaths made at the Altar, upon the Cross, upon the Go∣spel, the Mass, upon the Word of a King, and upon his Royal Salvation. The Excuses of your Boutefeus and Incen∣diaries, in saying that it is your Majesty's pleasure that the World should be set on fire, make your Majesty a Phaeton, or a Nero, and a declar'd Enemy both to God and Man. If your Majesty is of any Religion, it must be the Maho∣metan, for you blow up all sorts of Christian Churches, no distinction being made of the Protestant, and Catholick ones; If there were any Mosques in your way, they would be sacred and untouch'd. Read, Sir, the History of Count William, and his Acti∣ons in Guienne; you are an exact Copy of his Counte∣nance; only you excel him in Bombs, Stink-pots, Car∣casses, and other sorts of Infernal Fires; he was, as you are, a French-man, and more than that, a Gascon. Truth asks your Christian Majesty, why you flew so fu∣riously upon the Emperor, engag'd at such a distance in a glorious War against the Turk? in what did he offend you? did he ever pretend to your Crown? did he ever seise your Towns in time of Peace? did be ever raise a Rebellion in your Country, as you have done in Hungary?
did he ever bring the Turks into France? did he ever lie ready with a great Army to swallow up your Kingdom, when engag'd in other Wars, as your Majesty did near Dijon, and upon the Saone, in the Year 1683. when the Grand Visier was near devouring the East part of the Em∣pire with Two Hundred Thousand Turks, the Western Morsel being cut out for your Majesty's share? We all know, that one of your Intendants gave a bloody Repri∣mand to the Bishop of St. Omers, for having ordered Publick Prayers and a Fast when the Infidels were en∣tring Christendom; and the French Troops committing greater Barbarities in the Spanish Netherlands, than the Turks in Hungary and Austria. Your Majesty would never permit the Churches of France to pray for the Deliverance of Vienna, though Monsieur Seppeville gave Your Majesty a daily account of the progress of the Turks at that time; 'Twas M. Fouchay who persuaded your Majesty to make a diversion, at that juncture, rather in the Spanish Ne∣therlands, than in the Empire, lest your Negotiation with the Divan at Constantinople should be too notorious, which is amply display'd since in the Declaration of the Empire, sign'd at Ratisbon the 4th of March 1689. No body is ignorant of your Intrigues and Briberies in the Court and Diet of Poland, in order to throw all into confusion, and to put the Poles out of all condition to carry on any successful War against the Turk; the Mar∣quis de Bethune is known to be the Spy and Agent of that Roguery. The August Emperor, and the Princes of Germany, ac∣quire their Glory at the point of their Swords, and by the Exploits of a brave and generous War, conducted by the Hand of God, as that of Gideon; whereas all Your Majesty's Glory is founded upon Robbery, Surprize, Bri∣bery, Treachery, breach of Faith, &c. in which the
Dauphin has been instructed, and bred up, of which he gave many proofs in his first enterprize, the last year, up∣on the Palatinate. I could easily convince Your Majesty, that Your Nego∣tiation with the Ottoman Port, to destroy the Empire, might have been fatal to Your self. For amongst the Pri∣soners taken at the Battel of Barkan, after the raising the Siege of Vienna, the Bassa of Silistria was one, who con∣fess'd to the great General of Poland, That the Grand Vi∣sier was resolv'd, upon the taking of Vienna, to fly im∣mediately into the Bowels of the Empire, and to march in person to Ratisbon; for which Expedition he had made provision of Money, Ammunition, and all other Necessa∣ries for Eighteen Months. Now what could Your Majesty have done upon such a vast Inundation of Barbarians, spreading towards the Borders of France; it would have been too late to have dealt with the Turks, as Your Maje∣sty's Father did with the Swedes; who growing very for∣midable in the Empire by French Intrigues, and advancing too near the Rhine, gave Lewis the XIIIth great jealousie and fear of their Progress and Success; whereupon, to prevent the ill consequences, Your Father suspended the payment of the Subsidies, and other Assistances, which he had all along afforded them under-hand, and neglected no manner of means to disperse the remains of the Swedish Forces, that surviv'd the loss of their immortal Hero, the Great Gustavas Adolphus, and were headed by the Duke of Saxe Weimar. This is not the first time, that the mad Caprices of the French have arm'd many Nations against them. The Empe∣ror Valentinian writ to Theodorick, That there was an indi∣spensable necessity to unite themselves against the French, who were so transported with the vain notion of Glory, that they began to affect in that Age a Universal Empire, as tho
every thing belong'd to them: That they never began any War, for which they could assign any cause, or the least reason; for they call'd every thing just, which-was agreea∣ble to their Exorbitant Lusts and Passions; Vide Anton. Bonfin. Rerum. Hungar. Dec. 8. Lib. 3. Can Your Majesty be so blind, or vain, as to imagine that the Confederate Princes and States will bear any lon∣ger with the Chimera's and Phrensies of the Brains of Your Ministers, published in so many Scandalous Manifesto's, which ought to be purg'd with large Doses of Hellebore. How can Your Majesty treat the Emperor as a Calumniator, because he will not suffer himself to be amus'd any longer with the publick Professions of Your Sincerity to preserve the Peace and Repose of Christendom? We cannot but ri∣dicule Your Majesty for prostituting Your Glory to the Al∣gerines, and humbling Your self at the Feet of such a Mo∣bile, in offering them Your Ports to facilitate their Depre∣dations upon the Christians; by which You have rendred them so stiff, that they demand full Reparations for the Damages done by Your Bombs, and the restitution of all Slaves. How can You, Sir, tax the Emperor with disturbing the publick Peace, after He had born so long with Your Insults, and Usurpations? You make every thing a breach of the Peace, which contradicts Your Will and Pleasure. How can Your Majesty be persuaded that the Emperor hath vio∣lated the Laws and Statutes of the Church, in opposing Cardinal Furstenburg, the common Incendiary of the Em∣pire, and the Church, incapacitated by the Pope, and put by, by the common practice of the Chapter of Cologn, af∣ter he had fill'd the Bishoprick with French Troops, sown Divisions, and kindled a Bloody War in Europe. Under the Covert of this Cardinal, and Elector, Your Majesty took occasion to vex and torment all Christendom, Your
Soldiers seizing Rhinberg, Nuys, Keiserwert, Zons, Bon, &c. burning Anderpatch, Lintz, and Brûle, the Asylum of Cardinal Mazarine, when driven out of France, where he had the leisure and opportunity to gather many Troops to return withal, and to gain the Battel of Rettell, whereby he fixt the tottering Crown upon Your Majesty's Head; Your Intendants and Officers have suck'd the Blood and Marrow of the whole Electorat, under the disguise of protecting it against its lawful Master; the miserable Inhabitants dying with hunger, and oppression, whilst your Dragoons grew fat with the Spoils. The Sons and Brothers of the present Prince Palatine ha∣ving appear'd at Cologn in favour of the Election of the young Prince of Bavaria against Cardinal Fustenberg, an Ene∣my of the Empire, seizing upon the whole Electorate with swarms of French Troops before he had ever one Vote gi∣ven him by the Chapter; or indeed, before the breath was out of the late Elector's Mouth, gave umbrage to Your Majesty to burn and destroy all the Countries and Estates belonging to the good old Elector Palatine, their Father, as his Dutchy of Juliers, the County of Bergue, the ancient Palace and Castle of Heydelberg; all his Cities in the Pala∣tinate, as Manheim, Nieustad, Frankendale, &c. carrying away all the Goods and Chattels of the Countrey, whereby all manner of subsistence might be taken away from the mi∣serable Inhabitants, whose Ghosts cry out for Vengeance. The Elector of Treves hath been treated by Your Majesty more like a Rebel, than a Sovereign Prince, because he thought it his duty to be faithful to the Interest of the Em∣pire, and the Church, of which he is an Illustrious Member: Your Majesty first seis'd, then dismantled, now plunder'd and burnt the Capital City of Treves, and turn'd his whole Electorate into a Wilderness of Ruines, and Ashes. The Marquis de Bousters has been the Executioner of all Your
Cruelties in that Countrey, having last Winter turn'd the beautiful City of Coblentz into a Furnace, with his Bombs and Carcasses, there now remaining little of the Place, only heaps of Stones, and Cinders; 'twas wonderful to see with what patience and constancy the Elector of Treves view'd from his Castle of Hermanstein his City of Coblentz burning and tumbling under his eyes, and afterwards his whole Coun∣try in flames, not so much as one Church standing for the worship of God Almighty, tho there were reckon'd above 800 Religious Houses in the Electorate, six Cities, forty great Towns, 400 Villages, and sixty great Castles. The Elector of Mentz being weary of Your Majesty's Yoke, began to espouse the Cause of the Empire and the Church, having suffer'd long under the Chains You had put upon him: Monsieur Fouchay, and Your Officers affronted him daily with intolerable Indignities, contrary to the Capitu∣lation, and Your Majesty's Royal Word, which at last prov'd of fatal consequence to his Subjects and Country; his Palace was soon ransack't, the Monasteries and Citizens Houses plunder'd, and all utterly ruin'd, tho under the stipulated and solemn protection of Your Majesty, who assumes the Titles of Lewis the Just, the Pious, the Great. What has the Circle of Suabia done to Your Majesty, to be so barbarously dealt with, contrary to all the Rules of Christianity, and the common Maxims of War? She commits no Hostilities against Your Majesty, sends no Forces to join the Confederates upon the Rhine; all her Troops are em∣ploy'd in Hungary against the Infidels, which may be one cause of the Desolations committed by Your Soldiers from Strasburg, Brisac, and Hunningen; for the Mahometan and the French Cause are the same. What Affronts has the young Innocent Duke of Wirtemberg, not yet 12 years of Age, put upon Lewis le Grand? who has seiz'd his Place of Residence, driving the little Duke away to seek his Fortune; ravaging, destroying, and burning all his Dutchy of Wirtemberg, after
that Monsieur Invigny had been receiv'd with a particular respect at his Court, as well as Monsieur Bourgeauville before him, two French Envoys, who had enchanted that Court with great promises of safety and protection. In what Sir, has the Ancient City of Spires offended you, that Justice is dethron'd from her Imperial Seat, and all the Re∣cords of the Empire destroy'd, as tho Your Majesty intended to obliterate the very name of the Germans, as the Goths did that of the Romans? What sins has the Imperial City of Worms committed against Your Divinity? to be first plun∣der'd, and then burnt for company with her Neighbour Spires; all the poor Inhabitants, as well religious as secular, being commanded, upon pain of death, to retire into no o∣ther Country, but what was under the French domination. What a miserable Spectacle was it to behold the starving Gentry and Commonalty forced to march through ruin'd Countries, where they left their dead Children and Relati∣ons in the Woods and Ditches; and to render this Action more memorable and renowned in future Annals, Your Ma∣jesty chose the day of Pentecost, the Festival of the Holy Ghost (of which Order Your Majesty is the Head) to make this great Sacrifice to Your Glory? the fiery Tongues ha∣ving appear'd to the Apostles upon this day, was an argument to Your Majesty to storm Heaven with the Cries and Flames of Imperial Cities, a new sort of Gigantomachia. Solyman, the great Persecutor of the Christians in the East, became Master of Constantinople upon the day of the Feast of Pente∣cost; Louis the XIVth, the great Persecutor of the West, did famous Actions the same day, and seems resolv'd to make eve∣ry day of the year a Fast in memory of his Tragical Exploits. We hear Your Majesty has commanded the Academy of Painters at Paris to draw the History of this War; they must not forget to represent your Engineers melting the Bells, Clocks, Church-Leads, &c. to turn them into Instruments of War; their blowing up of Vaults and
Arches; their knocking and pulling down all that surviv'd the Flames, lest there should be the least Retreat for the languishing Inhabitants: They have not spar'd the Bones and Ashes of the Dead, the stately Sepulchres and Monu∣ments of the Emperours and Empresses at Spires and Worms, being all buried in the Ruins, as those of Con∣rade II. Henry II. Henry IV. Henry V. and their Empresses. Attila and his Goths left many Towers standing, which are now pull'd down by Your Majesty's strong and mighty Arm; quod non fecerunt Barbari, fecit Ludovicus Magnus, Justus, Pius. The Injuries and Affronts put upon the Bishop of Worms, near Ninety years of Age, and a Prince of the Empire, are almost incredible, if they had not been perpetrated by French-men, who hurried the old Venerable Pastor up and down in a Chair, laid him in a ruin'd Castle, and menac'd him with blows, unless he would discover all the Plate and Riches of the Church. All your Declarations of War accuse the King of Spain and the Elector Palatine of secret Machinations against your Majesty, as stirring up of Wars against you, and exciting all the Princes and States of Christendom to rise up in Arms a∣gainst France; whereas your Majesty design'd nothing by be∣ginning this barbarous War, but to maintain the Peace and Happiness of Christendom, for which your Majesty's desire is most sincere. Now how notoriously false these Accusations are against the King of Spain and the Elector Palatine, eve∣ry body may easily judge, who knows the Court of Spain, and the temper of the Spaniards, as well as the condition and state of the Prince Palatine, who has few or no Envoys running from Court to Court, no Spies, no masqueraded Incendiaries. Your Majesty sent to the Imperial Court Mr. Seppeville a little before the Truce, and after him Chiverny, who presently after was dispatch'd to the Northern Courts; Lusignan succeeded him, and like a common Herauld pub∣lished
your Declaration of War under the very nose of the Emperour, for which he was sent away by the Imperial Or∣der. The scandalous Intrigues of these three Ministers to embroil Hungary, and encourage the Turk, are too common∣ly known, to be here repeated After the conclusion of the Peace of Nimguen, your Majsty sent Verius to Ratisbon, as an Instrument and Machine of Discord, to hinder all cor∣respondence at the Diet; which he did for some time, till Honour and Self-preservation started and confirm'd the League of Ausburgh. Your Majesty entertain'd Villars at the Court of Bavaria, a very impertinent and imperious Fel∣low. At the Court of Brandenburgh you had M. Kebenac, an impudent Negotiator. At the Court of Mentz, M. Fou∣chay, a very insulting domineering Monsiur, who never spoke to the Elector without signs of despising his Person and his Sovereignty. Your Majesty had M. Tambonneau, and since Gravell, at the Court of the Elector of Cologn, who laid the train of all those Miseries which now we behold in that fruitful Country: They deluded the late Elector, surroun∣ded him with French Creatures, fill'd his Garisons with French Forces: how often did they threaten the Elector of Treves with Fire and Sword, unless he would declare for France; telling him, That they had his whole State between their Hammer and their Anvil, which prov'd true in the ef∣fect: But what immortal Honour has the Elector of Treves merited in sacrisicing his All, rather than betray the Empire and his Church! At the Court of Lunenbourg your Minister M d'Arsy was notorious, and Montargis at Cpenhagen. Your Majesty still keeps Bidal at Hamburg, who is so impudent, that no assronts can get him out of the City. All these, and many more, run up and down Europe, sowing mischief, and putting all into flames. Your Majesty disguises your Missio∣naires and Creatures under Perriwig-makrs, Dancing, Fencing Masters, Confectioners, Cooks, Valets de Chamber, disbanded Soldiers, Masters of Languages, Musicians, Toy-men, &c.
These Men creep and insinuate into Courts, and the Houses of Great Men, into all Publick Companies, where they ferret up and down, and afterwards give Intelligence to your Supe∣riour Ministers. These Masqueraders suffer any Affronts to be put upon them, and all the Contempts in the World, by which means they cover and conceal their true Characters, and act without being suspected. Lewis the XI. employ'd M. Oliver (a Barber by Profession) in several Embassies, in which he past for a Ridicule; and thereby took many advan∣tages, as Gondamore did in England. All the French Ministers, Spies, and Pensioners, make it their only study and business to Preach up the Grandeur, the Glory, and the Wisdom of France; the Justice of your Majesty's Cause; your Zeal for the Peace and Repose of Christendom, and such-like Rhodoman∣tades; which impose upon some credulous, and foppish fren∣chify'd Fellows, some Women and Enthusiasts. They often urge the great Change and Revolution that would happen upon the King of Spain's Death; and tell us how then the greatest part of Europe would devolve by Right upon Louis le Grand. The Declaration of France against the Emperor, proclaims the Electrice of Bavaria barren, tho' she was breed∣ing at that very moment. And what Intrigues hath been on foot to prevent the Marriage of the incomparable Princess Mary Ann Palatine, with Charles the Second of Spain, who tho' of a weak Constitution, yet being now providentially deliver'd from the poysonous Embraces of his late Queen Louïse of Bourbon, and cherisht up by a fruitful wholsome German Princess, may in all probability see Heirs of his own Body to inherit his Kingdoms; of which the Court of France seems to be so Jealous, that a Squadron of Men of War is commanded to watch the Queen of Spain's motions, and if possible, to destroy her, whilst the French Troops are ruining her Father at Land. 'Tis notorious to all the World, how your Majesty has
persecuted the King of Spain from his very Cradle, contrary to the greatest Ties and Obligations that God Almighty could lay upon you; all the Modern Histories are full of your Treacheries, and Ʋsurpations upon his Dominions, therefore Truth will not here repeat them; only she thinks it proper to advertize your Majesty of late ones, which perhaps are already crowded out of your Memory, by daily swarms of fresh Ideas of that kind. Ever since the last Truce, your Majesty hath Treated the faithful Spanish Subjects as common Enemies, Arresting their Persons, and Confiscating their E∣states; because the Soverain Council of Brabant durst be so honest, as to pronounce a favourable Sentence for the Prince of Orange, (now by the special Providence of Heaven, King of Great Britain) against the Count de Solre, betwixt whom there had been a great and long Suit depending, for several Seigneuries and Lands. Your Majesty knows how justly Spain has complain'd by her Ambassadour at your Court, that your Governour of the French Netherlands has sometimes quitted, then presently seiz'd again the best part of the Châtelenie, or Jurisdiction of Courtray, and proceeded to post up the French Arms, even before the Counterscarp of the Cittadel of Namur. Your Ma∣jesty is not ignorant, that your Men of War have cruis'd in the Bay of Cadiz, and extted by force great Customs and Impositions from all Spanish, as well as other Ships; nor how treacherously your Fleet surpris'd Admiral Papachini, in time of Peace, who refus'd to strike his Flag, knowing no other Soveraign of the Spanish Seas, but the King of Spain his Ma∣ster. How often have the Ministers and Envoys of Spain remonstrated against these Proceedings, and made use of the Mediations of the Kings of England, Charles the Second, and James the Second, the Emperor, and the States of the Seven United Provinces, who were all Guarantees of the Peace and Truce; but your Majesty was resolv'd to declare a King your
publick Enemy, for no other reason, but that he had born too long with the Insults, and Affronts of your Majesty's Mi∣nisters, Fleets, and Armies. After your taking of Luxemburgh, in the middle of a full Peace, your Majesty's Ministers declar'd up and down, That then the Foundation of a lasting Peace was laid, that City which had been the Source of many Quarrels, being now in their Master's possession. But the Germans, especially the Princes of the Rhine, saw their fatal Error too late; their Countries being thereby laid open and expos'd to the fury of the French, in whose way the Bulwark of Luxemburgh had always laid as a Rampart of those States and Territories, which are now a lamentable heap of Ruines: But if we should enter far into the secret Conduct of this Affair, we shall find the principal Author of it in England, laid asleep in the poysonous Bosome of a French Dalila, which contri∣buted as much to the loss of Luxemburgh, as Helena did to that of Troy; this Fortress lies now like the Trojan Horse, sending forth every day armed Men to burn and destroy all about the Frontiers of the Empire. 'Tis well known, that the Prince of Orange (who is now in a Condition to raise the Glory of the English Nation, and to cast the Ballance of Chri∣stendom) and the States, would have reliev'd Luxemburgh at that Juncture, if the Guarrantee of England would have done his Duty, and declar'd in conjunction with them (as he was oblig'd) against France. How can you, Sir, object to the King of Spain, that he did abandon and betray King James the Second of England, when as his Ambassador Don Pedro Ronquillo, gave him al∣ways sincere and cordial Advice, to adhere to the true Inte∣rest of Christendom, and to forsake all French Councels and Measures, with which Monsieur Barillon, and his Italian Spouse were always amusing and deluding him, plying him daily with the Sollicitations of Jesuited Priests and Confessors, The
same Advice was often given him by the Emperour, whose Letters are upon Record; but James was deaf, and would not hearken to the wholesome Instructions so often instill'd into his Ears; the consequence whereof now proves, that your Majesty by your New French Politicks, has been the principal Instrument of the Advancement of the late Prince of Orange, and of setting him upon a Throne, which is like to be the Scourge of France, and the Deliverer of Christendom from its present Bondage. If the Great Scipio Africanus was stil'd the Destroyer of Carthage and Numantia, (which had always been the invere∣rate Enemies of Rome) and was reprehended for it by the Grave Roman Historians; what a Figure then will your Ma∣jesty make in History, if instead of Monsieur Boileau (now in Pension for that purpose) a Polybius, a Livy, a Tacitus, or a Plutarch should write your Life; what would they say of your Burnings and Devastations, how would they recon∣cile them to the Character that wise Seneca gives of a Great Man: Consulere Patriae, parcere afflictis, ferâ caede abstinere, tempus irae dare, orbi quietem, saeculo pacem suo, petitur hâc Coelum Viâ. In Octav. Act. 2. Truth desires you, Great Sir, to reflect a little upon the desperate Condition in which your Armies have left many Millions of Souls, now ready to starve and languish for want of common Sustenance, all the Wines, Corn, Grains, Cat∣tel, Forrage, &c. being order'd to be brought into your Majesty's Fortresses of Mount-Royal, Luxemburgh, Sar Louis, Philipsburgh, Strasburgh, Brisac, Hunningen, and Fort Louis, under pain of Death, and afterwards all the Houses and Pla∣ces of shelter, tho' Churches, Chappels, Hospitals, to be burnt, and all laid waste, as the Deserts of Arabia; neither the Tears of Infants, of Widows, of Nuns, Old Men, laid prostrate at the Feet of your unmerciful Soldiers, can soften their obdurate Hearts, le Roy le veut, is the word of them all.
The miserable inhabitants of the Palatinat, when they opened their Gates to your Son the Dauphin, had his honour and solemn word pawn'd for their safety and protection; his Cpitulations with Worms, Spire, Frankendale, Heydel∣berg, Manheim, &c. are upon Record, and will one day be witness against you. Now that the Duke de Feuillade hath erected to your Majesty a magnificent Statue, in imitation of the Romans, who dedicated the like to their Hero's and Great Men, he ought also to appoint a solemn Triumph for your Majesty, if he intends to copy the whole Ceremony and pomp of the Ancients; but Truth will not suffer your Majesty to be drawn in a pare white Ivory Triumphal Chair, such as those of the Roman Consuls and Emperours wont to be; the Wheels of your Chariot will be red with the Blood of Christians, or black with the smoak of your burnings; the Horses shall not be of the Ermine colour, but rather like those in the Revelations, chap. 6. the first whereof was white, the second red, the third black, and the fourth pale, which are applicable to the four parts of your Ma∣jesties Life: He that sate upon the first had a Bow in his hand, and a Crown was given unto him, the white colour may signify the Innocence of your Majesties Infancy and Minority, in which after the Death of Lewis the XIII. you was miraculously preserv'd against many powerful Factions under the Ministries of Richelieu and Mazarine; the Crown given was yours; the second Horse was red, and power was given to him that sate thereon, to take Peace from the Earth, and that they should kill one another, and there was given unto him a great Sword, proper to banish Peace out of the World, to kill and slay; the red colour represents the Blood spilt in whole streams by your Majesty, and the man with the Sword in his hand, is he that cuts all bonds of Humane Society. The colour of the black Horse blazens it self, and
represents the blackness of your Boutefeus and Incendiaries. The fourth Horse was pale, and the name of him that sate on him was Death, and Hell followed him, and power was given unto them to kill with Sword, Hunger, &c. These, Sir, are to draw your Triumphal Chariot thro the Streets of Paris, after which the Fourth Horse is to devour you; neither the Louvre nor Versailles can shelter you; your Fleets and Armies, your Bombs, your Carcasses, and Stink∣pots cannot hinder this Sceleton from drawing you under ground; Read, Sir, the whole Revelation, and you will see St. John pointing at you in every Chapter. Your Majesty never yet was in any War (and you have been in many) whereof you was not the Spring and Author; did ever any Prince or State attack you first, have not you always been the first Aggressor, and the Vi∣olator of the Peace; your Majesty has stole away above a sixth part of the Empire, and above half of the Netherlands by piece-meals, when all your Neighbours were sleeping under their own Figg-Trees and Vines, resting as they dream't secure under your Majesties Treaties and Com∣pacts, then which nothing ought to be more Sacred. What will your Majesty say, if the Diet and the Con∣federate Princes and States will no longer Treat with you upon your Royal Word and Honour, which are so prosti∣tuted and blown upon, that they will pass no more cur∣rant, then King Jame's Coyn in Ireland; all your Seals and Stamps are Brass and Counterfeit. The Confederates know not what Oaths, what new God, or Religion to invent, for the binding and obliging your Majesty to keep the com∣mon Faith of Nations; what if they insist upon a General Assembly of the Estates of France, seeing they cannot enter into any Treaty with the Court of France, without the joint reputation of the whole body of the Kingdom; this was practiced upon your Majesties account at the Treaties of
Westphalia, where there was a Convention of all the Estates of the Empire to satisfy your Ministers. The Empire is resolv'd and fixt upon the point and prin∣ciple of having all the Estates of France call'd together; Reason will direct your Subjects to insist upon it at this juncture, seeing all their Trade and ways of subsisting (un∣less by burning) are stopt, the Finances multiplied and en∣creast in every branch. This, Sir, will raise and kindle some sparks and rays of former Liberty and Property in your Subjects breasts; your Majesty will be the looser, your People gainers; the Sun of your Glory shining with a false light, will suffer a total Eclipse, which must have a fatal influence upon your Glory and pretended Grandure. One little spark of Fire from abroad, may kindle such a Fire in France, that all your Engines will never be able to quench; the Necessities of your People hath rendred them extreamly sensible and susceptible of any impressions; the Commons are opprest in the highest degrees, the Mer∣chants have no commerce, the Nobility is debased, the Clergy dis-respected, all in confusion; the greatest part of Europe is prepar'd to assist them, the rest are providing for the general Invasion of France on all sides, from all parts, both by Sea and Land, from East and West, the South and the North; not to force your Majesties Subjects to Rebel, but only to throw off their intolerable Yoke of Slavery, their Fetters and their Chains; and to free themselves as well as their Posterity from all the Miseries of Bondage, un∣der which they groan, and pine away. Your Majesties Edicts must be recall'd, the old ones resetled upon a sure bottom; your Finances regulated, your heavy Taxes and Impositions moderated. These things, Sir, will be done, and remember that Truth told you so; the late easy Revo∣lution in England is so fresh and deep in your Memory, that I need not represent the History to your Majesty, least
it should make you Abdicate before your time, whereby your Throne will become vacant, till Truth is set upon it. The Late King James of England had neither burnt Cities, Towns, or Villages, he had not laid whole Countries in ashes, yet how sudden and quick was his overthrow, and ruine; not so much as one Battel, his Fleet and Army were cold in his defence, his strong holds yeilded themselves, his Subjects tho' train'd up in a course of Passive Obedience, did generally revolt and rise up against him, yet they had not felt half the Smart and Oppressions that the Subjects of France bear at present: The Late King James was but just entred into the Schools of the Jesuits, he was many Classes below Your Majesty, being only in the bud, whereas your Vi∣ces are come now to full Maturity, and must rot in few Months. Repent, Great Sir, before it is too late; the Confederacy grows every day, and you consume apace; they are all animated with the highest resentments imaginable, and in∣vincibly united; you have no Allies in England, in Mun∣ster, Denmark, or Sweden, as you had in the Years 1672, and 1678. You have no Protestant Subjects to fight for you, which in those years made up a great and best part of your Armies; your ngdom is exhausted of all its Riches, all your Ports are forsaken, and your Revenue sinks to nothing; What, Sir, can you propound to your self by forcing all Christendom to devour you; The Astrologers foretel that your Majesty is preparing your own Funeral Fire, and that you intend to leap alive into the Flames which your own hands have kindled, Dum cupit Empedocles Deus immortalis haberi, Insilit in flammas; Horace de Arte poet. Aetna, Vesuvius, the Vulcano's, and Hecla refuse to burn at present, now that your Majesty has set up a burn∣ing Mountain every Mile, the great ones disdain to follow your French Fashion.
Remember, Sir, how the Just God chastis'd and extin∣guished the numerous Line of the Valois (your Predeces∣ors) since Francis the I. was the Founder of the Alliance with the Turks, which your Majesty cultivates so carefully, that it is become your Darling and your Mistriss. The longer Heaven delays her Vengeance, the more rigorous proves her Execution, which she often entails upon many Generations. Delicta majorum immeritus lues, Romane, donec Templa refeceris, Aedes{que} labentes Deorum, & foeda nigro simu∣lacra fumo. Horat. lib. 3. od. 6. Read, Sir, the Chronicles of your own Kingdom, and you will find up and down the Curses and Maledictions of your dying Predecessors, and of many other great Men, thrown out and fulminated against those that should dare to destroy Cities, Churches, and Countries. The Arch∣bishop, St. Reny, who Baptized Clovis the Founder of your Most Christian Majesty, sends you the following Curse in his last Will and Testament. Statuo, inquit, ut si aliquando genus Regium per benedictionem meam toties Domino consecra∣tum, mala pro bonis reddens, Ecclesiarum dei pervasor, depo∣pulator gravis, aut contrarius extiterit, convocatis Remorum Diaecesis Episcopis, primum moneatur, & deinde, &c. Ita ut us{que} ad septimam monitionem, si prius satis facere noluerit, paternae pietatis longanimitate differatur, tandem{que} si pospositis omnibus praefatis benedictionibus, incorrigibilis contumaciae spiritum non deposuerit, &c. Elogium segregationis a corpore ab ab omnibus ei porrigatur. Testamentum S. Remigii ap. Bri∣son. de formul. lib. 7. & Flodoard. Histor. Rem. lib. 1. c. 18. Your Majesty cannot but have read, or at least heard, how Lewis the XI. tho he had govern'd very well, enjoy'd great and real Prosperities, united so many Provinces to the Crown, which constitute and form the beautiful body of France; yet after all this so many Jealousies, Fears, troubles
of Mind, and remorses of Conscience seiz'd upon him, that he confin'd himself in his Castle of Plessis la Tour as in a Prison, apprehending all the World to be his Enemy; no body was admitted to see him, but his Domestick Servants, and them he chang'd every Week; 400 Archers kept con∣stant guard at the Gate, whilst others walked continually the rounds to prevent any surprize; he order'd Iron Gates, Spikes, and Crows feet, to be placed every where about the Castle; besides four great Iron Watch-houses full of holes, out of which his Guards might shoot at pleasure; he left no Man of whom he had the least suspition either in Town or Country, but he sent his Guards not only to bid them depart, but to conduct them away; during this confine∣ment of himself he was always displacing the great Officers of his Kingdom, Civil and Military, which made some be∣lieve that he was impaired in his Senses and Intellectuals, but they were mistaken and knew not his humours, says that wise Man, and great Historian, Philip de Comines's Book VI. As to his jealousie, all Princes (if they are wise) are prone to it, especially if they have made many Enemies, and injur'd many People; Lewis the XI. had some thoughts of easing his Country, but he should have begun sooner, saith the Historian; for he had given his Kingdom many Wounds, which bled fiercely, and requir'd a long time for their consolidation and cure. The last Years of his life, which he might have desired to pass in tranquillity and re∣pose, serv'd only to perplex and torment him; Heaven refus'd to sweeten the sharpness of his troubles, and in∣quietude of mind, notwithstanding he had beg'd the bene∣diction of the Hermit of Calabria, and the Prayers of the Church. The Life of this great King, one of the most Glorious of your Predecessors, whose Exit I have related, did not afford any of those Tragical and Barbarous Scenes, which appear
thro the whole Stage of your Majesties Reign▪ He had no Amity or Correspondence with the sworn Enemies of Chri∣stendom (with whom you are in a stronger Alliance, than ever you were with any Christian Prince) but refus'd all Intelligence and Friendship with them, even to refuse Au∣dience to the Turkish Ambassador, who brought along with him a great Roll of Relicks, (which had remain'd at Con∣stantinople) together with a vast Sum of Money. 'Tis now high time, that Truth should turn her head, and speak to the People of France; what will become of you, if things come to extremity; or if you do not take timely measures for the preservation of your selfs and Coun∣try, by a generous, tho' necessary Declaration: If the Spa∣niards (who grow more and more powerful upon your Frontiers) break through the Pyrenean Barriers, you will soon see all Languedoc, and Gascony in flames. If the Vau∣dois and Milanois pass into Dauphine (as there is nothing to hinder them) then all Provence, Lionnois, &c. will be laid in Ashes. If the Swisses break into Franche Comte, then all Burgundy must be set on Fire. If the Germans, and Confe∣derates get into Lorrain, or Luxemburg, then Champagn grows hot. If the Dutch and Spaniards into Picardy, then Normandy, the Isle of France and Brie must burn for it. If the Dutch and English Fleets disembark several Armies upon the Coasts, then Bretagne, Poictou, and Guienne must be destroy'd; so that there is a terrible Prospect before your eyes. Your own Armies paid with the sweat of your brows, must be the Firebrands of your Country, under pretence to save the Carcass of a Tyrant, an Enemy to God and Man. Reflect a little upon the lamentable State of France, and if you can bear it any longer, the World must think you Asses, Bousalo's, Camels, Beasts of Burthen, rather then Men endow'd with any Spirit or Reason, or Sense of the least Liberty. You have had your Conde's, your Coligni's,
and your Guise's, Men of Great Souls, and vast Enterprise Truth speaks, and offers here to head and conduct you; Nil desperandum me Duce, & Auspice Christo. Lastly, Great Sir, I do apply my self to your Throne once more; take from the Infallible mouth of Truth her last Prayer and Request, which ever she intends to make to you; viz. Remember that which your Pious Mother Ann of Austria hath often told you, when she us'd to shew your Majesty her Breast eaten to the very Ribs with a furi∣ous greedy Cancer, upon which she us'd to conjure your Majesty to be contented with what God Almighty had libe∣rally bestow'd upon you, fearing (by something she had early discover'd in your Complexion) least you should lose your own, in endeavouring to force away that of ano∣ther. A Man unstain'd and pure from Sin, No Quiver fraught with Poyson'd heads, No Africk Javelin needs, He has a Guard and Arms within. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maiden-Head against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. POlitica Sacra & Civilis, or a Model of Civil and Eccle∣siastical Government: Wherein besides the Positive Doctrine concerning State and Church in general, are de∣bated the principal Controversies of the Times, concerning the Constitution of the State and Church of England, tend∣ing to Righteousness, Peace and Truth. Octavo, By George Lawson Rector of More in the County of Salop. Mixt Essays upon Tragedies, Comedies, Italian Come∣dies, English Comedies, and Opera's to His Grace the Duke of Buckingham; Written Originally in French, by the Sieur de St. Euveremont. Bellamira, or the Mistress, a Comedy, Written by the Honourable Sir Charles Sedley Baronet. Popery, or the Principles and Position approved by the Church of Rome (when really Believed and Practised) are very dangerous to all, and to Protestant Kings and Supream Power, more especially Pernicious, and Inconsistent with that Loyalty which (by the Law of Nature and Scripture) is indispensably due to Supream Power. In a Letter to a Person of Honour, by Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Parson's Councellor, with the Lawes of Tythes and Tything in two Books; The first shewing the Order every Parson, Vicar, &c. ought to observe in obtaining a Spiri∣tual preserment, and what Duties are incumbent upon him after taking the same, and many other things necessary for every Clergy Man to know and observe. The second
shews in what manner all sorts of Tythes, Offerings, Mor∣tueries, and other Church Duties are to be paid, as well in London as elsewhere, as well by the Cannon as Com∣mon, and Statute Laws, and in what Courts and Manner they may be recover'd, what Charges they are subject to, and in any other things concerning the same necessary for Clergy Men, and all others to know: The Fourth Edition Corrected and Enlarged in many particulars thro' the whole Book, with a Table, &c. Written by Sir Simon Degge Knight. Gentlemans Jockey and Approved Farrier, Instructing in the Natures, Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses, with an exact and easie Method of Breeding, Buy∣ing, Dyeting, and otherwise ordering all sorts of Horses, as well for Common as Ordinary use; as the Heats and Course, with divers other Curiosities, Collected by long Practice, Experience and Paines of J. H. Esq; M. Hod∣son, Mr. Holled, Mr. Willis, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Holden, Thomas Empson, Mr. Roper, Mr. Medcalfe, and N. Shaw. The Eighth Edition with Additions. An Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes, together with some Animadversions upon a Book Writ by Sir Edward Herbert, late Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common-Pleas: Entituled A short Account of the Authority in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case. The Power, Jurisdiction, and Priviledge of Parliament, and the Antiquity of the House of Commons asserted, occasioned by an Information in the Kings-Bench by the Attorney General, against the Speaker of the House of Commons: As also, A Discourse concerning the Eccle∣siastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of England, occasioned by the late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes.
A Defence of the late Lord Russels Innocency by way of Answer, or Confutation of a Libellous Pamphlet Inti∣led, An Antidote against Poyson, with two Letters of the Author of this Book upon the Subject of his Lord∣ships Tryal: Together with an Argument in the great Case concerning Elections of Members to Parliament, be∣tween Sir Samuel Bernardiston Baronet Plaintiff, and Sir William Soames, Sheriff of Suffolk Defendant, in the Court of Kings-Bench, in an Action upon the Case, and after∣wards by Error sued in the Exchequer Chamber. The Lord Russel's Innocency, further defended by way of Reply to an Answer, Entituled, The Magestracy and Government of England Vindicated. These last Four Writ by Sir Robert Atkyns Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and Lord Chief Barron of Their Majesties Court of Exchequer. FINIS.
