O112 9570930 43681
Observations UPON MR. Walkers Account OF THE SIEGE of London-Derry. WITH SOME REMARKS On the Great and Memorable Actions there done. Licensed, October 4th. 1689. J. F. ENvy is the inseparable Concomitant of Great, and Brave Men; all extraordinary Perfor∣mances are attended by Obloquy, and Cen∣sure. No sooner does the prosperous Sun¦shine upon any Generous Enterprize, but Clouds of Malice, Medisance, and Detraction obscure the Glo∣ry of the Undertaking; and Love, Charity, and Respect, degenerate into Hatred, Despight, and Contempt.
It is not long since the Eyes of all England were fix'd upon the Success of London-Derry: The Pro∣testants solemnly wish'd for its Preservation, as the last Pledge of their Security, and Restitution: The Papists eagerly long'd for its Rendition, as the infalli∣ble means to complete their universal Design; and an uncontroulable Opportunity to possess Ireland, to invade Scotland, and embroyle England▪ To say no∣thing of the Protestant Interest through Europe, on which the Fate of that Place had an undoubted Aspect, and Influence. At that time, all men were prompted with a Cu∣riosity to observe, and wonder, that so mean a Place could make so Vigorous a Resistance against so terri∣ble a Siege; that a Rabble of raw un-disciplin'd men could know how to make such prosperous Sallys a∣gainst a Formidable Army, commanded by Officers of great Name. It was the Talk of every Meeting, Club, and Table; every man was inquisitive to un∣derstand who was the Commander, and Governour of that City; and when it came to be known, that Mr. Walker was the man, a thousand Questions were started about his Birth, Education, Function, and In∣clinations, all men admiring at such prodigious Ac∣tions, which no Age, nor History can parallel, and which create a Credibility even in the most impro∣bable Romances. No less liberal were they in their Applauses and Commendations, extolling his Fame in Verses and Panegyricks, publishing his Effigies in Printed Cuts, tossing his Name between Printers and Hawkers, and making it the Subject of News-Let∣ters, and Gazets; while every man, according to his Fancy, proportion'd a Reward to his un-requitable
Merits: It seem'd, as if London intended him a pub∣lick Roman Triumph, and the whole Kingdom to be Actors, or Spectators of the Cavalcade. At last he arrived; the King received him gratiously, and con∣ferred on him a Mark of His Favour, and Esteem; the Lords of the Council, and several of the Nobi∣lity caressed him with abundance of Kindness, and Respect: the Prime Citizens treated him with all the Demonstrations of Joy, and Gratitude; and the Vul∣gar even stiffed him with Gazing, Crowding, and Acclamations. Amidst this Warmth of Honour, and Satisfaction, some malignant Exhalations have been rais'd, to dar∣ken and obscure the Reputation of this most celebra∣ted Person; and invidious men have sought Inven∣tions to disparage his Veracity, and vilifie his Cre∣dit; and stirred up a Dust, which possibly may re∣verberate on the Eyes of them that caus'd it, but can with no Reason, or Justice, affect him. Mr. Walker being by his best and nearest Friends press'd to write a Narrative of the Memorable Siege of London-Derry, was with much Reluctancy per∣swaded to it, because it was impossible to emit a Suc∣cinct and exact Narration of so many various and un∣usual Adventures, without mentioning the Errours, and Miscarriages of some concern'd in that Affair on the one hand; and on the other hand, without doing Violence to his own Modesty, in becoming the He∣rauld of his own Praises. Nevertheless, out of such Notes, and Minutes, as he had by him, and set down upon the Place, he digested all matters into an orderly Account of the Siege, industriously omitting the Ho∣nour due to himself, in many particular Actions;
and passing over, or very tenderly touching upon such things as really are unaccountable, and unexcusable. So that I dare boldly say, there never was a Dis∣course of that Nature (wherein such un-exampled Occurrences, so many men of different Humours, Perswasions, and Designs, must of necessity be taken Notice of) written with so much easiness, calmness, and indifferency; and with so little Reflection. Yet after all this, the Spirit of Envy and Detra∣ction is seen in our Streets, and some men will be dissatisfied, only to gratifie their own Perverseness. One finds fault with the Form and Method of the Narrative; another cavils at the Contents and Pas∣sages in it; never considering, that the Sincerity of a true and impartial Relation will not admit of such Subterfuges of Art and Rhetorick, as are necessary to support a Fancy, or Fiction: Neither is it easie to represent a Story with such a Face of Impartiality, as the Beholder can espy no Spots, or Wrinkles in it. Some out of an incredulous Stiffness will not believe that a Person bred up in Study and Learning, con∣versant onely in Books, and accustomed to the Pul∣pit, should so wonderfully (as it were by an Enthu∣siasm of Military Skill) discharge the Part of a Ve∣terane Souldier, and a GENERAL: But it is certain beyond all Colour of a Just Contradiction, that no man ever yet perform'd so difficult a Task with more Prudence, Moderation, and Dexterity; convinceing the World by his Example, that Learn∣ing and Valour are not incompatible; that Wisdom, Sagacity, and good Conduct, accompany'd by a clean and natural Courage, are sufficient Qualifica∣tions to make a Great Commander, without the
Aid of Discipline, Exercise, and the Art of War. Others taking Notice, that Colonel Baker (who in∣deed was a brave Man, and a good Souldier) is mentioned as his Collegue in the Government; and that other Officers and Gentlemen have been Sha∣rers in the Fateigue and Dangers attending the Siege, seem to grudge and repine, that the Honour of those extraordinary Atchievements should be attributed solely to him; and judging that the Pecuniary Re∣ward presented to him, ought with more Reason to be distributed, and divided among his Fellow-Actors. I shall say nothing to derogate from those Worthy Persons, who have so commendably acted, and suf∣fered for their Religion, and Country: But when men shall coolly consider, that the Officers and Souldiers of that Garrison are the Object of the Kings especial Care, and that by continuing them in Commands, or daily Pay, they receive a Re∣compence answerable to their Merits; while Mr. Walker being by his Function uncapable of such Im∣ployments, could not depend upon a growing Sub∣sistence; they must ingeniously conclude, that His Majesty did not testifie His Acknowledgments to him with less Prudence, than Generosity: The further Effects of which, if he had not by his in∣vincible Modesty resisted, he had before this time been established in a Station of great Eminency, and considerable Profit. And howsoever the Sum may bear the Shew of a Reward proportionate to his Service: I dare aver it is far short of his very Sufferings, and will not reach to the refunding of what he has lost in his Houses and Personal Estate, by Fire, Plunder, and other Outrages done by his, and our implacable Enemies.
But all these Objections are but squibs and fluts, the extravagances of passionate and inconsiderate men, and such as are strangers to the Business, to the Place, and to Him: Hitherto, I have had no further Tryal, than to avoid the single Attacks of a particular displeasure, doubt or dissatisfaction; I am now to en∣counter a Legion; I hear a Volly of Whispers and Murmurs, and some pragmatical men would pretend to interess a whole Party; tho' I perswade my self that men so Discreet and so Judicious, will not concern themselves in such Altercations. It is observed, that in the Account given of the Siege of London-Derry, a very black Character is infixed on a Non-Conformist Preacher, pag. 21. where it is said, that Mr. Osburn was a Spy upon the whole North, imployed by my Lord Tir∣connel: that in another Place (viz. pag. 57.) where the Ministers of the Church of England are enumerated and re-counted by Pole; there is only a slight mention made of the Non-Conforming Ministers to the number of seven, but not the least hint of one of their Names. In the Vindication of this passage, I shall desire the Reader fairly and equally to consider the Occasion. Mr. Walker, when he had given an Account, that there were Eighteen Clergy-men in the Town of the Com∣munion of the Church (ascribing no more to them, than that in their turns, when they were not in Action, they had Prayers and Sermon every Day) he proceeds gentilely, and Impartially to commemorate the Carriage of the Seven Non-Conforming Ministers, giving them this En∣comium (beyond that he said of his own Brethren) that they were careful of their People, and kept them very Obedient and Quiet; and having a Design Rhetorically to enforce their Commendation, he could not more
Artificially insinuate it to their Advantage, than by marking the plain Disparity in the behaviour of their Brother Mr. Osburn, who in his Letters, Messages and Discourses, was Re∣ported to Entertain Sentiments very much different from theirs. I shall not at present say any more of Mr. Osburn, than what is already said; but I desire every man, who is not by∣assed by prejudice or prepossession, quietly to consider, whe∣ther Mr. Walker (pen't up within the Walls of London-Derry, deprived of all Information and Intelligence both of Pub∣lick Affairs, and the Actions of Private Men) seeing a Letter from a Person generally known, and an Eminent Leader of a Party, discovering an admission into the Presence of the Popish Lord Deputy (the great Engine and Operator in the ruin of Ireland) an Intimacy with him, and a Trust and Commission de∣rived from him, whereby he was directed to cajole the poor distracted and disanimated Protestants, with the Terror of Conquest, and Military Execution on the one side, in case of Opposition; and the delusion of hope to be secure under a Pro∣tection, in case of Submission, and a tame Surrender of their Arms, and Horses: I say, whether Mr. Walker, perusing this ambi∣guous Letter, and observing the pernicious Effects of it, upon the generality of the People in Ʋlster, especially those of the writers Perswasion, whereby they were influenc'd to a stupid & fatal Compliance (as if the Doctrine of Passive Obedience & Non-Resistance may be taught on fit occasions, even by such as dis∣sent from the Church of England) had not reason to suspect his Candor, and too apprehensive, and become very jealous of his Integrity: If this Argument will not suffice to justify Mr. W's. assertion (who in the whole Narrative is not provoked to fix a positive Character on any other Person but him) there may possibly be more demonstrative Proofs ready to be produced, which nothing but querulous Murmurs, sophistical Evasions, and unhandsome Reflections can Extort from him. For assu∣redly, neither he nor I retain any Inclinations, but what tend to Moderation and Unity; Earnestly wishing a perfect Agreement & Understanding among all Protestants. As to the other part of the Expostulation, why eighteen Names of the Ministers of the Communion of the Church of England should be distinctly recited; and of seven Non-Conforming Ministers
not one should be remembred; I have only this to say, that since those Gentlemen did not think it fit to joyn with Mr. Walker in the Church, and possibly their Inclinations did not dispose them to meet him upon the Walls, or accompany him in his Sallies; it is no way strange or improbable, that their Names should be altogether unknown to him; neither can he be sus∣pected purposely to over-look the naming of them, since he hath remembred them generally with so ingenious a Descrip∣tion of their Care and Concernment for their Flock. Nay, to put it out of all Doubt, and beyond the reach of Murmur it self; let it be taken Notice of (I am well assured of what I say) that when Mr. Walker gave His Majesty an Account of the Affairs of London-Derry, he Candidly and Impartially represented the Action and Service of those few Dissenters in the Garrison, and recommended them to the KINGS Fa∣vours, equally with the rest. Some Remarks upon the Great and Memorable SIEGE of London-Derry. IT is so ordinary a thing in the World, to ascribe unusual Success and Prosperity in great Undertakings, to the Super-natural Operations of Providence, that every Country, and every Religion will at some time boast their Title, and share in it. The Mahometans put in their Claim to this, as well as Christians; and the universal spreading of Popery hath presumed to inculcate that as an especial Mark of Divine Approbation, which others have look'd on, only as a Permis∣sion of Vengeance for the Sins of those who Professed the true Religion. Miracles are ceased, yet it is no solecism to call such Occurrences Miraculous, which come to pass without means, beyond hope, contrary to expectation, where no hu∣mane Art or Strength is greatly contributory; but the Finger of God is plainly visible and discernible in all the Performan∣ces, and Transactions. And that London-Derry, (and conse∣quently the Protestant Interest) hath been under the peculiar Protection of the Almighty, preserved by un-foreseen Acci∣dents, and wonderfully Delivered from their Rage who ga∣ped
for their Destructions, and presumptuously assured them∣selves of Victory: I shall endeavour to demonstrate by the few following Remarks, which serve as so many Links to compose one Chain of Miracles. 1. The inexcusable oversight of the Earl of Tirconnel, who, to super-erogate in his Zeal to serve the Late King, withdrew the whole Garrison out of London-Derry, not leaving so much as a Centinel on the Walls, or a Souldier at the Gates; nor remembring to supply that removal by a New Potent, till People were awakened by their imminent Danger, and warn'd to consult their Safety. 2. The courageous and seasonable Resolution of the Inha∣bitants of London-Derry to shut their Gates, & deny Entrance to a numerous swarm of Irish and Highland Papists, who were just ready to enter, and at such a time, when the Protestants through the Kingdom were disarmed, all Forts and Garrisons (except London-Derry) in the Hands of the Papists, the whole Army of the same cue, Mass celebrated in every Town, and no way left to give a check to the accomplishment of their Ʋn∣christian designs, & frustrating their Plot of a general Massacre; but by preserving that Place in the Hands of the Protestants. 3. The Return of the Forces under the Command of Col. Cunningham, sent to the Relief of London-Derry, without En∣tring the Place or Landing. It being morally certain, that if those Forces had Landed under the Command of Experien∣ced Officers, those brave and hardy Men, who have so signali∣zed themselves by their Valor, had been superseded from Duty, and perhaps oblig'd to take the Field; and it may without of∣fence be doubted, whether those, who were to succeed them, would have given so advantageous an account of their Actions. 4. The desertion of the Place by the then Governour, and (by his Example and Encouragement) the withdrawing of so many Gentlemen & Families into England & Scotland; whose continuance there, would quickly have consumed the Pro∣visions in the Place, & obliged them to an untimely Surrender. 5. The precipitancy and over-sight of Col▪ Luna, in de∣serting the Place, and leaving above 400 Barrels of Powder in the Magazine; which he ought not to have done, when he thought the City was not Tenable, but that very Store, thus by Providence over lookt, and left behind, hath Defended the
Place, and contributed much to the Destruction of the Enemy▪ 6. The unanimous suffrage of the People in Electing & Con∣stituting Mr. George Walker their Commander in Chief; than whom they could not have pitch'd upon a Person more com∣pleatly adapted to so caprichious an Imployment; being a Man of Exquisite Parts, having a neat Dexterity in accom∣modating the humours of the Rabble; a discreet Temper in moderating the diversity of perswasions; a prudent mana∣gery of the common Provisions; a vigilant Care in the order of Guards, Watches and Exercise; and an undaunted Cou∣rage in Leading them on to the most hazardous Enterprizes. 7. The departure of the most part of the Citizens and In∣habitants, who being unaccustomed with the dreadful Treat∣ments of War, might probably have been induced to a Treaty of Surrender, in hope to save their Lives, their Houses, and their Goods. And in their stead, the Arrival of so many Strangers from all parts of Ʋlster, of whom the Garrison was composed; who being enraged by the loss of their Estates and Goods; and being made desperate by their Con∣finement to that place, from whence there was no possibility of Retreat, or Escape; they have performed such Actions, as no Arm of Flesh would ever have atchieved, without a Di∣vine Support. 8. The Arrival of Four Hundred and Eighty Barrels of Powder, with other Amunition, and Two Thousand Arms, at such a time, when the absolute scarcity of such Provision must necessarily have oblig'd the Inhabitants to Submit to their Enemies, upon the First Investing of the Place. 9. The Retreat of the Forces from Colerain, which being a Place no way Tenable, they must have been exposed to Rout and Ruin; whereas by their admission into London-Derry, the Garrison became recruited & re-inforced by many good Men. 10. The Treacherous Proceedings of the Enemy, as that of Lieutenant General Hamilton, who having promised and agreed that he should not March the Army within Four Miles of the Town, made an orderly Approach to the Walls, during the very time of the Treaty: The Barbarous Murder of Captain Cunningham, after being taken Prisoner, and Quarter given; the Firing of an Hundred shot at Mr. Walker, when he went out upon their hanging up a White-Flag,
and their Invitation to a Treaty; their dishonourable breaking of Parol, in detaining Mr. White and two others, with their Boat, who were sent out upon the Enemies desire, that they might have leave to come to them; Lastly, The Discovery of their Oath and Resolutions not to keep Faith with the besieged, and to break whatever Articles should be made with them; which one of their Party, a Prisoner in the Town, declared upon meer Conviction of Conscience, and a Horror of their perfidious Dealings. 11. The falling of a Bomb, designed for Destruction, but by the direction of Providence, lighting in such a Place, where by tearing open the Ground, a great many Sacks of Meal were discovered, which there had been buried; upon the sight of which, the People were Encouraged to make a further search in the Back-sides and Yards, and found as much Provision as served to Supply the Garri∣son for a whole Month. The Error of the Enemies Bombar∣deir, in casting a great Bomb beyond the Walls, which falling into a Mine, where the Enemy were busie at work, destroy'd se∣veral of their own Men, and utterly frustrated that Design. 12. The many bold and successful Sallies made by a mingled Company of fresh, untrain'd, unexperienc'd Men, against an Army of Twenty Thousand well Disciplin'd, well Arm'd, well Mounted Souldiers, animated with their uninterrupted Proceedings, and confident of Reducing that poor neglected Place, by Storming or Starving; whereof you may see some Instances in Mr. Walkers Account of the Siege of London Derry, pag. 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 33, 38. And which is very admirable, in all these Rencounters, and during the whole Siege, there were not above Eighty Men of the Garrison cut off, while between Eight and Nine Thousand of the besiegers fell and perished. 13. The Proclamation set out by the Late King James, inviting all Protestants to return to their Dwellings, and remain under his Protection, had an Effect contrary to his intent, and help'd to keep London-Derry from falling into his Hands. For taking hold on this occasion, above Ten Thousand Protestants, of the most infirm, and most un∣serviceable (who yet had Mouths and Bellies) went out of the Garrison, and by that means the Provisions lasted the longer.
14. The barbarous and most inhumane driving the Pro∣testants before the Walls of London-Derry, is not only remark∣able, by their Dismission and their Escape from the Guns of the Town, which fired upon them; but that in their retreat, the Governour handsomely and undiscern'd, shuffled in among them above eight Hundred poor Protestants, Women, Children, and unserviceable Men, which in a few days must have peri∣shed in the Streets. 15. The wonderful and super-natural Courage of the very Women in the Town, who shewing no token of Fear or Dismay, appeared upon the Walls, upon every approach of the Enemy, regardless of the Bullets flying about them, running to and fro to furnish the Souldiers with Powder, and bringing Stones to supply them toward their better Resistance. 16. Nay, even Famine and Sickness contributed to the Preservation of the Place. For had it not pleased God (the Disposer of Life and Death) to take out of the World seven or eight Thousand of the besieged by such ways; the whole Number must inevitably have perished by want, or submit to the Arbitrary Terms of faithless and merciless Men. Lastly, The most opportune Relief brought to them at the very pinch of Extreamity, when they only reckoned upon two Days Life, and had only Nine lean Horses left, and among them all, but one Pint of Meal to each Man, and of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Regimented Men, only Four Thousand Three Hundred remaining; whereof at least one fourth Part was rendred un∣serviceable. The wonderful breaking or passing the Boom (which the Enemy had laid cross the River) by the Skill and Valour of Capt. Michaiah Browning, who, under God, saved London-Derry, by the loss of himself. Had these things been effected sooner, men would have been too apt to boast of themselves, to ascribe their Deliverance to the Strength, Con∣duct, and Courage of their Relievers: Whereas now it is un∣deniably Evident, that God Almighty condescended to watch over that poor City, and to Rescue that Remnant of Prote∣stants, from utter Destruction, when they were not capable to help themselves. He only did it then, & He would not do it sooner. LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1689.
