O288 13162279 98198
A Thanksgiving-Sermon, FOR Deliverance of this Kingdom FROM Popery and Arbitrary Power.
The Publisher to the Reader. THIS Sermon had been published sooner had not the Carrier ept it several Weeks in his Hands before he delivered it; yet I hope the pious Reader will not think it comes too late for publick Ʋse, when he considers the Oc∣casion and the Matter of it, and how excellently well it is managed by the Reverend Author. So great and amazing are the Providences of God towards us in England in delivering us from Popery and Arbitrary Power, by the glorious Conduct of the Prince of Orange, (now our Gratious King) that discourses of this Nature (which so well represent the Glories of this Deliverance) should never be esteemed unseasonable, and 'tis hop'd the Wisdom of the Nation will make the Duty of Thankful∣ness anniversary on this account, that so the present and future Generations may praise the Lord for his Good∣ness, and for his wonderful Works to us the Children of Men in this Island. I heartily wish our present Murmurers (commonly called Grumbletonians) would but seriously consider how conspicuously the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God appear in the late Revolutions, I think then they would be convinced (if they do not wilfully shut their Eyes against the Beams of Divine Majesty) how great their Sin is in provoking the great God at the Red-Sea, even at the Red-Sea of our Deliverance, by hankering after the Onions and Garlick of Egypt. I pray God open all our Eyes that we may know in this our Day, the things that belong to our Peace, before they be hid from us. Amen.
ENGLAND's CALL TO THANKFULNESS, FOR Her Great DELIVERANCE FROM POPERY and ARBITRARY POWER, By the Glorious Conduct of the Prince of Orange, (now King of England) in the Year 1688. In a Sermon preach'd in the Parish-Church of Almer in Dorsetshire, on February the 14th, 1688/9 By JOHN OLLIFFE, RECTOR there. LONDON; printed for Ionathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard, MDCLXXXIX.
PSALM cxxvi. ver. 3. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad. THE Design of our assembling toge∣ther at this time, is to render Thanks to Almighty God, for the late great Deliverance which he has wrought for us, from the sub∣tile and dangerous Attempts of our Popish Enemies to subvert our Government and Re∣ligion, and to implore his farther Blessing and Assi∣stance, that that may be perfected, which is so hap∣pily begun. And surely if we have been awake to take notice of things, if we have had our Eyes open to see and observe the several Transactions of Provi∣dence, which have been in our Behalf in this respect, we cannot but think this a very reasonable Service. And you will easily perceive the Words which I have read to you out of the Psalmist to be a fit Subject of my Discourse upon this occasion. This Psalm was composed, as appeareth by the subject matter of it, at the return of the Jewish Peo∣ple from Babylon, after their long and hard Bondage there; which was a Mercy of so great and strange a Nature, that it filled them with Admiration and Astonishment to consider of it, that they could scarce
believe their own Eyes and Ears in what they heard and saw, but were so surprized with it, that they thought it to be but a Dream or Delusion of their own Fancies: ver. 1. When the Lord turned again the Captivity Sion, we were like them that dream. And the Heathen were as much amazed and startled at it as they, ver. 2. For then said they among the Heathens, The Lord hath done great things for them. It was the wonder of all, that an Heathen Empe∣rour of his own free motion should set at Liberty a captive People, and send them to their own Land, a People despised and scorned of all; when it had been esteemed the Policy of all the former Kings to destroy and ruin that singular sort of Common∣wealth, that was separate from all People, that had been the great Eye-sore of all the Nations about. And this mighty Prince doth not only freely discharge them, and send them back into their own Country, but assists them in the building of their Temple, and setting up the Worship of the true God of Israel, whose Ordinances were different from all People: well might they therefore be amazed and wonder at so strange a Revolution and turn of things. And here in this verse now they ascribe and attri∣bute all to God, they own it to be his Work, though Cyrus was the Instrument; and that it was a great Work indeed, which rightly called for Joy and Thankfulness. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad. And that which the Jews here say in their Thanksgiving and Praise, I think we of this Nation have cause likewise to say at this time, viz. That the Lord hath done great things for us; and that there is justly due to him a Tribute of delightful Praise now, as there was from them then.
Let us consider therefore, I. The great Things that God hath done for us. And, II. The Praise that is due to him for the same. I. Let us consider the great Things that God hath done for us: which will appear to be great indeed, if we consider them even nakedly in themselves, and much more if they are considered in their Circum∣stances. First, The Things which God hath done for us, are very great in themselves. For it is no less, than the saving of our English Government from appa∣rent Ruin, the recovering of our Rights from Ar∣bitrary Invasions; the securing of our Liberties and Properties, and above all the preserving our Religion, which was in manifest Hazard of being undermined and destroyed, and the preventing the Massacres and Bloodshed, which probably must have attended the same. It is agreed on all hands, that the English Go∣vernment was in the way to ruin; the force of Laws, even in themselves as Laws, was enervated, and ma∣ny mortal Blows were given to the Legislative Power it self in its very Fundamentals; and the Rights of Men imbodied in Corporations, and the particular Liberties of Persons were no longer secure to any, when once they stood in Competition with Popish Designs. But this inslaving of our Bodies, and depriving us of our outward Rights was the least of those Mise∣ries that were growing upon us, and which we were
already in part groaning under: That which is worse, is the Inslaving of our Souls and Consciences, by a mighty Power, which goeth to check-mate it with Almighty God himself. This was coming on us amain, like an overflowing Deluge invading the Land. For those that think most moderately of the Administration of things before, must allow, that all that Liberty that was promised or given, was no farther intended, than as it was hoped it might be an Introduction to a more Arbitrary Invasion of our Laws, and a means of Establishment and Increase of the Romish Religion among us. And it is well known, what the Nature of that Religion is, when once it hath got the Power in its Hands, it will suffer none to stand by it, whatever Laws, Provisions, or Promises are made for the se∣curing of any other; as is apparent from the Popish Management in the Neighbour-Nation, where such a Persecution hath been set afoot, and carried on against the Protestant Party, as the Tongue of Man is not able to express, nor the Pen of any to depaint in its right Colours. And neither the Merits of that Par∣ty, nor the Edicts and Laws, that were in their Fa∣vour, could ward it off; which is an Evidence, be∣sides the many sanguinary Proceedings and bloody Massacres that have been before executed in that and other Popish Countries, what we must have look'd for when once that Religion had got the Ascendant over us, that it had been out of Fear of Danger it self: What could we then have expected, but that Prisons and Racks, Confiscation of Goods, and Fire and Sword must have been our Portion, as well as our Neighbours, having also had so many Testimonies and Marks of their Kindness to us in former Ages at home.
But we have cause to fear, that this would not on∣ly have been the end of this Religion, when once it could have come to its Growth and Establishment, which must have been a long time first, if that was to be procured by ordinary and common Me∣thods. But the fiery Zeal of our Enemies was too rapid and fierce to be contained within the ordinary Bounds of slow and usual Methods; we must have expected it to have broken out far beyond; and it is not to be doubted, but if they could have been se∣cure of their Arms at home, and of a Fleet at Sea to have served the Design, or as soon as they could have ordered the matter, that it would have been so, there should a forreign Force have then joyned with them; and we should have had Swords and Guns to have converted Protestants, which Arguments and Rea∣sons had been too dull Tools to effect: what the Poli∣ticks could not have brought about, should have been attempted by main Might. And what between the Prerogative of a bigotted Prince, the Sentence of corrupt Judges, the Colour and Favour of Laws to be procured for Popish Ser∣vice, and the Violence of an armed Force, poor Pro∣testants could have expected nothing else, but to have been ground to peices, as between so many Mil∣stones: And this was coming upon us a-pace, if our Almighty Deliverer had not procured for us a Reme∣dy in good time. And if once England had become a Prey to Popish Rage, which hath been justly esteemed the great Bulwark of the Reformation, the Protestant States abroad had not been like to subsist long, but in hu∣mane prospect of things must have undergone the same Fate.
And whose Heart would not ake then to consider the Power and Prevalence that the Romish Religion should have had, not only among us, but all Chri∣stendom over, if God had not put a stop to its rising Greatness, and beat off the Chariot Wheels, by which our Enemies did drive so fast; and in the nick of time drown the Egyptians before they could overtake his Israel? The glorious Reformation, which hath so long shined with a mighty Lustre, must then have set in obscure Darkness. And those Protestants that would still have kept the Faith and a good Consci∣ence, must have run to Caves and Holes of the Earth for Shelter, for there had been no longer any place of abode for them in the City that is set on a Hill. Then you must have been bowing your Knees to Idols again, and falling down before Stocks and Stones, or would have had such a weight of Oppressi∣ons and Cruelties laid on, that would have broke your very Backs; and if we could not admit to bear the Load of all the Popish Superstitions, we should have had a Load of another Nature, that without the Strength of Martyrs we must needs have fallen under. We must have taken the Mark of the Beast in our Foreheads, or we should hardly have bought and sold in the Markets. Then Traditions and Canons must have been our Rule, rather than the Holy Scriptures: Yea, we should not have been allowed to have believed our own Senses, nor to have made use of the most natu∣ral Right which belongs to us as rational Creatures, to have judged for our selves, but must have submitted Sense, Reason, Conscience, Scripture, and all to a pretended infallible Judge, though we know not
how he came by his Infallibility, nor can see any thing in the World that he hath to say for it, but big Words, and proud Boasts: But we must have put out our own Eyes, and yet have been forc'd to have fol∣lowed blind Guides. If we had kept the Founda∣tion, we must have had Hay and Stubble built upon it; and then if ever we had been saved, it must needs have been with the greatest Difficulty imaginable. We and our Children must have been nurtur'd up with corrupt Doctrines, and false and lying Legends, instead of being fed with the sincere Milk of the Word. You must have had half Sacraments, and Latin Prayers, that you should not have understood what you had been about; and you must have wor∣shipped a little piece of Dough for a God, conjured into a Deity by five words of the Priest, when you may have as good an one your selves in your own Cupboards. And if you could not have turned Papists throughly, then at least you must have turned Hypocrites, and dissembled before God and the World, or else a Cru∣sado of red Coats and Dragoons fit for the purpose would have tried their skill upon you. But all this and much more, which might be re∣presented, our gracious Saviour hath mercifully pre∣vented; and not only so, but we have good hopes of such an Establishment and Settlement, that all our other Grievances may be redressed likewise; and Peace and Righteousness may flourish in our Land. I have good hopes, that we shall not only be fe∣oured from the Fears of Popery and Slavery, but that we may see a long-look'd-for blessed Union among Protestants, and Religion, in its Power and Purity in good Reputation among us, that it shall be a thing
of as bad a Name to be a wicked Man, as to be a Pa∣pist. It hath been a mighty Work which hath been done already; and that will give us Encouragement to hope for more, if we thankfully accept and im∣prove that which is begun. You will all allow, that these are great things in∣deed, there being nothing that is more dear to Men, then the saving of Life, Liberty and Religion. But these great things hath God done for us in this his wonderful Dispensation at this time. Secondly, It will appear that God hath done great things for us, if we consider the Circumstances. As that it was at a time, when our Enemies were bold and confident, when they thought all things se∣cure to themselves, and past danger of miscarrying; they had the Advice and Assistance of that Society, and Order of Men, that have been cryed up in this laste Age, for being expert in all the Arts of Policy. They have been framing and laying, and turning and winding this Plot of extirpating the Northern He∣resy for a long time. The Softness and Fearfulness of the first of the two Royal Brothers was indeed some Hindrance to them: but now they had got a Prince, whose eager and fiery Spirit, animated with Popish Zeal, resolved to accomplish the Design, or himself to die a Mar∣tyr for the impious Cause. Some of them in the former Reign have been heard to say, that the Plot was laid so deep, that all the Devils in Hell were not able to hinder it. And indeed so far they were partly in the right; for then Satan should have been divided against himself, it being the Interest and Business only of that black Kingdom; but they have found there is a God
in Heaven, that hath been able to frustrate all their Designs. But they however were confident and big with Expectation of Success; and some have given out very bold Words, that we must either burn or turn, and that it were the better way to come over to them in time by Perswasion, than stay till we were com∣pelled by Force. For the Design that was laid, was the Fruit of their long and best Counsels; so that now at last they lit∣tle doubled but all would be theirs, and they began already in Imagination to divide the Spoil among themselves. Now to have all these Hopes disappoint∣ed, and to have all these Counsels disannulled, is cer∣tainly a very great thing. Then consider on the other side, that we were al∣most hopeless of finding any Remedy. A Faintness and Dispiritedness had seized the Nation; they ha∣ving been so long time used to Infringements of their Rights, to Burdens and Oppressions, that the bear∣ing of them now was almost grown natural by being common, and so became to be the more easily en∣dured. Many indeed of Superiour Quality, and of tender Resentments, could not but look on with Dis∣content, but knew not how to help. On their parts 'tis true there had not been many Converts, but what they could not get in Persons of their own Religion, they found in such as had none at all, who being therefore put in places of Ju∣dicature and Trust, would serve their Designs as well or better than their own most Religious Votaries. So that the Law was perverted to favour their side. There were Armies, and Troops to prevent Insurrecti∣ons: A great number of the best Protestants were
lulled asleep by the present Ease that they had, like Persons wearied after long Labour, and now were glad to sit down and be at rest. Others had been hamstrung with pretty uncouth Doctrines, that though they were in pain, yet had no mind to move either hand or Foot. And then above all, there was a mighty Nimrod beyond the Seas, to espouse and carry on the Project, and is one who had been long flush'd, both with Cruelty and Success. So that what could we hope, unless Help should come from the Clouds? And we had no thought of Miracles. But such indeed, and no less hath ap∣peared in these great Things, that God hath done for us. Consider again, Here is a Deliverance, sudden, unexpected, hardly thought of; so that it may be well applied, what is here said by the Jews at their Deliverance out of Captivity, we are like them that dream, when our Adversaries Confidence and our own Fears would not give us leave to hope. God hath been seen in the Mount, just when we were appointed for Sacrifice: and our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler, the Snare is broken and we are escaped. Consider moreover the manner, in what a strange and unheard-of way it hath been, as well as sudden and unhoped for. All this glorious Scene of Coun∣sels and Arts is taken down as it were in a Moment, and almost disappears. That which we have seen contriving and promoting for so long time, how soon is it unravelled! and the Work of so many Years is undone almost before you can think how.
And yet hardly any Blood spilt in the case, or but very little; when we could not have thought, but that a Sea of Blood must have flowed in upon us, be∣fore the Banks of Right and Justice could have been set up again, which were fallen down. But though our Adversaries storm and fret never so much, our Deliverance is wrought; and those whom we had cause to fear most from, as the Instru∣ments of our Mischief, come to be our Helpers, whereby the long Train of Popish Contrivances is blown away like Chaff: and the Pit which they had digged for others, they are fallen into themselves: and the proud Scorners have been filled with their own ways. Yea, our Deliverance hath been carried on farther than we could expect, even after it was begun, and we have hopes of more yet; and those things which have seemed to be Hindrances and Lets in the way, may prove the greatest Furtherances to the most hap∣py End. It is to be hoped, that all will grow wiser after all that long dear-bought Experience, which we have had of the evil of our Divisions; and that neither Party will think so hardly of one another for the time to come, as they have done. But that ways will be found out to compose our Religious Jars and Differences, that we may like Brethren live together in Unity. And then shall we become as a City com∣pact within it self; which is never in so great Dan∣ger, as from intestine Fouds and Quarrels. But now that the Mercy which we have received may be more inherent in our Apprehensions, com∣pare the Condition of our poor Brethren in other parts, and what they have suffered, whilst we are de∣livered.
We have had a Cloud over us, that hath been no bigger in Comparison than a Man's hand (though others have been gathering about) and have had but a few Drops in comparison falling upon us: whilst it hath been with them a Day of Blackness and Darkness, of Gloominess and thick Darkness; the whole Heavens have been filled with Clouds and Rain, with Storms and Tempests, so that they have not seen the Sun nor Stars for many Days; a very bitter Cup hath been wrung out to them, which we have hardly sipt of, but they have drunk the very Dregs; and who can tell, what may be the Portion of our Brethren in the Neighbour Kingdom under the same Government with our selves, who must needs be sighing still in fearful and dreadful Expecta∣tions, whilst to us it is a good Day? We have an ear∣ly Help and Salvation wrought, which they can see yet but at a Distance: And 'tis well if their Hopes can over-ballance their Fears. And must we not say then, that all this is a migh∣ty Work, and that God hath done great things for us? Long and lasting Miseries and Calamities did sorely threaten us, neither could we see any present Help at hand. But God put forth his Voice, and called back the proud Waters, that they have not prevailed over us. He hath brought us out, and hath set our Feet in a large place: Our Govern∣ment is vindicated from Tyranny and Usurpation; our Liberties and Rights rescued out of the Hands of Invaders; our Religion preserved, which we were afraid would have been lost: and we hope all will be but the more furbish'd up, and rendred brighter by those Rubs and Oppositions that it hath met with.
And must not we say, that these are great things? when the deepest Policies have been defeated; Arms and Power have been turned against the Users; a Deliverance wrought, and yet so little Effusion of Blood in the procuring of it. The Minds, Coun∣sels, and Policies of Men turned about upon a sud∣den: A mighty Revolution, and yet almost with∣out any noise: A new Face of things appears, which looks beautiful, though it be not yet fully filled up. II. Now let us consider then the Praise that is due to God for all this, for all these great Things that he hath done for us. For this Gladness, which is in our Hearts, should flow out in Praises to God; for that is the best Expression both of Gladness and Gra∣titude; which in such a case should always go toge∣ther. Oh clap your hands, all ye People, shout unto God with the Voice of Triumph. For the Lord most high is ter∣rible, he is a great King over all the Earth: Sing Praises to God, sing Praises; Sing Praises unto our King, sing Praises: God reigneth over the Heathen, God sitteth upon the Throne of his Holiness: He is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selah. And now there are these four things to be consider∣ed in that Praise, which is due from us to God at this time. 1. It is to be acknowledged and confessed by us, that it is his Work, that it is he that hath done these great Things for us, though it hath been by the Inter∣vention of Means, which he works, as he commonly doth; yet these Means are of his providing, choosing,
exciting; and become prosperous by his Assisting and Blessing; and therefore though Means are to be valued and honoured in their places, yet it is to God that the principal Tribute of Praise belongs. And in all such cases, we find that this hath been the Method of the Church, to give God the Honour. When Moses and Aaron brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Moses was an eminent Instru∣ment, he was their Counsellour and Captain, yet the Glory of the Deliverance is ascribed to God, and these were but the Means: Thou leddest thy People, like a Flock, say they, by the Hand of Moses and Aa∣ron, Psal. 77.20. So in the Victories of Deborah and Barak over Jabin and Sisera, Praise ye the Lord, say they, for the avenging of Israel, Judg 5.2. And so always, when ever any Deliverer was rais∣ed up, or any Deliverance wrought, it is observed as the Lords doing still: For this God is our God for ever and ever, Psal. 48.14. And therefore, Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O People saved of the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and the Sword of thy Excellency! And therefore thine Enemies shall be found Liers unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon their high places; as Moses speaks in his Blessing of the People, Deut. 33. ult. And this is the Churches constant Opinion and Sense of things, as appears in that Psal. 124. which is calculated for any times of Deliverance; If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel say; If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, when Men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against us: our Help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and
Earth. The like may we now say; and it is unto God therefore that we must give the Glory of all that Mercy, that we have received as the principal Au∣thor, Exciter, Promoter, & Worker of our Deliverance. And there are several Things, that do manifestly speak the Divine Counsel, and Power, and Providence to have been eminently in all this Affair, in that there hath been such a strange Concurrence of all things to bring it about to the pass that 'tis now in. As besides the more remote Providences of former Years, the present Ability and Wealth of that Neigh∣bour State, by whose Counsel and Assistance our great Deliverer under God was enabled to undertake this Enterprize, they being together embark'd in the same common Protestant Interest with our selves. And then the Concurrence of the States about in the same Design, all the Protestants expecting to un∣dergo the same Fate with us. And moreover a general Union of the Popish Go∣vernours themselves against the French Nimrod, upon whose Assistance the Popish Farty at home did build their Hopes, as from him they had derived their Counsels; and the very Winds and Elements made to conspire for the convenient Passage of the Troops that were engaged to help us. And such an Union of all Parties, that duly con∣sidered of things among our selves, either to join in with the forreign Helps, or at least not to oppose them, as hath not been known in this Nation for a great while past. For there was an Universal, either Suspicion or Discontent in all Parties against the Power, that is now fallen, for fear either of its Frauds or Violences. And it pleased God to enlighten at perswade those
that were able to do most hurt by the Arms that they were impowered with, not to concur with Usurpa∣tion and Tyranny to the Ruin of their Country, but rather to give an helping hand by an amicable Con∣junction with those that sought its Preservation. And such a wise Counsel and Conduct hath been pursued in the Affair all along; and such Shame and Guilt, such Distrust and Trembling seized upon our Adversaries, that there hath been nothing considera∣bly to stop the coming of this Matter to such a blessed Issue as we could not foresee. So that that is come to pass, which neither they did fear at first, nor we could hope. That proud and fierce Jesuit, that stood so near the Throne, hath been heard to make a mock of Provi∣dence, when in Discourse one said to him, that God in his Providence would take care to maintain that Party, that had Justice on its side: He replied scoffingly, What do you talk of Providence now a-days? But he hath found there hath been a great and wise Providence that hath over-ruled all, and hath outdone all his Counsels and Policies. And it is our parts then, to ascribe the Glory of all to this Holy and wise Providence, as being in such an eminent manner concerned in bringing all about, which we now hear and see; in putting such a Spirit of Counsel and Courage in our great Deliverer, pro∣viding sufficient Means and Assistance, and uniting all both at home and abroad to comply with the Un∣dertaking, or not to make any considerable Opposi∣tion: Surely this is the Lord's Doing, and it ought to be marvellous in our Eyes. Oh sing unto the Lord a new Song; sing unto the Lord all the Earth, Sing unto the Lord, bless his Name, and shew forth his Salvation
from day to day; For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; He is to be feared above all Gods, Honour and Ma∣jesty are before him; Strength and Beauty are in his San∣ctuary: Give unto the Lord, O ye Kindreds of the Peo∣ple, give unto the Lord Glory and Strength; Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name; bring an Offering, and come into his Courts: Say among the Heathen, that the Lord reigneth; the World also shall be established, that it shall not be moved, he shall judg the People righteously. 2. The next thing then to be considered in this Duty of Praise is, that as we acknowledg it to be God's Act, so that we acknowledg it also to be an Act of free Grace, and mere undeserved Mercy to us; so that we must every way say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be given the Glory. As our Help cometh of God, for vain else would be the Help of Man; so we must acknowledg, that it is of God's mere Mercy that we are thus delivered, and that we are not consumed: It is only because his Com∣passions fail not. This must always be remembred, as Moses also tells the Jews upon their getting the Land of Canaan, Deut. 9.4. Speak not thou in thy Heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast out these Nations from before thee, saying, For my Righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this Land: But for the Wickedness of these Nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee; Not for thy Righteousness, or for the Ʋprightness of thine Heart dost thou go to possess the Land; but for the Wickedness of these Nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee, &c. Whether it be for their Sins or no, that there hath been such a strange change and Revolution among us, I will not determine; but I am sure it is not for our Merits. For I doubt we have cause enough to lament and con∣fess with Shame and Confusion, as Ezra did the Sins of
the People of the Jews, Ezr. 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my Face to thee my God: For our Ini∣quities are increased over our Heads, and our Trespass is grown up unto the Heavens: Since the Days of our Fathers have we been in a great Trespass unto this Day. And therefore we must say as he, ver. 8. that it is all of Mercy, that we have been delivered from any Evil, that Grace hath been shewn us from the Lord our God, to leave us a Remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his Holy Place, that our God may lighten our Eyes, and give us a little reviving in our Bondage. And God hath not forsaken us, but hath ex∣tended Mercy unto us. It is all Grace and Mercy, and not Worthiness and Merit on our parts. There have been, blessed be God, many pious pray∣ing Persons amongst us, that have been earnest with God for Mercy and Settlement to the Land. But how many more are there that have been Cursers, Swearers, A∣theists and prophane Wretches, that have not had the Fear of God before their Eyes: And we may well ad∣mire, that the Oaths and Blasphemies of the many have not outcryed the Prayers of the few. Swearing is a mere Defiance of Heaven without any considerable Temptation, having nothing it it, either of Prosit or Pleasure: But yet is a Sin that hath got into all parts, into Courts and Cities, into Towns and Vil∣lages, to the Country Man at his Plow and Cart, and the Shop-keeper in his Shop, to bind every little Bargain; to bloat up a vain Discourse, and to back every giddy Passion. We have lived in an Age, wherein Hell hath been as it were let loose, and Rioting and Drunkenness, Cham∣bering and Wantonness, Luxury and Intemperance have been very fashionable Accomplishments; and Sin hath been grown downright impudent, and hath outfac'd the Sun at Noon-day. Whereas formerly, as the Apostle tells us; that they
that were drunk, were drunk in the Night, as being the proper time to conceal such Works of Darkness. Now we have had not only Night-Revellings, but Day-ex∣cesses with a witness: And whereas the Proverb used to be as drunk as a Beggar, I am sorry to say, that those of higher Quality have seemed to envy the Beggar's good Name. Sin hath taken Heart, and hath dared to show it self, and come abroad in Pomp, having had the Examples and Encouragements of Persons of all Places and Quali∣ties to countenance and back it; so that there hath obtained almost an universal Corruption of Manners. And then Uncleanness follows as the natural Consequent of all this, and is always the Companion of a loose and wicked Age. As for Divine Worship and Adoration due to the great Creator of our Beings, and our continual Preserver and Benefactor, how little hath it been regarded by most Persons and Families, and by many even on the Christian Sabbath it self? That Day which hath been set apart for Divine Service and Worship, for devout Meditations and pious Works, hath been made with ma∣ny a meer Market-day of Debauchery, the best Day that the Devil hath, and the worst day of all the Week: or else a time of meer Visit and Idleness, except what is just spent in some parts perhaps of the publick Service, and which Men have been quite weary of too: Yea how hath all that is Divine, been exposed by Men of corrupt Minds; the Holy Scripture it self burlesqued and drol∣ed at? and how hath it been the Pride and Glory of wanton Wits to dare to speak against Heaven, and to make a Scoff of Immortality: Religion hath been de∣cried in the Streets: true Seriousness and Strictness have been esteemed a Crime: Formality and a siery Zeal for particular Forms and Parties, for Ceremonies
and outward Garbs, hath been with too too many thought a sufficient Commutation for substantial Piety and good Works; to bow at the Name of Jesus, and to be zealous for Church and Liturgy, must atone with many for all manner of Debaucheries and Immoralities. And what Bitterness and Envy have been among Neighbours? How few have been clothed with Humi∣lity, or have put on Charity, which is the Bond of Per∣fectness? But hard Censures, and unjust Surmises, Slan∣ders and Backbitings, Hatred and Strife have prevailed among those that should have lived together in mutual Love and Kindness. Families and Neighbourhoods have been the Theater of unchristian Feuds: and how have those that are joined in the same Societies, rejoic'd in one anothers Falls and Miseries. Yea, Religion it self, which should have meekned and united our Hearts, hath been the very thing that our Contentions and Differences have been most about: and that Charity which should be the proper Character of Christians, as it is the very Spirit of the Gospel, hath been laid aside, as if it did not concern us, and Fury and Animosity have been taken up instead of it: It hath been thought a commendable Quality to be fierce against all, that would not entertain their Notions of things, that they could even call down for Fire from Heaven up∣on them to consume them. Mens Feet have run to Evil, and they have made haste to shed innocent Blood; their Thoughts are Thoughts of Ini∣quity; Wasting and Destruction are in their Paths; and the way of Peace have they not known. Judgment hath been turned away backward, and Justice stood afar off: Yea Truth faileth, and he that departsth from evil, hath made himself a Prey, As the Words of the Prophet are, Isa. 57.7, &c. Which of Judah's Sins have we not had among us? Yea I may say, which of Sodom's Sins? And all this in a
Land of Light, which hath been lifted up to Heaven in many Blessings and Priviledges, and which professes to receive and submit to the Holy Institutions and Rules of the Blessed Jesus, by whom sure we are taught quite other things. If the rude and barbarous Indians or Ser∣vants of some cruel or Dunghil Deity, should wallow in all Licentiousness, or should like Beasts of Prey devour and tear one another, it would be no such strange thing: For this would satisfy best the Fiends they serve. But our Saviour hath wrote us another Copy, and hath pre∣scribed us Rules of the greatest Purity, Self-Denial, Love and Condescension to one another. And this is our Profession. And therefore this must needs be a mighty Aggrava∣tion of our Crimes, and might give us a just Expecta∣tion of another sort of Treatment from the Almighty. Well might God have said to us, Ah, I will ease me of my Adversaries, and I will avenge me of my Enemies. And we might have grop'd for the Wall like the Blind, for Support and Direction, and yet might not have found it. We might have roared all like Bears, and mourned sore like Doves; and look'd for Judgment, but have found none; for Salvation, which might have been far from us. This we might surely have expected, if Providence had mea∣sured out to us in his Dispensations that which we had deserved. So that what shall we say? And is not our Deliverance then of meer Mercy? God himself hath put on the Helmet of Salvation upon his Head for us, and hath put on the Garments of Venge∣ance for Clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a Cloak: and when the Enemy was coming in like a Flood upon us, the Spi∣rit of the Lord hath lift up a Standard against him. Let us therefore say with the Psalmist, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Bene∣fits:
Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and healeth all thy Diseases. Who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction; who crowneth thee with Loving-kindness and tender Mercies. 3. But then it is likewise to be considered in this Duty of Praise, that we show our thankful Acceptance of the Mercy, by our united Studies and earnest Pray∣ers to have that perfected which is begun, and now it is come to so good a pass, that it may not meet with any thing to obstruct the desired end. If there be any Value for so great a Mercy, and if we do really carry a grateful sense of it upon our Hearts; if we would not relapse into our former Troubles and Fears, but would see a lasting Peace in our Israel, we should labour to prevent whatsoever may hinder the full Attainment of a blessed Issue, and we should with joint Endeavours and strong Cries to the God of all Counsel and Grace, do our very utmost to accomplish so glori∣ous a Work. And if we do our parts, we need not doubt, but that he who hath so mercifully given out his helping-Hand thus far, will be as ready to assist in what remains. For if he had a mind to destroy us, surely he would not have done us all this good. But we must not think to dally with Providence, and to have it even at our Beck or Command. If we play away this day of Grace, and neglect the Season, or if we divide into Fractions, and run into parties, we must not think to be saved against our Will. God hath once more put an Opportunity in our hands, wherein we may make our selves happy, if we will consider the things that make for our Peace. And if we let this pass, we do not know whether ever we may have such another. If it should at last miscarry for want of our continual united Concurrence, it will be in vain for us to pretend
an Esteem of the present Providence, or a Zeal to our Religion, when we still sacrifice the publick Good to our private Interest or unchristian Resentments. But if it should be so indeed, we can expect no other but to be the Scorn and Derision of all Nations, and the Triumph of our enraged Enemies, as we shall be really a blot to the English Name and Reformed Religion; and our Posterity after us may have too much cause to curse us for the stupidst Generation that ever was. But then, moreover, if we are truly sensible of the Greatness of the present Mercy to our selves, and if there be any Grain of Christian Charity left in us, we cannot but pity those that want it, and shall be as earnest on their Behalf, that they may partake of the like; and as the Church here prays further, that God would turn their Captivity as the Streams of the South, and that they who have sowed in Tears, may at length reap in Joy: So let us pray in the Behalf of our poor Brethren, with the deepest and most yearning Compassion. O remember not against thy Servants former Iniquities; Let thy tender Mercies speedily prevent them; for they are brought very low; Help them, O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name, and deliver them: Wherefore should the Heathen say, Where is now their God? Let him be known among the Heathen in our sight: And let the Sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, according to the Greatness of thy Power: So we thy People and Sheep of thy Pasture, will give thee Thanks for ever; we will shew forth thy Praise to all Generations. 4. The last thing that I shall mention that is to be considered in this Duty of Praise is, that we manifest the Sincerity of our Gratitude by a serious Study of A∣mendment and Reformation, that it may not repent the Lord, what he hath done for us. For after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our great Trespasses,
seeing that our God hath punished us less than our Iniqui∣ties deserve, and hath given us such Deliverance as this, should we again break his Commandments? Then saith Ezra, Wouldst not thou be angry with us, till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor escaping? Ezr. 9.13, 14. We must not think that we are therefore delivered, to work Wickedness, or that we may sin with the great∣er Boldness. God hath a Divine and Holy end in this and all his Dispensations towards us; as Luke 1.69. He hath raised up an Horn of Salvation for us, that we be∣ing delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve him without Fear in Righteousness and Holiness before him all the Days of our Lives. We must not think that we are delivered from Pope∣ry to serve our own Lusts; which is every whit as dan∣gerous an Idolatry, as to bow to dumb Images, and to serve Stocks and Stones. We must not think that we are saved from Errours in our Faith and Doctrine, that we may have worse in our Lives. For there is no such Errour and Heresy in the World, as a bad Life and a wicked Heart. And we must not think, that our Liberties and Pro∣perties are preserved, that we may revel more with them in Wantonness and Excess. If our Laws and Go∣vernment are preserved, yet that will little avail us, if we do not govern our selves well, and our own Affecti∣ons and Passions. It is not the saving of our Laws will save us, if we are lawless in our own Spirits. If we are secured from outward Tyranny, what will that signify, if our Sins and Corruptions within do still tyrannize over us? the World or Sin in our Hearts will be a worse Tyrant to us, than ever any Prince that could sit upon the Throne. The Pope or French King could never hurt us, as our own evil Affections can.
It had been better a thousand times, that our Bodies had been hack'd and massacred at the command of furious Jesuits, or that we had been Slaves for ever to the most cruel Lords, if thereby our Virtue and Innocency might have been preserved, than that we should be the Devils Martyrs, or be living Slaves to the World and Flesh. It is a Reformation, that God intends in what he hath done for us; and that is it therefore, which we should also intend. Let not our Deliverance lull us asleep in Security. For if we do not make that Divine and Holy use of it as we ought, God can quickly turn his Hand upon us in Fury. And though one In∣strument be gone, he can quickly sind out another to punish us; or he can easily make us a Punishment to our selves, if he should but suffer an evil Spirit of Division and Discord to seize upon us. God hath Axes and Hammers enough at command, that he can make use of to chastise us, if yet all he hath done, doth us no good. As we sind in the History of the Judges, that when the People corrupted themselves after their Deliverance, God soon raised up other Enemies, that a long time kept them in hard Bondage, till they repented themselves of their Sins, and then the Lord heard their Groanings, and saved them. Jer. 7. 8. Ye trust▪ in lying Words, that cannot profit, if ye think you may sin securely, and because of presnt Mercies that yet shall be henceforth out of Danger: Will ye steal, murder and commit Adultery, and swear falsly, &c. And come and stand before me in this House, which is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these Aborninations? No. But go ye unto my place, which is at Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the Wickedness of my People Israel. So what Calamities and Miseries have befallen other Churches and Countries, and how can you but expect the like, if you do not take warning by their Falls. Thus saith the Lord of Hists. The God of Israel amend your Ways and your Doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. We are told by the Psalmist, Psal. 33.12. That blessed is the Nation wh hath the Lord for their God, and blessed is the People whom he hath chosen for his Inheritance. For if God be for us, who can be against us? If the Eternal God will be our Refuge, and will but put under the everlasting Arms, who is he that can hurt us? So that the greatest thing we can do towards our own Happiness, is to engage the mighty God to be on our side, and to secure his gracious and blessed Presence, that it may be ever with us. But then for this we must see, that we depart from all Iniquity;
for he is not a God that hath Pleasure in Wickedness, neither can Evil dwell with him: We must see that we walk before him, and be perfect: For his Eyes run to and fro, to show himself strong in the Behalf of them that walk uprightly; then he will be with us, and save us, and he will never leave us, nor forsake us, if we keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. We have plainly seen, that the Lord's hand is not shortned, that it cannot save; neither is his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear; and he is the same God yesterday, to day, and for ever. But let us see, that we do not at last provoke him to leave us by our Sins; let us see that our Iniquities do not separate between us and our God. He seemed for our Sins to threaten us sore, and to write bitter things against us; but he hath not yet done his Work, his strange Work; he hath not brought to pass his Act, his strange Act. As the Work of Judgment is called, because he is slow to anger; Isa. 28.21. Let us see, that we do not provoke him by our Sins to re∣turn upon us in Fury. It seems as if our gracious God had had a Dispute with himself, not to do with us as once he had about the People of Israel, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My Heart is turned within me; my Repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the Fierceness of mine Anger; I will not return to destroy Ephraim: For I am God, and not Man, the Holy one in the midst of thee. So that at length Mercy hath prevailed over Judgment, and we are saved as it is this Day. And now shall not the Goodness of God lead us to Repentance? shall we no better improve, but basely despise the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering? should we still continue to walk after our Hardness and impenitent Heart? What would this be, but to treasure up to our selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, which yet we may expect, if we should continue to do wickedly? It is prophesied of Mount Sion, Obad. 17. That upon Sion shall be Deliverance, and there shall be Holiness, and then the House of Jacob shall possess their Possessions. Why should it not be so with us? Why should not Deliverance and Holiness go together? And then might we hope, that we should dwell in a peaceable Habitati∣on, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet resting places. And, Surely if ever any Nation had cause to love and serve the great and Holy God, we ought to think our selves under the strictest
Obligations in the World to do so. For (as Moses once said to the Jews) What Nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? What Nation is there so great, that hath Statutes and Judgments so righteous? And what Nation is there that hath had so great Communications of Light and Love, as we have had? How early were the Thoughts of God for good to us in the days of our Fore-fathers for many Generations past? How soon did the Sun of Righteousness arise upon this Ionesom Isle, this ulti∣ma Thule, at the Ends of the Earth, and the day-spring from on high did visit us, when many other Nations for a long time sat in Darkness and saw no Light? How soon had Christianity here a legal Establishment, and the supream Authority and Power embrac'd and encouraged it, when in other places our Holy Religion was frowned at, and persecuted by those that should have been nursing-Fathers and nursing-Mo∣thers to it? And when for the Negligence and Sins of its Professours, a long Night of Darkness had overtaken us, as it had also in most other Churches, yet now blessed be God, for a good while this Night hath been spent, and the Lustre of Divine Truth hath gloriously arisen again and shone upon us. And when in many other places this blessed Reformation hath continually had the Powers of the Earth contesting against it, so that it could never get into the Throne; here it was begun at first, and hath been carried on and protected by publick Consti∣tutions, by our Princes and Laws: so that the Profession of that Religion that hath been a matter of great Trouble and Difficulty to others, because of the Discountenance and Oppositions it hath met with from those in Authority, hath been hardly a Virtue to us, who have had the Laws and Authority to encourage us to em∣brace it, whereby it hath become as well our Interest, as our Duty. And notwithstanding all the repeated Designs, the deep and close Combinations of our Enemies to overturn, overturn, over∣turn all again, yet how little have they been able to prevail? He that sitteth in the Heavens hath laugh'd, the Lord hath had them in Derision. The Archers have sorely grieved, and have shot at us, and hated us, but our Bow hath abode in Strength, and the Arms of our Hands have been made strong, by the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob, who hath helped us and blessed us.
We have had the Blessings of Heaven above, and the Blessings of the deep that lieth under; we have had the Blessings of the Breast and of the Womb; we have had the upper and nether Springs; and our Blessings have prevailed above the Blessings of our Progenitours. And the Lord hath still established us an Holy People unto himself, that all the Earth may see, that we are called by his Name. We have been a Nation, that hath flowed with Riches, Wealth and Honour; so that we have been both the Admiration and Envy of many about us. We have wanted nothing; we have had Plen∣ty of all things; we have had Glory and Power; we have been able to help our Friends, and have not feared our Enemies. Now indeed we were almost fallen, had not our Almighty De∣liverer graciously prevented us, and found out help for us, who used to have the Honour in that kind to give, and not to receive. But now if after all this Kindness that hath been showed us, if after all this that hath been done for us, we should sin against him, and should cast his Commandments behind our Backs, what Tongue were able to express our Ingratitude? Surely God hath planted us a Noble Vine, and in a very fruitful Hill. And never was any Vineyard so fenc'd, and secured, and watched over, as we have been by our careful Protectour. In a Word, What could have been done more for us, than what God hath done for us? But now when he look'd, that we should bring forth Grapes, have we not brought forth wild Grapes? Hath not our Vine been degenerated, and become as the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields of Gomorrah? And have not our Grapes been Grapes of Gall, and our Wine the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps? Therefore may we not wonder, that God hath not taken away his Hedg that was about us, and laid us waste? As he threatned once to do to the Jews for the like reason, Isai. 5. But now he is pleased to wait a while longer upon us; but if after all, we do not answer his La∣bour and Cost, let us look to our selves. He is prevailed upon by the Prayers of his Servants, as we find it in the Parable of the barren Fig-tree, to try us a while longer, Luke 13.8, 9. Lord, let it alone this Year also, till I shall dig about it and dung it; And if it bear Fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shalt cut it down. Our Fruitfulness under our Mercies must prevent our Ruin. We find in the Epistle, that was written to the Church of Ephe∣sus, Rev. 2.1, &c. that though that Church had suffered much for their Profession, and was free from those gross Corruptions that had insected other Churches by the Errours of the Nicolai∣tans,
Yet I have somewhat against thee, saith our Saviour, Because thou hast left thy first Love; and for that he is much displeased: Re∣member therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, saith he, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. But we are not only fallen from our first Love, but have been grown greatly corrupt. We have quite lost our Fore-Fathers Zeal, and instead of being better by our former means, we are become worse and worse. The old English Gravi∣ty and Seriousness is gone, and we have strived to out do the deeds of the Wicked. And yet we are spared and delivered. God threatned to spue out of his Mouth the Church of the La∣odiceans, for being neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.15. And surely if Lukewarmness in Religion be such a Provocation, 'tis a wonder that this had not been our Lot. We have been hot indeed, where we should have been cold; hot in our Wickedness, Uncharitable∣ness and unbrotherly Carriage; but in true Godliness, Love and doing good to Men we have seemed to be as if there were neither Life nor Soul in us. And as was said to the Church of Sardis, Have we not also had a Name to live, and yet are dead? Surely at best our Works have not been perfect before God. And there he threatned to come on them, as a Thief, if they did not watch, so that they should not know n what Hour he would come upon them. This is partly true of us now; he hath come on us indeed like a Thief, as to the Sudden∣ness of it; but it hath not been to kill and destroy; but in one Hour, as it were is all this Salvation unexpectedly wrought: Surely we have seen strange things to day. And now considering his wonderful Grace and Kindness to us, together with our former Sins and Ingratitude; 'tis high time for s to awake to Repentance, and to give up our selves to him in an Holy intire Obedience. We must repent then of our past Wickedness, and set up a present Reformation, that our Mercies may be lasting to us, and may be intailed upon the Generations to come. We had need all of us mourn, every Family apart; the Family of the House of Da∣vid, and the Family of the House of Nathan, and the Family of the House of Levi, and the Family of Shimei. And it doth not at all an become the Solemnity of this Day, when we are returning Thanks for Mercies, yet bitterly to bewail our Sins, which inhance the Greatness of God's Mercy to us, and might have justly made us to have expected other things. And O that God would be pleased
to pour out a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication upon all Flesh among us for that End! But we must not only reflect with Sorrow upon times past, our chief Work is yet to come. And that is, that we labour for a tho∣row and National Reformation; which though we that are in pri∣vate Capacities cannot do much to, yet we should labour to do what we can; that as we have contributed to the national Guilt, by our Omissions and evil Practices and Examples, so now we may by the same ways promote a National Repentance: And what we cannot do our selves, let us help by our devout and earnest Prayers at the Throne of Grace, that Holiness beginning at the Throne, may flow down through all the Channels of Office and Magistracy to the meanest Person of the Land. Let not Holiness suffer for the Miscarriages of some of its Pro∣fessours. But let Piety come into Reputation again; and let it be an Honour to Men to be as good as may be; which would soon be, if all in high place would publickly own and defend it. We have good Laws already, that all agree in, for the suppressing of all Irreligion and Immorality: There is no party can have the Face to desire and beg a Toleration here. Let these be put into Execution; and let Vice be outfac'd, that hath been so bold and impudent among us so long. If Men will rant and damn, and swear and be drunk, let them do it in Corners; but let them not dare to appear abroad to infect others by their pestilent Breath. If Men will dare to affront God, and commit Villanies and Excess, let them be stigmatized, and let a Mark be set upon them, that they may become the Observation and Scorn of all, if they forfeit Pity by their Irreclaimableness. If Men will not become truly religious, yet however they ought to be kept from abusing Religion. There is no civiliz'd Nation, but hath always thought Religion and Vertue its greatest Honour and Interest. Atheists themselves will allow that 'tis convenient for the publick Good. And there∣fore those that decry and discourage it, or give Countenance to Irreligion and Sin, ought to be accounted the very Pests of Man∣kind, and are really the worst of Traitors and Enemies, that any State can have: And the greatest Kindness therefore that we can show to our Native Country, is, by becoming truly religious and good. This is the way to engage God on our side, to prevent the Miscarrying of that Deliverance at last, that hath had so blessed a Beginning, and to obtain a Blessing upon the publick Counsels and Endeavours, and doth in its own Nature tend to promote the Honour, the Quiet, and the Happiness of the Land.
If Parents would be religious in educating their Children, and would but take as much Pains to instruct and nurture them up in the Knowledg of God, as they do teach them any Arts and Sciences. If rich Men and Gentlemen would be religious, and there▪ by influence their poor Neighbours to like and practise the same. If publick Officers would be religious, and restrain Sin, as they might, by their Example and Authority. If they that teach others to be religious, would be truly religious themselves, and become Examples of it to the Flock, then we should soon have as it were new Heavens and a new Earth; and if we would but thus do our Duty to God and our Neighbour, we may be sure he will not fail to pour down his Blessings upon us. Let us therefore all consider our ways; and as now we rejoice and are glad at the great and strange things that God hath done for us, let us see that we make a grateful Return to God of a sui∣table Obedience; let Religion be our Study in all its parts; let us keep his Sabbaths, and observe his Ordinances; let us read and study his Word to this end that we may be better, and let our De∣light be in the Law of the Lord; let us tremble at his Name, and do his Will; let us fly from Sin, and mortify our Lusts; let us par∣ticularly see that we remember the new Commandment of our bles∣sed Saviour, that we love one another, and that we live together as Brethren: Let us consider, that Religion doth not consist in Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. And let this our Sion be filled with Judgment and Righteousness: And Oh that Wisdom and Knowledg may be the Stability of our times and Strength of our Salvation, and that the Fear of the Lord may be our Treasure: Then the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever; then Violence shall no more be heard in our Land, nor Wasting and Destruction in all our Bor∣ders; but we shall call our Walls Salvation, and our Gates Praise. And the Lord shall be unto us an everlasting Light, and our God, our Glory. The Sun shall no more go down, neither shall the Moon with∣draw her self: For the Lord shall be our everlasting Light, and the Days of our Mourning shall be ended. FINIS.
Books lately Printed and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Pauls Church-yard, relating to the great Revolutions and Affairs in England, 1688, 1689. AN Account of the Reasons of the Nobility and Gentry's Invitation of the Prince of Orange into England; Being a Memorial from the English Pro∣testants concerning their Grievances; with a large Account of the Birth of the Prince of Wales: presented to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange. A Collection of Political and Historical Papers relating to the Present, Juncture of Affairs in England, in eleven Parts; which will be Continued from Time to Time, according as Matter occurs. A Brief History of the Succession of the Crown of England, &c. Collected out of the Records, and the most Authentick Historians; written for the Satis∣faction of the Nation. Wonderful Predictions of Nostredamus, Grebner, David Pareus, and Autonius Torquatus; wherein the Grandeur of their Present Majesties, the Happiness of England, and Downfall of France and Rome are plainly Delineated. With a large Preface, shewing, That the Crown of England, has not been obscurely foretold to their Majesties William the 3d, and Queen Mary, late Prince and Princess of Orange; and that the People of this Ancient Monarchy have duly contributed thereunto, in the present Assembly of Lords and Commons, notwithstanding the Objections of Men of different Extremes. Julian's Arts to Undermine and Extirpate Christianity, &c. By Samuel Johnson. The Impression of which Book was made in the Year 1683, and has ever since in buried under the Ruins of all those English Rights which it endeavoured to defend; but by the Auspicious and Happy Arrival of the Prince of Orange, both They and It have obtained a Resurrection. The Mystery of Iniquity working in the Dividing of Protestants, in order to the subverting of Religion, and our Laws, for almost the space of thirty Years last past, plainly laid open. With some Advices to Protestants of all Perswasions, in the present Juncture of our Affairs. To which is added, A Specimen of a Bill for uniting of Protestants. Liberty of Conscience now highly necessary for England, humbly represented to this present Parliament. A Friendly Debate between Dr. Kingsman, a dissatisfied Clergy-man, and Gratia∣nus Trimmer, a Neighbour Minister, concerning the late Thanksgiving-Day; the Prince's Descent into England; the Nobility and Gentries joining with him; the Acts of the Honourable Convention; the Nature of our English Government; e Secret League with France; the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, &c. With some Considerations on Bishop Sanderson and Dr. Falkner, about Monarchy, th, &c. Written for the Satisfaction of some of the Clergy, and others that  under Scruples. By a Minister of the Church of England. reproved, in a Sermon on 1 Cor. 10.10. By Mr. Hopkins.
