p138 13084354 97280
Tears Wip'd off, OR THE SECOND ESSAY OF THE QUAKERS BY WAY OF POETRY: Occasioned by the CORONATION of JAMES and MARY. Written in the sincerity of the Spirit, By W. P. a Servant to the Light. SOund loud ye Trumpets, now the Spirit move! Of JAMES and MARY's Coronation speak: Yea—let it be the boundless sp'rit of Love, That doth all discord in a Land forsake. Therefore prepare your well-tun'd Instruments, To Awe the minds of all our Male-contents; Joyn Holy Davids Harp, ye Loyal Quire, To greet wise SOLOMON our New Crown'd King, Stifle, with Heavenly Joy, Rebellions Fire, And Songs of Triumph always to Him Sing. Consider how Wise JAMES hath harras'd been By Murd'ring Swearers; such ungodly Men As would in JAMES, kill Charles the First agen.
Eccho ye Heav'ns! and pow'rfull Lights display, To make more great Thy Coronation Day; Amazing all that dare such Truth gain-say. For we have now the fullness of the Light, Who long (like sullen Jews) were veil'd in Night; But, for the time to come, for Thee we'll Fight: Yea—girt a Carnal Weapon to our side, To Chastize him shall Thee O King Deride. Joash was sav'd from Athaliahs Rage, And by Jehojada the Priest was Crown'd, Which in Judeah then was just presage, Plentiful Peace should mightily abound. JAMES, now the only Ruler of this Land, Was long preserv'd from Plotters Murd'ring hand; Both of Achitophel's and Belials Band. What Mighty Joy ought we thy Friends to show, That still we have Thee JAMES, our King below. Inspire me now Thou mighty Sp'rit of Truth, That in some Measure we may here set forth The Gracious Blessings we enjoy in JAMES, Whom all the World with us aloud Proclames. Had that Corrupted Senate Charles o'reswaid, To push thee JAMES besides thy Lawful Throne, All Thy whole Land had been to Blood betray'd; Conqu'ring for Thee, that sits in Peace thereon. We therefore wish that disobedient Crew May see their errour, and for Pardon sue: And we will Learn, — that Anthems we may Sing With Hymns of Joy, for Second JAMES our King. I do confess I've heard Phanatick slaves Sorry that Thee O King escap'st with Life, (Where many in the Ocean found their Graves) When that great Ship struck on the Sandy shelf. But Heav'n (that has a more than common care Of such as Thee, who his Vicegerents are) Secur'd Thee from the Surges of the Sea, That thou might'st healer of our Breaches be.
Foreseeing then, this days Solemnity: That since no Monarch from the Grave is free, We should Great JAMES rejoyce in Sacred Thee: And (though unusual) shout our praise to Heav'n, That has a King so Potent to us giv'n. One that hath David's Valour and Success, Solomon's Wisdom, Hezekiah's Grace; And may Thy Reign with Theirs take equal place. Yea, let the Prophets Pray'r 'gainst wicked Men, Which Psalm the Hundred and Ninth doth plainly speak, Be all Thy Enemies reward and gain; Nay more, the mark of, Cain upon 'em break. Not, but Thy Frown will Awe Thy worst of Foes, And then Thy Smiles will make 'em crouch with shame, But Thy Word past is ev'ry Mans repose; Nay, he that doubts and knows Thee, wants a Name. All this, and more, than we can e're hold forth, Or words can frame, O King, in Thee is found; Time wants a President to shew thy worth, Yea, Languages a stile, and sense a sound. In all the Holy Writ we do not find Where to compare Thy Consort equally, As Ruth to Boaz, the same constant mind, MARY to JAMES; but greater the degree. In ev'ry trouble which Thou bar'st from Men, Whose Faith in things invisible did ly; How then was MARY, with a face Serene, Partner in all Thy worst extremity? When strange Commissions never seen nor Read, Arm'd with Black Bills in Spanish Pilgrims hands; When Truth Invisible with Oates did plead, Purbeck Invaders did infest our Lands: Thou JAMES with MARY now our present Queen, Did'st Reign secure, as on the Throne thoud'st been, Beauty and Honour still did guard Thee then.
MARY to either fitly is compar'd, Because in goodness something they agree, But we from Truth will never be debar'd; For there's between 'em Inequality: Which must with MARY's Crown be now put on, The best of Queens that ever Grac'd a Throne. Zadock the Priest the Holy Oyl has us'd, The sight was gratefull to thy Servants—King; We have the Temple of the Lord abus'd; Now, we rejoyce to hear 'em shout and Sing. Yea, then I said! how have we gone astray? Misled by Darkness from the Light of Day; Then thus for JAMES and MARY did I Pray. That God would great Increase unto 'em give That a Long Race of Kings might them survive; That from their Loyns a Prince of Wales may come, To Conquer Foes abroad; win them at home: That here, not one disloyal Heart may be; But all might own and bless this Monarchy. Let Thy great Act of Grace those people free Whose Light was Dim, for now the Sun they See; But let Plot-Vouchers grace the Triple Tree. We unacquainted are with mighty show, But if our sense of this Thou wilt allow, We could dispence had it been greater now. We foolish faults had, JAMES, and not a few; But 'mongst the Kings the Bible doth afford, More than their greatest Glory is Thy due; For a Kings Splendour speaks him like his word. We ne're shall Poets for Description grow, We leave all that to Authors that bestow On Kings their Talent, and Usurpers too. Walk with the People, and the Rebels guide; And then the Godlike Royal ones deride: Though now they fa and flatter on their side. We say, Preserve thee JAMES, thy CONSORT so, From such Time-servers, bowing but for show, We from Great Natures Light are Loyal now. FINIS. LONDON, Printed by J. P. for Henry Playford, near the Temple-Church: 1685.
