P1465AA 99829843 34288
A COLLECTION OF SOME Brave ACTIONS AND Memorable SAYINGS OF King Henry the Great. Writ in French by the Bishop of Rodez, as a Supplement to the History of that King, formerly publish'd by the same Author. Done into English. Licensed, June 6. 1688. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Bell over against the Middle Temple-Gate, near Temple-Bar, 1688.
Advertisement. THE Glorious Name of Henry the Great is suf∣ficient to recommend to the the Public any thing concern∣ing him. Nor is it the least of those Glories which Crown his Memory, that not only the most Christian King now reigning in France is his Grandson, but also our own most Gracious Sovereign King James II. whose true and live∣ly Character we may read in what is here said of his Grand∣father
King Henry IV. This Collection of that famous Prince's Words and Actions I find Printed at the end of the French Edition of his Life, and writ by the same Author, Hardovin de Perefixe, Bishop of Rodez; tho it seems it has not been hitherto rendred in∣to our Language. Certainly the Remarks here collected are worthy the Applause of all Nations, and the Imitation of the greatest and bravest of Men. As he was not inferi∣our (except only in time) to the best of those Heroes of Antiquity, whose Actions and
Sayings Plutarch hath with great Industry collected, so are these Particulars of his Life no less worthy of Ob∣servation. But I will detain the Reader no longer from perusing the Author, premi∣sing only, that the Bishop of Rodez was formerly Preceptor to his Present Majesty of France, King Lewis XIV, and the occasion of his making these Collections, he hath suf∣ficiently set forth in his Epi∣stle Dedicatory to that King, as follows.
TO THE KING. SIRE, WHEN I observed your Majesties Care and De∣light in reading the Summary of the Life of Henry the Great to have given your Majesty some Sa∣tisfaction, and caused so great Joy in all France, who saw her King follow such glorious Exam∣ples, I thought my self obliged to add thereunto this little Collection,
which I have made of the bra∣vest Actions, and the most me∣morable Sayings of that August Monarch; That so the Picture which I have already presented to your Majesty may appear more finisht and perfect. In effect, Sire, these par∣ticulars do represent the Interior of his Soul, and express his Ge∣nius and his Inclinations more lively than all that has been said in the most glorious part of his History; and discovering to us the bottom of his Heart and Spi∣rit, they at the same time make us see that this generous Prince was such within, as he appeared without; and that he was not at
all like those who have nothing good but the Exterior, and who disguise dangerous Vices under beautiful Appearances. But, Sire, it must necessarily be acknowledg∣ed, that you have made a much better Picture of him in your Person and Conduct, beyond the performance of all the Pencils and Pens of the World. Further let me add, that in regard your Ma∣jesty is not displeased that I have the Honour to be near your Per∣son, and that thereby I have the Joy to see such great and glorious Actions at so little distance, I find my self engaged to commit them to writing, that so I may one day
attest them to all Europe, and to Posterity. I believe that when the Public shall see the History which I design to give them, they will confess, that the Parallel of your Majesty with Henry the Great will be most just, and that even the Glory of the Grandfather will receive new Splendor from that of his Grandson. I shall be at no trouble to invent any Artifice, or false Ornaments, to embelish the Work: I shall not need to employ therein any thing but Candour, and the simple Truth; and if I have any Reproach to fear, it will be that I have said less than Renown it self has pub∣lisht.
In effect, Sire, seeing that so noble Ayr, and that profound Wisdom with which your Majesty proceeds, I dare boldly, and with∣out Flattery fore-tell, that your Heroic Vertues will in a little time surpass those of Augustus, of Charlemagne, and of Henry the Great; and I hope also that, the Favours of Heaven continu∣ing, I shall see your Glory and your Posterity to equal the Desires which I daily make with that Zeal which ought to appear in, SIRE Of your Majesty, The most humble, most obedi∣ent, most faithful, and most obliged Servant and Subject, Hardovin B. of Rodez.
A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN Brave ACTIONS AND Memorable SAYINGS OF King Henry the Great. IT would be a Task mighty painful, and without end, to him who aims to express eve∣ry thing that's Brave in the Life of Henry the Great. More than Fifty Historians, and above Five Hun
Panegyrists, Poets, and Orators have endeavour'd it, and yet have not exprest half what the Subject affords. Amidst so great variety, we collect here some Flowers, not the most beautiful, perhaps, but however, such as please best; and we will put them together with∣out Art and Order; the Confusion of pleasing Objects having its pro∣per Beauty as well as the best Me∣thod. Some have observ'd that this Great King excell'd the Emperor Augustus in Goodness and Mercy; and that, like him, after a long Intestine War, he closed up the Wounds of the State, allay'd the Tempest that disturb'd it, and re∣stor'd the Force of the Laws, the Authority of the Magistrate, and the Discipline of his Soldiers.
Many also have compared the begining of his Reign to that of David for the great Revolutions that exercis'd his Courage: The Middle, to that of Solomon for the Order and Beauty of his Govern∣ment, and for the Plenty and Riches which he procured to his Kingdom: And his mournful End to that of Josias. Three of the best and most religious Kings that ever Govern'd God's People. Others have put him in parallel with Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Empire; with Alexander the Great, with the Emperors Con∣stantine I. Charlemagne, Otho, and Henry IV. Certain it is, there is not one of these Princes to whom he may not be equall'd, and, per∣haps, in some particulars he much excells.
It is a curious Observation, that never any Prince arriv'd to the Suc∣cession of a Crown, at so great a distance from it; nor ever saw so many Princes of the Blood die be∣fore him. But it is a more important Remarque, that never King of France united so many fair Possessi∣ons into his Dominion as he. He only, brought more Additions to the Crown, than Philip de Valois, Lewis XII. and Francis I. who all, like him, were of the collateral Line. He annext that part which was left him of the Kingdom of Na∣varre, the Soveraignty of Bearn, the Dutchies of Alanson, Vendosme, Albert, Beaumont, Vicomte, I know not how many rich Counties, Foix, Armagnac, Bigorre, Rovergue, Pe∣igord, la Fere, Marle, Soissons, Li∣moges,
Conversan, and so many o∣ther Lands, that to name them would be troublesom. It is easie to say what was the most prevailing Passion of this Prince, but not which was the greatest of his Vertues; for he had them almost all in the highest degree. As to his Courage and Warlike Vertue, it would be per∣adventure impossible to find any Sovereign Prince, nay even any Captain, who ever shewed it on so many occasions. It is reported of the Emperor Henry IV. that he had been in Threescore and Two Battels, or eminent Combats; but our Henry had signaliz'd his He∣roick Valour in Four or Five pitcht Battels, more than a Hundred Bloody Combats, and in Two Hundred Sieges. Before the Death
of Henry III. had call'd him to the Crown of France, he had defend∣ed himself against Seven Wars, which he concluded happily in Se∣ven Treaties of Peace; and in these Wars, at divers times, and in divers places, he has had Four or Five Armies upon him, having no good assurance to trust in but his own proper Vertue to support so great a Weight. From the Age of Fifteen Years, at which time he first put on his Arms, he bore them continually to the Age of Forty Five. In all occasions he was as forward in Danger as any one of his Captains. He was wounded two or three times, but slightly. However it was not Rashness, nor only the desire of Glory that engaged him in such Hazards, but Necessity. It
concern'd him to shew an Exam∣ple to his Soldiers: The Fortune of France, and his own, was re∣duc'd to that Condition, that Ho∣nour oblig'd him either to con∣quer or die; otherwise he had not exposed himself in such sort as he did: For he was not ignorant that a King, whose Affairs are in Peace, ought to preserve himself for the Love of his Subjects, to whom he ows himself more than to himself. He was so generous as to cause Vitry the Captain of his Guards to receive the Man who had wound∣ed him at the Battle of Aumale. The Mareschal d'Estrees being one day with him in his Coach, and his Guard marching by to their Post, he shewed him the Man, saying, Behold there the Soldier that wound∣ed me at the Battle of Aumale. Re∣ally
this was a most Heroique Action. He never feared Death in what∣soever posture she presented her self to him, whether in the Field, or in Bed. He was often heard to say, That he yielded himself with an entire Submission to the Di∣vine Providence, and that he should never have either Fear or Regret, when it should please God to call him. He went to a Fight with a Cou∣rage truly Martial, and with a brave Resolution, but without Va∣nity. After a Victory he express'd less Joy, than before the Encoun∣ter: For (as he express'd himself) he could not rejoyce to see so ma∣ny French-men, his Subjects, lye dead on the place, and that the Gain which he made from that
Action could not be without a Loss. He was wondrous active. He was himself personally in all his Enterprises. He apply'd himself entirely to what he undertook; and never went about any thing of which he had not a perfect Knowledge, and had fore-seen all the means by which he might ex∣pect to be successful, or obstructed. He had always an attentive Eye to the Execution of what he com∣manded, and oftentimes made him∣self one of the Party. Thus he found few Enterprises that he did not go through, and few Obstacles that he did not fore-cast; in such manner, that it. was not without just Reason that he took for his Device a Hercules, the Conquerour of Monsters, with these words, Invia Virtuti nulla est via.
He judg'd wonderfully of the Designs of his Enemies; and often foreseeing what they would under∣take, he gave out such Orders as secur'd his Army, and caused the greatest of his Captains to say, That they were beholden to him for their safety, and that he, ha∣ving a Soul more elevated, saw further than any of them. His Promptitude was no less than his Judgment. The Duke of Parma having observ'd with what celerity he acted, said of him, That other Generals made War like Ly∣ons and Wild Boars, Beasts of the Earth, but the King like a Flying Eagle. He was continually on Horseback, which was the occasi∣on that they said of him, that he wore out more Boots than Shooes,
and that he was less time in Bed than the Duke of Mayenne at Table. He used to say, That the great Feasters and the great Sleepers were not capable of any great A∣ction: And that a Soul, which sleep∣ing and eating had overwhelm'd in a Mass of Fat, could not have any noble and generous Motions. If he loved Feasts and good Cheer, it was not for filling his Belly, but only for the refreshing his Spirit, and rejoycing himself. He was no Bigot, but truly pi∣ous and Christian. He had very good Sentiments of the Majesty and infinite Goodness of God. It was his Saying, That he trembled with Fear, and that he became less than an Atome, when he be∣held
himself in the Presence of such an Almighty Power, who has raised all things from nothing, and who could reduce them again to the same Original, by withdraw∣ing his Almighty Hand: But that he felt himself transported with un∣utterable Joy, when he contem∣plates, that his Sovereign Good∣ness protects all Men under his Wings, as his Children; and more especially Kings, to whom he communicates his Power of do∣ing good to other Men. After his Conversion, he had always a very great respect for the Holy See, and shewed himself its Defender with no less Zeal than his Ancestors: And also exprest a strong and lively Faith for the Re∣ality of Christ's Body in the Eu∣charist.
Passing one Day in a Street near the Lonvre, he met a Priest carry∣ing the Holy Sacrament; He cast himself immediately upon his Knees, and adored with mighty respect. The Duke of Sully, a Hugnenot, who was then with him, demanded, Sir, Is it possible that you can believe in this after the things which I have seen? The King an∣swered, Yes, by the Living God, I believe; and he must be a Mad-man who believes not: I would willingly lose a Finger, that you also believed as I do. He also employed all Gentle Means to draw along with him all his Subjects into the Bosom of the Church, in such sort, as he was the cause of bringing in of more than Threescore Thousand Souls.
But he would never use any Vio∣lence for this end, as the Leaguers desired; nay, he despised those who became Converts for any temporal Interest. When he prayed, he kneel'd up∣on both Knees, his Hands joyned, and his Eyes lift up to Heaven; his Prayers were not long, but fer∣vent: Through the whole Course of his Life he never undertook any thing, but first he implored the Assistance of God, and com∣mitted the event into his hands. It is but a few days since I was infor∣med by a Person of great Quality, who did usually accompany the King in his Huntings, that he never dislodged a Deer, but that he put off his Hat, and made the Sign of the Cross, and then set Spurs to his Horse, and away after the Chase.
He had read and studied the Holy Scriptures, and took great delight to hear them explained; and would often in his Discourse bring Examples from thence. While he was yet a Huguenot, he had an Honour for the Prelates and Ecclesiastics, tho they were his severest Persecutors; and that the most of them, instead of re∣ducing him by fair means into the Sheep-fold, did what possibly they could to expel him still further, and shut the Gate against him. Here-establisht the exercise of the Catholique Religion in more than three hundred Cities and Towns, where it had not been suffer'd of Thirty years before. What shall I say of so many Churches which
he Re-built, and of so many Hos∣pitals which he Founded? among others that of S. Lewis near Paris, for those who have the Plague, one of the most Beautiful Structures that adorn that great City; and that of the Brothers de la Charitie in the Fauxbourg St. Germain; It was his Credit that preserved the Holy Sepulchre of Christ in Je∣rusalem, which the Turks were about to demolish, and caused the Cordeliers, who were the Guardi∣ans of that place, to be released, whom the Barbarians had put in Irons; and obtain'd the Grand Seigniors permission to build a House for the Fathers Jesuits in the Suburbs of Constantinople. Homer calls Justice one of the Counsellors of Jupiter. One may say more truly that she was so to
Henry the Great. If we may be∣lieve his greatest Confident, he did often protest both in Public and Private, that he did not at all de∣sire the Goods of others unjustly; that he sought nothing but his own; and that God had given him a Kingdom great enough for his satisfaction, were it not that his Providence did permit some∣thing else. We may also perceive plainly, that in the great design which he had to divide Christiani∣ty into Fifteen Dominions, he took not one Foot of Land to himself; so far did he renounce his just Pre∣tensions to the Kingdom of Na∣varre. Never was Prince more punctu∣al than he in the Payment of his Debts. We need but see his Let∣ters to the Duke of Sully his Sur∣intendent,
in which he often com∣manded him to pay even what he lost at play. One of the Projects which he endeavour'd with the greatest Ar∣dour to effect, was the retrench∣ing the exorbitant length, and vex∣atious Tricks of the Proceedings at Law; almost every time that his Chancellour, and Achilles de Harlay, his first President, came to wait on him, he would still con∣jure them to find out some means, whereby his People might not be any longer tormented by this Ink∣horn War, sometimes more ruin ous than that of two Armies. He could not see without aver∣sion, Prelates of an ill Life, and corrupt Judges. He used to say of the first, I would willingly do
what they Preach, but they little think that I know what they them∣selves are. And of the other, I cannot comprehend how People should be so wicked, as to judge against their Knowledge and Con∣science. He had always an open Ear for the Party accused. He never suf∣fer'd himself to be engaged with prejudice, nor ever judged of any person before he was throughly inform'd. Thus honest men had always the greatest advantage with him. He said, That to reign well, a King should not do all that he can do. A Sentiment very like that of the Great Emperour Justinian, Recorded in these words, Truly Royal, and Worthy to be Writ in
Letters of Gold, Digna Vox est Majestate Regnantis, Subditum se legibus profiteri. You may see here the reason why this wise King did not think it any diminution of his Authority to hear the Remonstrances of his Subjects, and his Courts of Justice. He debated their Reasons with themselves, and with his Council, and sometimes thought it honou∣rable to change his Resolutions when he perceived it any way for the better, or where, possibly, he had been deceived, knowing well, that there is no Man in the World so intelligent, and of so clear a Judgment, but that he may fail through Passion or Ignorance. But when he found, that the motives which he had to order any thing, were more prevalent and just than
the others, he would be obey'd strictly; and used to say to his So∣vereign Courts, that his own In∣telligence and Experience could not suffer their Contradictions. He said sometimes, that God did him the favour in his Old Age to let him go twice or thrice a Week to the Parliament, and to the Chamber of Accounts, as the good King Lewis XII used to do; There to shorten Proceedings, and to put his Revenue in such good order, that in the future it might not be Wasted. Such ought to be his latter Walks. He was easily induced to grant his Pardons, where the Offence was not horrible; for in such cases he stood firm to the utmost Seve∣rity.
Thus at one time he answer'd a person who begg'd the Abolition of an excess committed upon some Officers of Justice; I have but two Eyes and two Feet; in what then do I differ from the rest of my Subjects, if I have not the power of Justice in my Disposal? Yet at another time he told a Person of Quality, who besought him for a Pardon for his Nephew, who had kill'd a Man; I am sorry that I cannot grant your Request; it becomes you to behave your self like an Unkle, and me, as a King; I excuse your Petition, do you ex∣cuse my Denyal. He did passionately affect Glo∣ry and Reputation, as all great Souls have done, and was extream
sensible both of the Good and Bad which People said of him. But he could not relish those Praises which were not cordial; and was not at all pleased to be praised to his Face, nor by such People who were not praise-worthy themselves. For this Reason, altho he esteem∣ed those whom he thought good Historians, taking delight to dis∣course with them, and inform 'em of what he had done, allowing them great Pensions; yet did he despise all little Scriblers who were uncapable to eternize his Name. In this he was like Alexander the Great, who forbid all Painters to attempt his Picture, but only A∣pelles, whose Pencil might in some sort equal his own Renown. He did him a great Displeasure who concealed the Truth from
him; he desir'd to know the Truth in all things: But above all, none could oblige him more, than to let him know what People said of him; for he desir'd to know his own Faults, that so he might re∣form them; however, he was not pleased that any should tell him of these matters otherwise than in private. But so, he received their Advice kindly; he would thank them, and encourage such who had taken that Liberty to continue it upon the like occasions. This is the only way by which a Prince can make himself perfect, know all things, and never be de∣ceived. Never was any Prince a more Religious Observer of his Faith and Promise, than he. Accord∣ing to that excellent Saying of
King John, That if Faith were lost in the World, she ought to be sought for, and found in the Mouth of Kings. Of this we have ob∣serv'd many Examples in his Life: Among others, that concerning the Duke of Savoy: But in regard this was wonderfully brave; it will be good to insert here what hath been already writ by D'Au∣bigné, a Person the more credible in this, in regard he hath not bin over favourable to this Prince in other matters: Two Ancient Counsellors of State, says he, gave him strange Advice, which was to detain the Duke, and break that safe Conduct which he had given him, whom they accu∣sed of having often broke his Agree∣ments, when to his Advantage: By this means, say they, the King may recover the Marquisat of Salures,
save much Time and Treasure, and the Lives of many French Soldiers. But the King answered, I brought this Principle into the World with me, and I have learnt it from those who nursed me, that the Observation of my Faith is of greater Advantage than any thing that Perfidy can pro∣mise. I have the Example of King Francis, who might by Treachery have kept a greater Prize, I mean Charles V. but would not. If the Duke of Savoy hath violated his Promise, yet the imitation of ano∣thers Fault is a Crime, and the best use that a King can make of the Per∣fidy of his Enemies, is to advance thereby the Lustre and Value of his own Faith and Integrity. Where can any Man find a better Lesson, and more generous Sentiments?
Tho he loved Discourse, and understood Railery as well as any Gentleman of his Court, yet he hated all Detractors and Detra∣ctions; and if at any time he spoke ill of any Man, it was certainly of such an one who was notoriously known to be a Bad Man; and for such he thought it a piece of Ju∣stice to decry them, and discover to the whole World what sort of People they were. Witness what he said to Biron concerning Laffin; His faithful Servants had always this Advantage, that the ill Offi∣ces of such Men could never make any impression against them in his Mind. Without such a Judgment in a Prince, things would go very ill at Court; and it would be im∣possible for honest Men to defend themselves from Parasites and Knaves.
He did infinitely favour his No∣bility and Gentry, and held it a great Glory to be the Head of that illustrious Body. When he spoke of the several Blessings which God had bestowed upon him, he esteem∣ed it above all, that he had a Train of Four Thousand Gentlemen to attend him, able to encounter the greatest Army that could be rais'd against him. A Spanish Ambassa∣dor did once acknowledge to him, That he was surprized to see what a number of Gentlemen were con∣tinually about him, and did even crowd him up: The King an∣swered, If you had but seen me in a Fight, they crowd me up then much more. He behaved himself to the Courtiers with great Familiarity,
and desired that they might use the same to him, provided they did not lose the respect which was due to his Person; and if any was wanting in that, he was assuredly made sensible of his Fault. Some there are who would insi∣nuate, that he did not love Men of Learning, but they are much deceived. He allow'd Pensions to many Scholars, even in Italy and Germany, and took care himself that they should receive them. The Cardinal du Perron, de Sponde, Sca∣liger, Casaubon, Fresne, Canaye, and many others have testifyed the esteem which he had for Learn∣ing. 'Tis also a great Error to believe that he was altogether unlearned himself. It is true, he was not ex∣treamly
knowing; but it is as true, that he was not ignorant in any hing that was necessary for a King to know. He understood a little Latin. He had much studyed History, as well that of France, as the Greek and Roman, and the Hi∣story of the Bible. He knew as well the Theory as Practice of the Politicks, Moralality, and OEco∣nomicks. He learnt the Art Mili∣tary from the Books of that Sub∣ject, at the same time when he ex∣ercis'd the Practice. And he had by heart many excellent Sentences taken from Ancient Authors, which he used to apply so very pertinent∣ly, that his Teachers were astonisht. He resolved at his return from Ger∣many to reform the University of Paris, and to found there four or five Colleges to teach freely, and among the rest, one where there
should be a Revenue for the Edu∣cating of Three Hundred Gentle∣men, without the least Expence to their Parents. He was not, indeed, liberal even to profuseness, as the Princes of the House of Valois had been before him. But if he was sparing in his Expences, it was because he would spare the Substance of his poor People; and that he thought it not just to vex whole Provinces to enrich particular Persons. After all he was so just, and payed so well, that none could ever say that he retain'd the Sallery or Reward of those who had served him. He gave away every year in good Sil∣ver, not in Bills and Papers, above Three Millions of Livers, which he bestowed and distributed among a great number of People. Was not
this very much for those times? He was at some times hasty and passionate to his best Servants, but it pass'd over in a moment; and he was not ashamed, if they were Persons of Quality and Merit, to make them his Excuse. You may remember what he did on this oc∣casion to Theodoric de Schomberg at the Battel of Yury. An easie Freedom, Trust, and Facility of Conversation was natu∣ral to him. In the time of War he hath been seen to make himself a Camrade to Common Soldiers, to sit down at the Corps de Gard, and lay himself upon a Mattress, to hold in one hand à piece of Camp-Bisket, which he would eat, while with a Coal in the other he would draw out and design a Camp and Trench∣es.
He would himself take a Pick∣ax, and dig, to encourage the Sol∣diers to work. He would comfort poor People during the War, and convince them, that it was not he, but the League that was the cause of all their Miseries. Afterwards, in the time of Peace, he would make himself familiar with the most inferiour Persons: He would suddenly slip a way from his Company, and mingle himself (unknown) among Country Peo∣ple, and Tradesmen in Inns, to whom he would put a hundred Questions to sift out of them that which he knew none was bold enough to tell him bare-fac'd, and to discover the Oppressions which they lay under, whether it were from the Violence of Gentlemen, the Extortions of the Officers of
his Revenues and Taxes, or the corrupt Decrees of wicked Judges. When he had learnt from them what he sought for, he would re∣turn again to his Courtiers, who were sometimes not a little trou∣bled in his Absence to know what was become of him. It was upon one of these occa∣sions, that an inferiour Tradesman, but a Man of Good Sense, convin∣ced him, that the Paulete, or An∣nual Right, was an Invention high∣ly prejudicial both to King and People. Another time being in an Inn at Milly in Gastinois, and ha∣ving put certain people there into a Discourse of his Life, there was one who said a thousand good things of him, but concluded thus, He loves Women too much, God punishes Adulterers, it is to be
feared that in the end he will not let it pass, having endured so long. These Words sunk so deep in his Heart, that he confess'd never any Preacher toucht him so sensibly. Another time being extream hungry in hunting, he came to an Inn on the High-way, and set him∣self down at Table with a Com∣pany of Tradesmen; where ha∣ving dined, they began to talk of him, (they knew him not, for his Apparel was always plain.) A cer∣tain Fellow that dealt in Hogs cry'd, Never speak of that, the Cask will always smell of the Herring. A while after the King standing at the Window, saw several Lords who rode about to find him; these seeing the King, came up present∣ly to the Chamber: The Hog-Merchant hearing them call him
Sire, and your Majesty, without doubt was sufficiently astonisht, and wisht heartily that he had never spoke those foolish Words. But the King stepping from the place where he stood, stroke him gently on the Arm, saying, Honest Man, the Cask will always smell of the Herring; but this ought to be applyed to you, and not to me: I am, I praise God, a good Catholick, but you keep still the old Leaven of the League. In what Terms ought we to speak of his good Humour and Clemency, to express them wor∣thily? One may say that he was all Heart, and that he had no Gall. Of so many Conspirators that did their endeavour to embroyl the Kingdom, 'tis observed, that he never Executed any but the Ma∣reschal de Biron, to whom, before
he delivered him over to Justice, he offer'd his pardon, three seve∣ral times, in case he would but ac∣knowledge his Offence. In all his Wars, when he saw his Enemies give Ground, and just put to the Rout, did he not use to ride up to the Head of his Bataillions, crying, Save the French, Quarter to the French. In time of Peace he al∣ways preserved his Hands clean from the Bloud of his Subjects; although in his Wars, he never re∣turn'd from a Fight with his Sword unstain'd in the Bloud of his Ene∣mies. Like a good Shepherd, who en∣deavours to Cure those of his Flock that are infected, rather than cut their Throats. He used all patience, obliging Actions, and
Address, to recover those whom the Faction had infected. He dis∣sembled the knowledg of their ill Will, and in spite of their Endea∣vours he hindred them from do∣ing Evil, and converted them to good. A wise King, said he, is like an able Apothecary, who of the worst of Poysons composes excellent Antidotes, and of Vipers makes Trea∣cle. Above all these excellent Qua∣lities, we ought to place the un∣speakable Love and Tenderness which he had for his People. He affected nothing more passionate∣ly than to pleasure them, and to make them live at peace and ease. To this purpose was his most or∣dinary Discourse. We may see an infinite number of his Letters to the Governours of Provinces, to
his Sur-intendants, and to his Par∣liaments, containing these Expressi∣ons, Take Care of my People, they are my Children, God has given them to my Care, and I am responsible; and such like Words, full of Ar∣dour, and a most cordial and pa∣ternal Goodness. When the Duke of Savoy came to Paris, the King took him one day to see'em play at Tennis, in the Fauxbourg St. Germain; after the Sport was over, as they were stand∣ing together at the Window that open'd to the Street; the Duke see∣ing a mighty Concourse of people, told him, He could never sufficiently admire the Beauty and Opulence of France, and askt his Majesty what the Revenue might be worth to him. This Prince generous and ready in his Repartees, answered, It is worth what I please. The Duke
finding this Answer evasive, prest him to tell him precisely what France yielded him. The King replyed, Yes indeed, what I please; for having the Heart of my People, I have all that I desire: And if God gives me but Life, I will cause that there shall not be a Labourer in my. Kingdom, but he shall be able, if he pleases, to have a Hen in his Pot eve∣ry day. Adding, And if they have not so at present, it is because I am forced to maintain so many Soldiers to reduce all those to reason, who would choak my Authority. The Duke re∣plyed not a word more, but re∣main'd satisfy'd with the Answer. Certain Troops that he sent into Germany, having committed some Disorders in Champagne, and plun∣dered some of the Peasant's Hou∣ses, he told the Captains that re∣main'd
behind in Paris: Depart in speed, and take Orders about this bu∣siness, or you shall answer for it. What! if they ruine my People that nourish me, who shall maintain the Charges of the Government; and who shall pay your Pensions, Gentlemen? Living God! He that takes from my People, takes from me. The Inhabitants of the Vally which runs along the River Loire, having been great Sufferers by the over∣flowing of that River, besought to be eased of the Taxes, and to that purpose writ to the Duke of Sully, Sur-intendant of the Finan∣ces, who presently made their Re∣quest known to the King by Let∣ter, who answer'd in these pathe∣tical Expressions; As to that about the great Flouds, God has given me my Subjects to preserve them as my
Children; Let my Council treat them with Charity; Alms are most pleasing to God, especially upon this occasion: I have a Tender Conscience; let them then have all the Assistance that you think I can afford them. After this can we wonder if this Prince was adored by all the World? The best Mark of the Goodness of a Sovereign Prince, and the streight Band which ought to be always between him and his Sub∣jects, is, the Care which he hath to communicate to them his own Joys, and the part which they take in those Joys, not only by outward appearances, which are extreamly deceitful, and which they afford as well to bad as good Princes; but also by the inward motions, and by the Sentiments of the Heart.
From the first entry that this true Father of the French made in∣to Paris, and when his Goodness began to be known there, all the Inhabitants of that little Word were always concern'd for what∣ever happen'd to him, and were as much affected with it, as if it had happened to themselves: They re∣joyced at his Contentments, and sorrowed at his Displeasure. Both the times he was sick, it seemed as if the people of that Great City had been in a Fever: On the con∣trary, he was no sooner well a∣gain, but his Health became theirs, and they believed that the Health of the Kingdom, and that of their Prince was the same thing. In like manner, when God had sent him any cause of Joy, he desir'd that they might partake of it; and to
that purpose he would make it known to them in the kindest man∣ner imaginable. Thus when Hea∣ven had given him a Dauphin, he caused him to be carry'd tho∣rough the Streets in an open Cra∣dle, that the People might be∣hold him at their ease, and enjoy the pleasure of the sight of that Blessing which they had so long desired for the love of the Father. I will here also observe some of his memorable Sayings, some of which discover the Sentiments, and very bottom of his Soul, as others the quickness of his Wit. At such times as he was taken up in pressing Affairs, so that he could not assist at Mass, (I mean upon the Worky-days, for upon Holy∣days and Sundays he never fail'd)
he used, by way of excuse, to say to the Prelates, who were then at Court; When I am employed for the Publick, methinks I leave God for God himself. Sometimes he used to say to his Confidents, and most intimate of his Servants, The French do not know me sufficiently; they will know bet∣ter, when they have lost me, what I am worth. Then lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, Lord, I am ready to depart this World when you please, but what will become of this poor People? When any advised him to be more careful of the preservation of his Person than he used to be, and not to go so often alone, or so slenderly accompanyed, as his cu∣stom was, he would answer, Fear ought not to be admitted into a Royal
Breast: He that fears Death, will never attempt any thing upon me; and he that despises his own Life, may be always Master of mine, in spight of a thousand Guards. I com∣mit my self to God when I rise, and when I lie down, I am in his Hands; after all, I live in such a manner, that I ought not to distrust; it belongs to Tyrants to stand continually in Fear. The Duke of Orleans, his second Son, being extream sick, and at the point of Death, he declared, That if he should die, he would not have any go about to comfort him, for he had entirely resign'd himself to the Will of God. Within two or three years after his coming to Paris, all the Sub∣urbs, which were old ruinous Hou∣ses,
were repaired; and the parti∣cular and publick Buildings, which he rais'd in that great City, made it become more Beautiful than e∣ver. The Spanish Ambassadors that came thither to swear the Treaty of Vervins, were astonished to be∣hold it in so good a Condition, and so different from what it was in the War, insomuch, that they told him one day, Sir, Here's a City mightily chang'd from what it was when we saw it last. Do not admire at that, (said he) when the Master is not at home, all is in dis∣order; but when he returns to his House, his Presence becomes its Or∣nament, and all things there feel the Advantage. He was in very great streights at the beginning of his Reign, in such manner, that he was heard to say,
That he seemed once a King without a Kingdom, a Husband without a Wife, and a Warriour without Mony: But since that God had shewn him so great Blessings, as to give him his Ar∣senal, he might boast that he had there wherewith to Arm Fifty Thousand Men with all sorts of Munition, and in the Bastile (which is near the other) wherewith to pay them for three Years. He said, That he had crost the Imaginations of three sorts of Peo∣ple; The Huguenots, who thought he would be always of their Reli∣gion: The Leaguers, who hoped he would not suffer himself to be converted: And the third Party, who believed he would never be married to a second Wife: I have deceived them all three, said he, I have left the Huguenot Opinions, I
am become a good Catholique, I am married again, and I have Children that shall succeed me, if God pleases. He said also, That when he first came to the Crown, he found three Parties; that he had united all three into one, without any Terms of distinction; that he was the King of these, as well as those; that he believed them all equally affected to his Service, but that it belonged to him to make the Difference, and to chuse those that he thought most capa∣ble. Nerestan, a very gallant Gentle∣man, having raised him a Regi∣ment, and as he protested that he desired no recompense, but only the Glory to serve him: The King Replyed, Good Subjects ought to speak as you do; they ought to forget
their Services, but it belongs to the Prince to remember them; and if he desires that they should continue faith∣ful, he ought to be just and acknow∣ledging. The Huguenots requiring of him some places of security, he told them, I am the only Security of my Subjects, I never yet broke my Faith with any. And when they reply∣ed, That King Henry III. had given them such. The Times then, said he, were such, that made him fear you, and not love you; but as for me, I love you, and fear you not. Some have made him give the same Answer to other Persons. They told him one Day of a certain Captain, who had been of the League, and was really a very gallant Man; but tho he had been
pardoned by him, and had ob∣tained from his Favour many other Benefits, yet for all this he loved him not at all; I will, said the King, do him so many good Offices, that I will force him to love me whe∣ther he will or no. 'Twas thus that this Prince used to gain back the greatest Revolters. And he was used to say to those who admired at such Proceedings, That a Man catches more Flies with one spoonful of Honey, than twenty Tun of Vi∣neger. But as Policy obliged him to do thus to those who loved him not, so his Generosity caused him al∣ways to grant an easie Pardon to those who humbly sought it by Submission. And he had often that excellent Verse of Virgil in his Mouth: Parcere Subjectis, & Debellare Superbos.
He jeer'd those extremely who pass the Bounds of their Profession, and meddle with those things that do not belong to their Science. A Bishop one Day discoursing of Mar∣tial Affairs very ill-favouredly, he turn'd from the Cock to the Ass, as the Saying is, and askt him, To what Saint does the Office of that day belong in your Breviary? At another time his own Taylor having printed a little Book of cer∣tain Orders, which he thought ne∣cessary for the Public Good, and presenting it to the King, he took it, laughing, and having run over some Pages, he called to one of his Valets de Chambre; Go, says he, fetch hether my Chancellor, to make me a new Suit, since you see here my Taylor has undertook to make Orders for Government.
A Gentleman of Provence having purchased at a dear Rate a Presi∣dents place, for which he was fain to borrow Mony; being come to wait upon the King, he said softly to a Lord that was near him, Be∣hold here a good Judge; I doubt not but he will discharge the Duty that he owes very honestly, in a small time. A Famous Physician being con∣verted from Huguenotism to the Catholique Religion, he said to Sully, My Friend, your Religion is desperately sick, the Physicians have given it over. The Huguenots of Poictou and Zaintonge, having sent to him cer∣tain Deputies to request some Suc∣cours, soon after his Conversion, he bid them, Apply your selves to my
Sister, your Government is now fallen to Distaff; that Princess remain∣ing still a Huguenot. The Queen making a Ball in the first Year after her Marriage, for which she made choice of Fifteen of the most Beautiful and best qua∣lified Ladies of the Court, he said thus to the Nuncio, Sir, I never beheld a more Beautiful Squadron, nor in all my Wars one more danger∣ous than this. A certain Lord, who had a long time stood Neuter during the trou∣bles, and took part with neither side, coming to him one time in∣to the Room where he was play∣ing at Cards, he call'd to him thus: Come, Sir, you are welcom, if we win, you shall be on our side.
A Lady of Condition, but very old and dry, being come to a Court-Ball, in a green Dress, he told her merrily, That he was much obliged to her, for having reconciled Verdure and Driness to honour the Company. A Spanish Embassador saying by way of Menace, that the King his Master would maintain such an Action at the Head of an Hundred Thousand Men; He replyed anger∣ly, You deceive your self, they are not Men in Spain, but Shadows. Once; when the Prevost de Mer∣chands, and the Eschevins came to demand of him his permission for the raising a small Imposition upon the Water-pipes in Paris, towards the defraying the Expences of the
Entertainment of Forty Swisse De∣puties lately arrived there for the renewing the Allyance, he an∣swered, Find some other expedient, it belongs only to our Lord to change Water into Wine. Behold here a small part of the renowned Actions, and memora∣ble Sayings of Henry the Great There is an infinite number of o∣thers which are graved in immor∣tal Characters in the Hearts of all good French-men, who pass them from Father to Son, through all Posterity, to serve for a Model to Sovereign Princes, who aim (as they ought) to reign happily, and measure their Power by the Rules, of Goodness and Justice. FINIS.
