P1834 12578904 63680
THE PETITION OF THE Roman Catholicks TO THE RUMP-PARLIAMENT. Published by the Care of M. M. For general Satisfaction. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Collins, at the Kings-Arms in Ludgate-street. 1673.
To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. The Humble Petition of the Roman Catholicks. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners have long waited some happy lea∣sure, when there might be a Hearing allowed them of their many sad Pressures, the Weight whereof hath sunk them so ruinously low, That they are utterly disabled to discharge their many Debts, make the least Provision for their Children, or Releive themselves, reduced to extream necessities. That even such of your Petitioners, as are Sequestred for Delinquency, Have still comforted their Sorrows with this Hope, That at last they should certainly be received to Mer∣cy, since the General Votes for Composition of the 17th of March, 1648. seem clearly to imply them capable thereof, when the Rules concerning them should be agreed upon.
That now the Wisdom of the Parliament, applying it self to establish the People of this Commonwealth in a quiet and setled Condition, Your Petitioners take up an hum∣ble confidence that they alone shall not be ex∣cluded from so Ʋniversal a Benefit. And therefore humbly pray, That the Laws and Proceedings concerning them may be taken into Consideration, and such Clemency and Compassion used towards them by Composition, or otherwise, as in the Judgment of this Honorable House may consist with the Publick Peace, and your Petitioners comfortable living in their Native Countrey. And they further humbly pray, That it would please the Parliament to vouchsafe them the Permission of Clearing their Reli∣gion, from whatsoever may be incon∣sistent with Government, Which will assuredly be done to full satisfaction, If there may be a Committee appointed by this Honorable House, on whom they may have the Priviledge to attend. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c.
