P2218A 10594855 45329
A FULL RELATION Of the taking of ROCHE CASTLE, Together with St. Patricks Cathedral, A place of great strength, wherein were put to the Sword Seven hundred Rebels, and many Priests and Friers. AS ALSO The taking in of many other places, all which was performed by the Army under the Command of the Lord INCHIQƲIN, Lord Pre∣sident of the Province of Munster in Ireland. SENT In a Letter from Colonel Alexander Pigot to a Commander of note in this City. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Tuckey at the Black-spred Eagle in Fleet-street, 1647.
Noble Sir, BY this opportunity of your Brothers go∣ing over, I could not omit to let you know some particulars of the proceed∣ings of this Army, and of the successes that it hath pleased God to give us, since we mar∣ched against the City of Cashel: On the 12. of September the Soldiers Garrisoned in that City, being terrified with the sudden taking of Chair Castle (a place of very great strength, and im∣portance on the River of Sewer) and with the storming of Roches Castle upon that River, and putting the Warders to the sword, being 50. in number, and with the burning of much corn, and divers Towns thereabouts, they deserted the City, and retreated to the great Rock adjoyn∣ing, whereon the Cathedral Church (called St. Patricks) is scituated, being a large and stately Pile, and the Church yard fortified. In this Church and Church-yard they had six full Companies of Foot, and divers Townsmen and Gentlemen, in all 800. or there abouts, be∣sides women and children, and all the goods they could in so short a time get together, con∣ceiving they were able to make it good against any opposition, that could be made against it.
My Lord president gave order for the summon∣ing of it, and upon consideration of the strength of the place, and of our want of bread, and want of convenient means for storming the place, the Counsel of War resolved to grant quarter unto them with bag and baggage, if they would by an hour surrender, which they refused, and stood on very high terms, but soon after propounded other terms which my Lord refused to accept, and willed the Drum, and two Offi∣cers that came with him to return, for that not one man of them should come forth alive, and declared unto us his will to storm the place, though it seemed a very difficult work; whereup∣on Sir William Bridges, Major Wearden, and other horse Officers, cheerfully offered to unmount their men, and joyn with the Foot in storming the place, and both Horse and Foot were very willing to proceed therein, preparations being made with all possible diligence: on the 15 day of September, my Lord gave command, and we began the storm; Sir William Bridges led up a∣bove 150. unmounted men with their swords and pistols, four Majors of Foot led up 200. a piece as a Forlorn hope to each post, and were seconded by four Lieut. Colonels, with 300. men a piece, and the Lord President marched up with the body of the Army, with their Colors flying, and Drums beating: the remainder of the horse (for the incouragement of the Foot) marching up within half Musket shot of the Rock. We fell on about three of the clock, and
in an hour we were absolute matters of it, having but eight men slain in the service, besides almost an hundred hurt, whereof it was my fortune to be one, having received a thrust with a pike be∣hinde my right ear, but I give God thanks I am well recovered of it, and so are most of the rest, though they were sorely bruised by the throw∣ing of stones from the wall before we could en∣ter; we made almost all their pikes unserviceable by cutting off their heads. In the Church we killed above 700. men, whereof many were Priests and Friers, besides some women that pe∣rished in the action: I am confident so many men were not seen slain in so small a compass of ground these many years; they lay five or six deep in many places, not one Officer or Soldier escaped, but one Major and the Governor, who as I hear is since dead of his wounds: before the Storm began, divers of the prime gentry being come upon license to speak with my Lord about rendring some other places, my Lord caused them to stand by, and see the storming perform∣ed, which you must think was to them no plea∣sant object: as soon as this was done the Sol∣diers fell to plundering, and many of them got good store of booty, among which were divers Pictures, Copes, Chalices and Vestments of the Priests, and the Mitre of the Titulary Archbi∣shop (who was lately fled to the supream Counsel leaving his Coach behinde him) 600 Arms, good store of Powder, and also divers Colors with the Sword and Maces of the Mayor of the City,
and some of the Aldermens Gowns that were brought to this City on the Soldiers backs, and here sold. In the Church was found a Letter of the Lord Taffe General of the Rebels forces to incourage Lieut. Colonel Butler their Governor to hold out, taking the place to be impregnable. I may not omit to tell you that the Rebels cal∣led on St. Patrick for help all the time of the storm and before, and some of them rung the bels in a very doleful tune, which our Soldiers told them was their knell, and so it proved, and divers of the Town and Country told us after∣wards, that they would never trust St. Patrick more. Before the storm we understood by ma∣ny in the Town that on new years day 1644. the Citizens of Cashel murdered 120. Protestants whom they had kept in a dungeon to the knees in dirt a moneth before because of their Religion onely, which is now paid home to them by the Providence of God. From hence my Lord President sent a strong party and entred the walled Town of Fethard, six miles distant, and having sent the Foot home to refresh them, sent from these parts a strong party of horse under the command of Sir Wil∣liam Bridges into the County of Kilkenny with directions to do what spoil, and to bring away what cattel he could. Sir William Bridges preten∣ded to quarter at Fethard, and gave orders ac∣cordingly, but used very great diligence in mar∣ching as neer Kilkenny as he could, where he un∣derstood a great part of Owen R▪ O▪ Neals men
were to defend the Supream Councel (as they call themselves) the sudden march of Sir William being noised at Callin an ancient Corporation, and a strong walled Town, lying within six miles of Kilkenny upon the river; the Suffrain and Burgesses thereof fled towards Kilkenny with what they could carry, and left the Town open, whereof the Troopers made as good use as they could; and having burnt all the Corn there∣abouts, Sir William Bridges and that party brought away 4000. head of cattel towards Fet∣hard, but that night proving stormy, and the Troopers wearied with their march, they lost neer two parts of them, and the rest they brought home to this Garrison: In all this march we went over as rich and goodly a Country, as ever I saw in England. My Lord is now taking his Musters of the Ar∣my, and intends to be suddenly abroad in the field again, having this Summer burnt corn from the gates of Limerick to Chashel, Clomnel, and Cal∣len near Kilkenny which terrified the Inhabitants exceedingly, and gave such an Alarm to the Su∣pream Counsel at Kilkenny, as they never had the like since the war began; and were it not that our Soldiers were almost naked, and much wanting means and medicaments, I am very confident you would have an account of some Winter ser∣vice meriting thanks, as we think our former service doth; having not been in Garrison these
six moneths, but only to get a little bread or bisquet, which if we had had, and Carriages in any reasonable proportion, we had scarce seen our Garrisons all this while; and therefore I be∣seech you, as you tender the service of the Par∣liament, and reducing of those bloody wrongs, labor to get us (over before Winter) cloathes for our men, and some means to incourage the Officers and Soldiers, and to comfort them in sickness after a hard and successful Summer ser∣vice: so, Sir, praying for the good and happy suc∣cess of the Parliament, and for your safe and speedy return unto us with some to supply our wants, I remain Your very humble servant, Alex: Pigot. Cork, Octob. 6. 1647. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
