P264 13790528 101833
A PANEGYRICK ON THEIR Royal Highnesses, And Congratulating His RETURN FROM SCOTLAND. LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford for Jos. Hindmarsh at the Sign of the Black Bull near the Royal-Exchange in Cornhill, 1682.
A PANEGYRICK ON THEIR Royal Highnesses. WHen the Most High Eternal Son of God Through fam'd Judea in Procession rode, The Loyal Publican, with zealous hast, Climb'd up a Tree to view him as he past, And with a look that did his Joy relate The Mighty Saviour did congratulate: So 'mongst the Crowds that with Impatience strove T' express their Fealty and faithful Love, I and my throbbing heart with equal flames Panted and prest to greet the Godlike JAMES. Welcome then, Mighty SIR; welcome as Peace To conquer'd Nations, or to sick Men, Ease; Welcome, as what you bring us, Loyalty, A fruit which in our Isle we rarely see; In th' barren North it blooms, to Storms expos'd; But in our Sunny Climate never grows: Here fertile Nature makes the Commons Kings, And from her fatness rank Rebellion springs': Damn'd lust of English-men, that ne're repented Their Treasons, nor with Blessings were contented.
Black was the Day, and blasted was the Year, When the curst Factious, full of wretched fear, Sought the true Heir of England to exclude, Only because He was too great, and good, Two Epithetes that never yet could suit The sordid Mind of your true English Brute: Loud Tempests roar'd, as if design'd to cross The Royal Mandate, and not let Him pass, Whilst weeping Showers seem'd to mourn our loss: And as each Element then bore a part In grief, even so did every Honest Heart. But now the happy hours are doubly bless't, The Land with the full Store of Heaven possess't; The Season smiles, and each propitious Ray For His Return their secret Joy display; The flowers that did in private Closets keep, And during th' Winter of His Absence sleep, Bloom out, and a gay fragrant Robe put on, To bless and welcome in the RISING SUN; LaetamurThe Motto of the Medal. is the Word, a word which late As mighty Hopes, did mighty Joy create, When the fam'd Motto with applause was put To the Effigie of the Grand Patriot, Nearest their hearts, where late their Georges hung, The pale-fac't Medall with its Silver tongue Was plac't, whilst every Wearer still exprest His Joy to harbour there so fam'd a Guest. The Wretch that stampt it got immortal fame; 'Twas coyn'd by stealth, like Groats at Brumicham;
Whilst each Possessor with exalted voice Cryes, England's saev'd, and now Let us Rejoyce. But though Seditious Tenets they pursue, We have a Cause of Joy solid and true, And therefore let us cry Laetamur too. For Mighty YORK'S return'd, return'd to Raign O're hearts, and move in His Great Sphere again: 'Tis in His Face you see the RISING SUN, T'other's a Comet blazing o're the Town, Portending Mischiefs seeming to explain The former Tragick Scene design'd again. Fly then ye Loyal Natives, fly with zeal, Embrace His Knees, and your true Joy reveal; Prove your affection to your Injur'd Prince, Give him your Hearts, for you had his long since: Give Him your Hearts, oppose the Rebel Power, And never part with your Lov'd HEROE more. And hail Bright PRINCESS, best of thy fair Kind, An Angel's Body with an Angel's Mind, Beauteous as are the Virgin Saints above, That sit and smile on the right hand of Jove, And good, as the first state Heav'n form'd 'em in, E're that Angelick Sex knew how to sin; How when She comes shall we our crimes attone? How shall we meet the Justice of Her Frown, That doing no offence was forc't away With Her dear Lord, a cruel Fate t' obey, And Sacrifice Her Joy, Her Peace and Fame, To a curst Branded thing without a Name?
Down her fair face the liquid Treasures rowld; Then taking on her ROYAL PARTNER hold, England farewell, She cry'd, thou hated shore, And may I never see thy baseness more! But she comes back, and nobly may despise The Pigmy Malice of her Enemies; Disdain and Anger in Her forehead sit, Yet both so calm'd and temper'd by Her Wit, That with a modest smile She strives t' oppose Revenge, and onely pities all her foes. Return then and forgive, and may Your Name Charm the wide Globe, as does your HEROES Fame: Long may ye love, and still may ye appear Teeming, as to our Joy you prove this Year. Your Pregnant Veins are framing wondrous things, Oh glorious Passion that creates young Kings! The Illustrious Infant struggles in the Womb, As if he knew his Royal fate to come, And silently mourns, that so long a space 'Twill be, e're he begins his Glorious Race: But when as the Divinest Gift of Heaven, The Princely Babe is for our Comfort given, May every heart conspire with every tongue T' implore his years may be renown'd and long, That he may merit his brave Fathers Name And Rival Vertue with his Mothers Fame. Methinks I see our great AUGUSTUS stand, With the fair PRINCESS smiling in His Hand, High Grandeur mixt with Joy adorns His Face, Whilst blushing Duty Hers does sweetly grace:
Their Eyes are fixt and mingling Glories seem, Like the Sun's Rayes Reflecting on a Jem: His Awfull Light then on His BROTHER shines, Who with a silent Modesty inclines To hear his welcome, and with humble grace Fixing His Eyes upon His Monarch's Face, His willing Knees with Loyal duty bend To His dear King, His Brother, and His Friend, Who in His Arms do's the Lov'd Favourite hold, And speaks a gracious welcome from His soul. Thrice happy Scotland, well didst thou begin To make attonement for thy former sin, When thou with Joy a Vertue didst Embrace: By brooding Factions driven from this place, Well was the much-wrong'd Prince receiv'd by thee, And well hast thou reform'd thy Loyalty: Yet to His Goodness thou thy Fame do'st owe, For thou hadst faithless bin had he been so: But as the Thracian Bard, with charming strains, Drew the Wild Savages from Woods and Plains, Controll'd their Brutish Rage where e're he came, And made the fiercest Bears and Tigers tame; So Mighty Prince Thy Vertue did oppose The close designs and Malice of thy Foes, And made a Nation, fam'd for Treachery, Bow to thy Loyal Principles and Thee, Whilst England's left with its King-killing Race, A Nest of Rebels, as it ever was. FINIS.
