P66 13084328 97278
OR, SELECT POEMS: BEING A Compendious and Methodical Re∣monstrance of such Passages in England, as have been most remarkable, as well before as since His GLORIOUS MAJESTIES Most Happy and Joyfull RESTAURATION. By J. P. Cantabr. — rediviva Monarchia floret Quippe Britannorum Jubilaeus adfuit Annus. LONDON, Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1661.
To the Reader. THough I have journey'd (as each harsh line tells) Scarce through the Suburbs where choyce learning dwells, Yet since mens fury and our Plagues do cease, And Love doth blossom on the stems of Peace, Let these distil'd extracted dews engage A relish in the palate of this Age; Till larger Vyols full be brought at last, Whereof this piece is serv'd up for a tast; 'Tis the Primitiae of mine unripe years, The tree is known best when its fruit appears. J. P.
A brief Relation of many horrid passages of the Rebells, and distress of Loyal Sub∣jects, since the beginning of the late Warres in England; and likewise of the Nati∣onal Changes before his Gratious Ma∣jesties providential and happy Restoration. UNpolisht lines shew not those splendent Rayes Of Britaines glorious State,(that is) before the Warres. in former dayes, Nor can I shew, since fate did cloud our bliss, Englands most dismal(that is) since the Wars be∣gan. Metamorphosis; I can't define those cruel Murderers Unless I write in bloody Characters, I must implore Melpomene to come To act a part and write those Traitors doom, To point out marks and then survey the bounds Of each mans Conscience fill'd with blood and wounds. Our Joy the fates to brinish tears did turn, When judgement perisht then 'twas time to mourn;
Men rag'd like wolves in ev'ry field and grove Waiting for blood, without a spark of love Which would enkindle friendship, and encrease United spirits in the bonds of peace. What's piety, said some! wee'll now possess The Land by force, or by perfidiousness: What perjur'd villaines treach'ry could not bring Their swords accomplisht, made their Martyr'd King Like a John Baptist; Englands bleeding heart When Englands head was off, did feel the smart: Our fruits were blasted, brambles grew alone Instead of Cedars, in our Lebanon. Vineyards and palaces lay desolate, No pen could write, no tongue our grief could rate; As fountains flow, blood gushed from our wounds, Grief knew no limits, Sorrow knew no bounds. Our Church defac'd, divested of its beauty, As if mens zeal oblig'd them and their duty, Forc't them t' assume that monstrous privilege, Abhoring Idolls, but not Sacrilege. It'h midst of tortures, and distracting cares They stroy'd each page of all our publick prayers, Hoping to bring our souls into a thrall; But yet in private with a silent call, Each prayer went up to th'Heavens, and did cause Our David sav'd from Bears and Lions paws. What foul corrupt and treacherous disguise Did cloak their horrid acts? what villanies
Did lurk within them, varnish'd ore with many Fine gilded words? Nay there remain'd not any Of that base crew, which did not alwaies bear In one part Honey, and a Sting elsewhere. They most rebelliously did disinthrone Their Soveraign King: in him they have pluckt down True Honours staff, Religions prop and gem, His Scepter ruin'd, and his Diadem. They butcher'd him, they brought him to the Bar, As if hee'd been some Thief or Murderer. The Royal Prosapie they quite exil'd When Charles the First was martyr'd, and then styl'd Angliae Tyrannus. I may fitly call All smooth-tongu'd Traytors, Honey mixt with Gall. How could men act such horrid things? We see What treach'rous Infidels these worldlings be. Base rebells rul'd the Land, all that seem'd good Lay then entomb'd in Sepulchres of blood. Thus Naboths blood was treacherously shed, And cursed Ahab after he was dead Enjoy'd his vineyard, but 'tis well known how Providence soon rang the changes here below And whisper'd chearful tydings to the world; Cromwel that perjur'd Ahab was soon hurld Into the earth, a place prepar'd of old To tame his rage, and keep his fury cold. Our proverb here, as 'twas in Babylon, Shall be, How is the Oppressor ceas'd and gone?
Then we perceiv'd that place fulfil'd, which sayes, No bloody man shall live out half his dayes. Cromwel dies and his sons usurp the King∣doms.No sooner th' old one dies but young ones come To take possession in their Fathers Room, But England still did want its lawfull King Some rise, some fall, and thus the changes ring. Then there was a De∣mocracy, such a Go∣vernment where ma∣ny rule.When those were ruin'd, then some had, we know A Common Wealth but we a common wo. Thus we see Plagues and Warres are but the keys Unlocking doors to further Miseries. Meaning Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middle∣ton, &c.* Then did a Blazing Star ith' West appear Whose splendid lustre made our hemisphere Almost a Paradice: some thought the Sun Exchang'd his wonted course, and had begun Ith West to rise; all they that lov'd the Crown, Rather then have the True old Cause go down, Joyntly resolv'd they'd for it live and die; For Earls, Lords, Knights, the whole Nobility VVere gather'd to a head, in hopes to tame The rebells fury and so winne the game, But their swords edge was turn'd, all hopes did fail, No strength, no prayers, no wishes could prevail. Justly might dayly bread be given to none That cannot truly say, Thy will be done. Our grief o're night was sent to give us warning To be prepared to meet joy in the morning. For then the blustring North wind cold and fierce Shaking the pillars of our Universe
Did drive the storms and dissipate each cloud,The Lord General Monk Duke of Albemarle did then rise in Scot∣land. VVherein the bloody Rebels sought to shroud: VVhen trouble came in metamorphiz'd times, But Heaven no longer would permit their crimes. No sooner clouds dispers'd but there appears A star i'th' North then we cast off all fears,That is the Lord Monk. And by it guided straitway go to meet Charles wayne with joy, all the noble fleet: Our glory in the VVest did set with th' Sun, What Zephyrus could not Boreas hath done. Now this rebellious crew in vaine may call For Atlas or Mount Gargarus to fall And cover them, can man himself defend? If sin beginneth sorrow makes an end. A thousand worlds, what's that? can that condole, Or pay a ransom for a Traitors soul? They can't convey themselves from Heavens view In spite of all that Hell or Earth can do. Each one reproacht by th' open world appears Perplext with grief and labyrinths of tears, Their present bliss did future wo portend, They were but fatted for a slaught'rous end. The sword vvas furbusht, and the trumpet sounds Blood, blood, and death by terrifying vvounds, And vvhen they have receiv'd their fatal doom Judge you what Epitaphs will fit their tombe; They that escape the thunderbolts of wo Will follovv them on earth where ere they go;
The darts of envy, stings of all disgrace And vengeance ushers them in every place. The time will likewise come at last when they Shall to the wandring fouls become a prey, Though their fields were not like Mount Gilboa Accurst, nor turn'd into a Golgotha; Ezek. 21.26, 27.Yet was their Crown * thrice overturn'd, and then Restor'd again unto the best of men, Whose right it is; although none other things Could quench their thirst, unless the blood of Kings, And banishment to recompence their Love, Although the Serpent snar'd the modest Dove, Though England was like a Jerusalem, A second Sodom, though our Diadem Lay dasht upon the ground, we made their food That built their Cities up with sacred bloud; Yet now once more wee'll shout for joy, and sing With Lute & Harp; since CHARLES our gracious King Hastes to the British shore, let Organs play, Let Trumpets sound, Bells ring, keep Holy-day. This Monarchie the world cann't parallel, All candid vertues, Love and Friendship dwell In ev'ry corner of the perfum'd Earth Garnisht with all the quintessence of mirth, Which ev'n as Cordials doe revive mens hearts, And all their faculties: Here is no darts Of hatred, malice, and of treacherie Shot to each other; But realitie
And true affection is the spotlesse Robe Which decks this polisht, and effulgent Globe; Each Loyal Subject renders just and true Tribute to Caesar, Honour where tis due. Thus in due time th' Almighty, when he pleases, Heals all our wounds, and cures all our diseases: He hath accomplisht our desires in peace, Now doth the Rebels rage and our woe cease. I knew our sorrows to our gain would tend, As means accomplishing an happy end; Floud-gates of joy are opend, and we know Streams of felicitie on us shall flow. England through bribes was ruin'd, but once more, Our King by judgement shall our bliss restore.
The foregoing Copy PARAPHRAZ'D Into a most Compendious Rapture IN a Charybdis lay this fatal Realm, A bloody Ocean did it overwhelm; We were made slaves to please mens crooked wills, Which said they'd heal us all with wholsome pills, And we, what game so ere was play'd, should win, But yet their sweet baits had sharp books within. Those horrid Plot-contrivers pleas'd to tearm, Their Agents Saints, and they themselves t' affirm The Keepers of our Liberties, 'tis true They kept them close, nay, imprison'd them too, So we could not enjoy them; they profess They walkt in paths of truth and righteousness; Yet had of Justice neither branch nor root, Walk in't, that is, they tread it underfoot. Most horrid villanies were in our City Wrought by a dang'rous, yet call'd Safe Committee.
Each Supream Head was like the cunning fox, Wolves were made sheepherds t' oversee the flocks. What strang game's this that Kings must not stay in't? How is it possible that we should win't, When nothing's left but packs of crafty Knaves, Pikes, clubs to kill's, and spades to dig our graves. We that escaped all in Booths did dwell, When they were ruin'd by each infidel, Then we no longer could inhabit here Till Monck did like a Star ith' North appear Inlightning England, which so long had been Dark as a dungeon, like a jayle within. That Blazing Comet which did soare so high Seem'd to portend our future misery, But turn'd to ignis fatuus at last, The rav'ning pack of bloodhounds being fast Link't up with chaines, and others nooz'd with cords; Thus ends the Glory of their upstart Lords. That grand Sorites of those mercies we Receiv'd from heavens liberality Should ravish all our thoughts, and wean our joyes From trivial objects, and inferior toyes. Now tyranny shall cease, and peace shall reign The wheel's turn'd round, and in its place again; For now their Land-Lord's come to's pleasant Mount, The Steward calls the Rebells to account, And since none dare his Majesty controul Perfumes of pleasure do dilate my soul,
Fill'd with delight; an Exstasie of joy Shall make men cry aloud, Vive Le Roy. Upon His GLORIOUS MAJESTIES Most Happy Retyre into ENGLAND. LEt's bid adieu to that black dismal age Wherein did murder and Rebellion rage, (that is) In Crom∣wel.Mars, Nero, Judas center'd all in * one Who would have Britain made a Babylon. But now our stormy Winter's overpast, Our sighs and tears turn'd into joy at last, Our confus'd Chaos brought to a right line, Our clouded bliss doth now begin to shine, Our figtrees bud, our clust'ring vines increase, England first blossoms, then yeilds fruits of peace. Our Jubilee returnes, our Glorious Lamp Spreads its effulgent beams and doth encamp Our rurall plaines, which the right Heir inherits; These cordials adde life to our dullest spirits.
Each glitt'ring Star, whose aspects like darts pierse Our foggy aire and cloudy Universe, Ushers the Sun in its Horizon, going To meet Charles Waine with glory overflowing. Hark how each Trumpet joyfull triumphs sounds, Since Peace inhabits our rich Edens bounds The silent Fishes wanton in the deep, Wilde beasts wax tame, all fury's laid asleep, The chirping Birds do with their warbling throats Give such an Emphasis to their sweet notes As ravish Souls, all former hideous cries Are chang'd into harmonious melodies, Perfum'd with pleasure, sugar'd with delight, Since Britains Glory now enjoyes his Right. The florid Spring with liberal encrease Augments our joy once more reviv'd in peace; The lofty Mountains, Valleys, our whole Globe, Compleatly deckt with a Majestick Robe; All things do smile, since vertues sacred gem Revives our late oppress'd Jerusalem. In which few lines I must acknowledge this, There's no Auxesis but a Meiosis. Natures whole frame resolves to welcom home Charles our Great Monarch, Joy of Christendome. Whose merits claim an everlasting story, VVhich is his own and also Englands Glory; His Coronation day wee'll solemnize VVith joyfull triumphs and Doxologies.
Heav'ns prosper him with trophies of renown, Then turn his earthly t' a celestial Crown. An Elegie upon the Death of that most emi∣nent and Gratious Prince HENRY Duke of GLOUCESTER APproach Melpomene, I must implore Thine aid t' assist me to unlock the door Of my imprison'd Genius, cold, benumm'd, And slumb'ring in my half dead Corps entomb'd. My brain's so frozen that it stops the stream Of my affections, and an Icie cream Doth Christallize my tears; I sigh, I mourn, And melt away as metals in an urne, Perish I must like carcases enshrin'd In monuments, unless I speak my minde. Phoebus withdraws his beams, his race is run, His course is finisht, and no more our Sun Sends forth its candid aspects, but doth call The lesser lights t' attend his funeral. Then pardon weakness, I must beg supplies To be my conduct at such obsequies, To guide my steps, whose infant years do want A crutch to hold by; I am bound to grant
That my dumb lips and tongue-tide wit affords Nothing but folly and abortive words, Therefore my Muse assist and help to rouz My drowsy faculties, and randivouz My frozen fancy and disbanded spirits, Because he's dead whose vast unfathom'd merits Invite thy help to shew them to the world, That they may be recorded, and enrold In everlasting registers, for he Did nere deserve a blot of Infamy; Wo mixt vvith tears vvould move an Adamant, Burden our souls vvhich as in travail pant. My mind's blockt up vvith grief, I can't restrain My soul from sorrovv, nor my heart from pain; For vve vvere guided by that sparkling Starre As Cynosures direct each Mariner But ridged fate depriv'd us of those rayes But yet we still can whisper out his praise. He vvas a model'd patern so divine, That all might square their actions to his line, His heart bedeckt vvith flourishes of Grace And beauties picture limned in his face; Nurst vvith the milk of sacred Eloquence, In's brain lay treasur'd vvit; the quintessence Of heav'nly gifts vvas center'd in that Gem Whose vertues claim'd a costly Diadem. My tongue must needs interpret all my fears, Mine eyes are limbicks to extract my tears.
Since pale fac'd Death surpriz'd and snatch away A Jewell deckt with wise Apollo's ray; Judgements Grand Atlas, and support; but sure That famous structure cannot long endure Whose chiefest Pillar's fall'n; how soon are we Almost astonisht and amaz'd to see The hungry Earth swallow up the best of Men, All things that smil'd begin to mourn agen, The busy'd fovvls began to build their nests, But now they shrovvd their heads within their breasts, Each lesser bird recalls her pleasing note, And bids it harbour in her silent throat, Under each branch they rest, and there they grieve, Lament, and seem to wish they could relieve Englands necessity, and want of him Whose death brought sorrow and made each eye dim, Drowned in tears; what soul would it not pierce To view a ruin'd Land, a Universe Clouded with folly? Reason being dead Our blest estate is metamorphosed. Youogest die first, Nature and reason jarre, Hysteron proteron seems irregular. Nay all things chang their wonted course, the woods Cast of their florid vestures, and the floods Do sometimes rage, and then stand still to view How Phoebus is eclips'd, the earth would shew It self unwilling t' interr him whose breath Was stopt i'th'morning of his age, by death,
How pale the Mountains look? how fierce and grim The craggy rocks appear? me thinks they seem To burst into a sweat; Had I my will I'de dye with grief like Niobe, and fill Thy tombe with tears; or had I Argus eyes Each one should help to weep thine obsequies; Thus men shall say, and give thee but thy due Here lyes great Caesar, and Mecenas too. Though Nature strives to make me cast an oare Into my boat, and lanch out from the shoar Into a Sea of tears, yet Reason sayes Th' unruly waves shall cease, the fates shall raise No more shipwracking stormes; but shall conspire To make that brinish raging Sea retyre. Wee'll not be still in Sorrow's bounds confin'd, Though some were martyr'd, some the earth inshrin'd Yet most choice souls still uphold the name Renown'd and Crown'd with sempeternal fame. Britains bright splendor shall not melt away, After a shower comes a clearer day, Retreats sometimes Death-like a trumpet sounds, And is most tragical with blood and wounds; But he whom we lament did live in peace, And so he dy'd whose bliss may never cease, For he that sent him will to him apply A Crown of Glory to Eternity. Shall we say, Stay, vvhen Heaven bids him come? Or shall we murmur if Heav'n calls him home?
Oh no! forbear, for he's not dead, but gone T' inhabit life and true perfection; Here upon earth each ecchoing Bell doth toul, And sounds a farevvell to his pious soul; In heav'n Cherubims vvith svveet Anthems cry Welcome Choice soul, wee'll sing thy Lullaby. Shall vve be griev'd or sorrovvfull at this, Because he's crovvn'd vvith everlasting bliss, And freed from this perverse vvorlds slavish fears, From anguish, sorrovv, and distracting cares? Shall vve dispaire? can't Providence afford Blessings more choice by speaking half a word? No fears shall therefore my firm hope destroy, Neither anticipate my future joy: Blame me not, Reader, if I rather chuse To close this Poem with a chearful Muse.
AN EPITAPH Upon the most Illustrious Prince HENRY Duke of GLOCESTER. WIthin this Monumental fabrick lies A pearl whose rayes did dazle each mans eyes. Whose vigorous Lustre did extract and draw The subtill Vapours from our heads, and thaw Each Frozen brain, whose Icie drops did turn To tears, to fill each Vacuum of this Urne. In him was Virtues microcosme heapt, In him Austrea Courts of Justice kept: 'Cause his unparallel'd endowments were Perfum'd with Heav'nly odours, and too rare, Too great, too good to beautifie this Nation, Therefore did he remove from's Earthly Station, To dwell 'mongst Cherubims, that Glorious Train, For he that sent him, call'd him back again. Palma repressa resurgit.
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of that most Renowned and Virtuous Lady MARY Princesse of AURANGE. OUR flashy sparks of joy are quencht with tears, My soul embarkt with grief, like Atlas, bears A Firmament of sorrow; wee'll no more Anchor our leaking Vessels near the shore, But rush into the gulf, and there shall lye The Muses flames of Ingenuity, Striving with boyst'rous waves; yet if Heav'n please To fuel them with Faith which may appease All wrath, and make us unto bliss arrive, Then shall triumphant joy once more revive. But since my tears are broacht, I can't refrain From sighs, 'tis hard to bridle and restrain The course of Nature, Is the Phoenix gone From our Arabia, leaving us alone Like Pelicans in deserts? she's inshrin'd, But leaves her fragrant spices still behind.
There was in her a pearly Cabinet, A costly Treasury in order set With pure refined sweets, enricht with gems, And garnisht with enamel'd Diadems. I mean her sacred gifts, transcendent merits, Who now eternal joy and bliss inherits: Wee'll keep the records of her memory, And own all virtue as her Progeny. Me thinks I hear the thundring Heavens groan, The whisp'ring air doth breath sighs, and bemone The worlds lamented losse: methinks I hear Each groan with ecchoes doubled in mine ear. A Cloudy darknesse over shades our Globe, The skie divested of each Starry Robe, Each spangled dazling Lamp, in black appears, Heav'n seems to mourn, and showres down its tears. The more I weep, those tears which I effuse, Water the Garden of my dolefull Muse; And all my dry'd up faculties do nourish, ('Tis known all water'd Plants will spread and flou∣rish) Therefore I Journey further, and my Quill, Though weary, makes a further progresse still. I can't detract my thoughts, I must retain A true Idea of her in my brain; Whose dust shall be dissected into pure, Nay golden Atomes; who 'mongst men can cure Great Britains wounds, or bring a remedy To a diseased Widdow'd Monarchy,
VVhose feeble head can scarce bear up the Crown; Two branches of our Laurell are blown down By Heavens breath, which doth another bring Out of that flock where blooming virtues spring. Thus we see how the scales of Providence VVeigh out each mortalls fate, which humane sense Cannot foresee: all honours, riches, health, Consume and vanish as it were by stealth; Fame is a shadow, each accomplishment Is but a separable Accident. Therefore let's trust in him who can turn gall, VVoes, Plagues, and chast'nings to a cordial; Wee'll Wave the Ocean of grief and fears, The flux and reflux of this Sea of tears, For now methinks the circled Rainbow sayes, Our tears shall not another deluge raise. She wading through a Brinish Sea, went where She now doth shine in a Seraphick Sphere; She pass'd the lower Olympick Pyramis, To th' Empyreum with transcendent bliss; Let's with Sabaean incense Crown her Hearse, Whose spreading fame perfumes the Universe.
A POEM Concerning those Fanatick Contrivers of the late Horrid and Bloody Plots against his SACRED MAJESTY, &c. Being Providentially discovered and prevented. WHat still perplext with Rebells? what? still bound In sorrow's chains? lay balsome to the wound, And fix a period to our soul piercing woe; Can florid Roses bud, or Cedars grow Where thornes and brambles are? the choaking weeds Devour'd the Crop, and spoyl'd the choicest seeds. But now wee'l fan and winnow Chaff from Corn, None but selected Flowers shall adorn Our Polisht Eden; all the spurious race Shall be cut off, or banisht with disgrace. VVe from a British, they a Brutish line Deduce their Pedigree; we must refine Such drossy mettals; It a hazzard were For us to dwell where Asps and Scorpions are.
Though you pretend, and Piety professe, Your Actions say you're guilded Rottennesse. You seem'd to be adorn'd, as if you were Gods Servants, with his Livery, but are Like Hypocrites with Leopards spots, and blurs, Like whited walls, and painted Sepulchres. Thieves, Rebells, Murderers, will soon be ganging To ruine those that sav'd them first from hanging: Ingratefull Worldlings! did our teeming Earth Give to this sordid Hell-bred crew a Birth? Could you expect your fury long should last, Whose Wind-mill-brains are turn'd with ev'ry blast? And like the Weather-cock with ev'ry wind; Who for your wav'ring and unconstant mind, With all your Treacherous dealings, i'le compare To Janus, and Chamelions in the aire. That Honour which you to your King professe, Your hearts allow not, but your tongues expresse: How can you Plot such cursed Villanie 'Gainst him, when none's so mercifull as he? Is this th' requital you on him bestow, VVho might have lookt with a severer brow? But scornes revenge, obeying him that sayes, Vengance is mine, I'le recompence their wayes. Methinks I see in your fierce Crueltie, Insulting Herods bloody Tyrannie. You Sware you'll ruine Church, and State withall, Never were Murd'rers so Tyrannical.
Slaying Men, Women, Children, who but them Should make the world a stroy'd Jerusalem? So they might but their Sov'raign dis-inthrone, They'd crosse the torrid, and the frozen Zone. They'd fear no swallowing gulfs, nor blasting winds, No storms nor tempests should disturb their minds; They'd bridle Fortune, and beat back the thunder, Batter stone walls, burst iron chains in sunder. But Providence, and Heav'ns impartial eye Would not bring us to such Adversitie: Their fiery darts are Quencht, each Temple stands Not yet destroy'd by Sacrilegious hands. Their horrid Plots are crost, curst and confounded, Their hopes are Shipwrackt, all their Forces wounded▪ This dismall, Hellish Plot that's now betray'd, Was but a noozing snare which they had laid To catch themselves, who now may weep and houl, Like Perillus in's Brazen Bull; their soul May grieve to think how all their winged fame Is fled away, and now their Noysome name, Odious to all men, must for ever be Branded with Characters of Infamy. When Overton is Overtur'd, and all The rest that have been most Tyrannicall, Then wee'll rejoyce in truth and peace, wee'll render True Loyalty to our true Faiths Defender.
In reditum Serenissimi Regis nostri CAROLI II. Felicissimè reducis. AUreum tandem properavit aevum, Quis{que} prestanti procreatur astro, Fata subrident meliorà nobis Fronte politâ; Dissipat Sidus Boreale nubes, Turpium crassos scelerúm{que} nimbos, Stricta vaginis latitant atrocis Tela ruinae. Lauriger Phoebus radias micantes Sparsit in cunctos alacres Britannos; Interit Sevus Nero: jam crueris Flumina stagnant. Sponte, Neptunus pelagi furentis Rector, Inspicet fidei tenaci,
Turbidis nondum Gelidae tumescant Fluctibus undae. Nostra Regalis fugiat carina Prorsus ingentes scopulos; nec ipse Naufragus sit Rex Carolus serena Gloria mundi. Dirigat Nautam Cynosura fulgens, Obrutus nec sit graviore Syllâ, Mersa nec forsan rapidâ Charybdi Inclita puppis. Aeolus ventos reprimat minaces, Voce diffundant tacitâ susurros; Affluat nobis pretiosa velis Aura secundis. Sit throno noster Carolus beatus, Aureum dextro positúm{que} sceptrum; Sit stolis cultus, caput & corusco Stemmate cinctum. Pace tunc omnes placidâ triumphent, Quis{que} tunc plaudens statuat trophaea: Belluae gaudent volucrés{que} amicti Gramine montes.
Terra, florentes inarata fruges Pinguis, ut gramen segitém{que} fundet, Incidat Nemo miseri cruento Gurgite damni. Splendidus nunc sol nitidè resurgit; Nobiles sanè meritò remordent Perfidos, ut pax modò Gente nostrâ Florida regnet. Est Deus in monte. TUrgida cùm rapidos commovit turbatumultus, Iran cùm fastu stygiam vomuêre tumenti, Dextram protendit Rector radiantis Olympi, Fulmina fortunae jactans, rutilís{que} sagittis▪ Vulnere dispersos fatali perdidit hostes; Nec pestes patitur posthac, regnante tyranno.
Est Deus in Monacho. STellato Numen Monachum splendore coronet, Quòd, quae decrevit, peragit miracula, Coelum; O mihi post nullos haeros memorande! manebit Prorsus in aeternum meritò Indelebile nomen. Stridula vivaces cantabunt organa laudes, Laurigeri stirpis nunquam monumenta peribunt. Est Deus in Monarcho. VIvat Rex, regnet Carolus quasi Magnus Apollo; Ac vigeat sceptrum, vortex Diademate cinctus Fulgeat; Et Libani fructus, florés{que} virescent; Florida purpurei frondescent gramina veris, Aurea profundis jactantur munera gazis Quippe tryumphantem decoravit Gloria REGEM.
Upon his GRACIOUS MAJESTIES Most Joyfull and Glorious CORONATION. WEre my lips sweld in drops of Helicon, And delug'd in those streams, this Theme alone Would drink the watery dews, though they were all Gloss'd with their tincture and Rhetoricall. Now since our tedious gloomy winters frowns, And storms of woe are gone, the spring-time Crowns Our works with vernal smiles; the day is come That gives Great Britains Crown a wellcome hope T' its Royal Seat, with such pomp, lustre, glory, As th' amaz'd world may ground each lofty story Upon that Thesis, which I cann't erect Within the confines of mine intellect. Much lesse expresly shew what Gallantry Ushers and Guards his Sacred Majesty, At this great dayes Solemnities; each gem And rubie shines in's pearly Diadem.
Attendants do their brandishments display, As if they had surpriz'd Jove of 's array; How can my mean endeavours then aspire The Culmen of that richly wrought attire? Nor can my towering thoughts span those vast bounds Of this dayes matchlesse splendor, which redounds To Englands Glory; my Quill cann't explain The radiant lustre of that Noble Train, But should my barren pasture yield no fruit, Well might I be recorded for a Mute. Showres ore night clear'd Heavens face,A De∣scription of the weather. that then It might send brighter aspects unto men; As soon as night took vving and fled away, The morn avvak'd and budded into day, Then th' early Larks, and all the vvarbling Quire, Did sing melodious Anthems, and inspire With harmony that Great dayes timely birth, Whose shrill-tongu'd ecchoes over-flow'd the Earth. Then did Aurora vvith her morning smiles, Open her Rosie casements to these Isles, And in the Peoples Universal vievv, Unlockt her Cabinet of Rubies too. Then Sol (vvhose heat and vigour ratifies The mislie fogs, and clears the cloudy skies) Shot all his rayes to crispe the frizled air, All that day long he rode in's stately Chair. The skie did need no beauty-spots to grace Add shevv the lustre of its smiling face;
Nor did it vvear a Mask, but vvhen 'tvvas late, Jove call'd a Synod, and the Heavens sate In Counsell, then immediately did joyn In triumphs vvith us, and the chearfull Nine; Th' Olympick sphears vvere put in tune, to shovv Hovv thunder ansvver'd our great guns belovv, Whose intermixed Volleys, and shrill tones, Were not like dolefull murmurings and groanes; Light'nings vvere Heavens Bone-fires to our vievv, All things did triumph, and had Trophies too. Since Supreme providence hath made Peace rise, Let not the Adamantine destanies Send us Usurping Tyrants any more, To gild their Swords in Royal Blood and Gore. If Iron Scepters come to rule agen, Svvords points must vvrite the Tragick Dooms of men. But Heavens grant those dayes may never come, To lead our Christian Kings to Martyrdome. Now wee'll wipe all our floating tears away, Shall their drops count each minute of the day? No, nor impetuous Rebellion rage, Nor swell hereafter, for our golden age Yields bloomy joyes; that day of Coronation Shall be observ'd throughout each Generation: The rest I leave for others to rehearse, Gracing the Fabrick of the Universe. FINIS.
