P859 99828395 32822
A TREATISE OF THE Necessity and Frequency of Recei∣ving the Holy Communion. With a Resolution of Doubts about it. In Three DISCOURSES begun upon Whit-Sunday in the Cathe∣dral Church of Peterburgh. To press the observation of the Fourth Rubrick after the Communion Office. By SYMON PATRICK, D. D. Dean of Peterburgh, and One of Hi Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston, Book-seller to His most Sacred Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXV.
IVth Rubrick after the Communion. And in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Colleges, where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion with the Priest, every Sunday, at the least, except they have a rea∣sonable cause to the contrary.
To the Most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, HIS GRACE, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, one of His Majestie's most Honourable PRIVY-COUNCIL, &c. May it please your Grace,
HAving endeavoured, with some success, to restore the Weekly Commu∣nions,in that Church to which I relate, and hoping for greater, by publishing these Discourses, which I made there upon that occa∣sion; I take the boldness to send them abroad, under your Grace's Protection: that if they can do any good, all that shall receive it may un∣derstand unto whom, under God, they principally owe it, and stand obliged to acknow∣ledge it.
For it was by your Grace's Fatherly Care, that I was put in mind of this great Duty, and exhorted to put it in practice: which pro∣duced these Meditations,wherein I have pressed it up∣on others. Who will be stir∣red up, I trust, by this means, to bless God for setting over them such a Faithful Pastor, as, by taking care to have this Sacred Food provided continually for them, seeks their increase in true Religion, and their nourishment with all goodness. They are very blind who do not see this to be a sin∣gular blessing; and very hard, whose hearts are not affected therewith: especially at such a time as this, when Religi∣on calls for all the supports we are able to lend it; and teaches us, it desires no bet∣ter,
no other than it self, if we will but uphold it in our hearts. Of which I beseech the Lord of all power and might, the giver of all good things, to make every one of us so deeply sensible; that we may be no longer negligent in the prin∣cipal office of it: but, in some measure, return unto that First love towards our blessed Lord and Saviour; from which we, as well as other Christian People, have long since shamefully faln. And may the same Good God, who put this thing in∣to your
Grace's heart, be pleased to bless and prosperall your pious designments: and prolong your dayes, which are spent in the study of the publick good, to see the ancient Devotion, and Ver∣tue too, not only bud again in this Church, but flourish also, and bring forth fruit in such abundance; that it may be the joy of all its Friends, the terror of all its Enemies; and, as the Prophet speaks of Jerusalem, a Praise in the Earth.
Then will this that your Grace hath done, be spoken of with Praise; and Poste∣rity will call you Blessed. Nay, to have but designedand attempted this, what∣soever the issue be, is so praise-worthy; that it will make your Name no less ho∣noured in future Generations, than that great Devotion, which we see combines in you with eminent Learning, that deep Humility, which cohabits with the highest Dignity, makes your Self to be reverenced in this. With which Reverence, if the Confidence I take, in making this small Present to your Grace, seem inconsistent, I comfort my self with the long experience I have had; that the best men are not al∣ways
the hardest to please, but ever the easiest to for∣give: As I doubt not your Grace will the presumption of this Address, from, 7th Sunday af∣ter Trinity, 1684. May it please your Grace, Your Grace's Most humble and Most obedient Servant, Symon Patrick.
To my Beloved Friends the Inhabitants of the City of Peterburgh. THE reason of Printing these Discourses, is nothing else, but the hope I have, that by presenting to your Eyes, what you heard lately with your Ears; it may make not only a new, but a more lasting impression upon your hearts: because you may have recourse to it when you please; and thereby not only refresh your memories, but set∣tle in your minds the remembrance of those things, which you perceive have a power in them, to perswade you to the constant performance of that duty, which is the subject of this Book.
A weighty Duty it is, whose pra∣ctice I here most earnestly press: and thereby invite you also to the enjoy∣mentof a very high Priviledge; the highest we are capable of, in this pre∣sent State. So it was accounted in ancient times; when to be detained from it by sickness, or such like hindrance, was lookt upon as a very sore
affli∣ction: under which they groaned so heavily, that they were wont to be comforted, by having the Holy Sa∣crament sent home to them, from the Church, in token of Peace and Communion. But when any one was deny'd the Communion, being thought unorthy to receive it, they lookt upon it as the greatest punishment in the World. Such a punishment, that they could not rest quietly under it; but, being full of grief and sorrow for those sins which kept them from such a Blessing, they made most hum∣ble supplications, with many tears and most lamentable cries, to be restored to the peace of the Church, and Com∣munion with Christ in his benefits.They fell upon their Knees, and be∣seeched the forgiveness and the Prayers, and Intercessions of their Christian Brethren: whom they in∣treated, after a most lowly manner, to solicite for them, that they might no longer remain in that forlorn condition: banished from the pre∣sence of God, and from the Society of his People. And till this was effected, they were in anguish of mind, and bitter∣ness of Spirit: looking upon them∣selves as lost men, who had the sen∣tence of death passed upon them: from which they begged, in sack-cloth and ashes, that they might be delivered.
Ʋpon which things when I reflect, I am amazed, and cannot but cry out, saying; Good God! how are we faln? What a dismal decay is there of Christian Piety among us? What an universal Lethargy hath seized us, in these Ages? Whereinwe see men lying very contentedly under that, which the first Christi∣ans thought the heaviest Calamity: Nay, willingly refraining the holy Communion, and keeping themselves from it, as unworthy of the benefit; and yet are not at all troubled at it. What an alteration is this? What new, or rather no Christianity is it; which teaches men now, to lie quiet∣ly in such a condition, as they them∣selves confess makes them unfit for Communion with God; and never to think of bewailing it, and being reconciled to Him, whom they have thus hainously offended? This is so sad a consideration, that it ought to awaken all good men, to call upon their people, and earnestly beseech them, to remember from whence they are faln, and re∣pent, and do the first works. When there was no need to use so many arguments, as I have repre∣sented,
to prove this to be a Chri∣stian Duty; nor so many motives, to perswade men to the frequent pra∣ctice of it: but they ran forwardly to the holy Communion; and were troubled, above measure, if they might not have the priviledge to re∣ceive it.
There were no quarrels then rai∣sed in those days, against the man∣ner of its Administration: no dis∣putes against the posture, wherein it was received. The Ministers of Christ had not their pretious time taken up, in answering objections, and satisfy∣ing doubts and scruples; much less did they stand in need of the assist∣ance of the Civil Power to inforce the practice of this duty. Which all took to be a Commandment of our Lord and Master, to commemorate his wonderful love, and shew forth his death and passion for our sakes; and therefore was no less chearfully and readily obeyed, than if theyhad been invited to the most deliti∣ous Feast, and promised to receive the greatest largesses in the World. That it may be so again, is the design of publishing these Papers; in which I have represented those Truths, which, if they be weighed and laid to heart, will save us this labour for the future. For I have shown you a short way to be free from all fears, and doubts about this mat∣ter: which is, not to leave your selves in uncertainty whether you shall go to Heaven or no; but by making that sure, to make your selves sit for the Holy Communion: unto which you may go with an assured confidence, if you have any good hope to be admitted into the Society of the blessed in Heaven.
If that be out of doubt, you need not doubt of acceptance with Christ, at his holy Table. For which the best preparation is an holy Life; or a serious Resolution of it for the fu∣ture,if hitherto we have lived other∣wise. What other Preparation had the Apostles, for the partaking of the first Eucharist, with our Blessed Lord and Saviour? What other could they have, when Christians re∣ceived it every day? If we have this therefore, which is the main thing, let us not stand upon little niceties: nor waste that time in questioning and debating, whether we be sit or no; which ought to be spent in doing this and other Chri∣stian Duties, whereby we shall be every day fitter to have Communion with our Saviour.
Remember, that it is in actions of Piety, as it is in those of Poli∣cy. A Wisdom that is too scrupu∣lous, commonly doth nothing for fear of doing ill. We read of Cities that have been taken, while the Senators were gravely deliberating how to pre∣serve them. Even so is it here too; over-much niceness about prepara∣tion,makes men never to be prepa∣red. Therefore it is a fault; when it hinders that duty, which it keeps us still thinking how to perform. Let us not confound our selves with words, but understand the sense of things: and then we shall not be perplexed, as many have been, in this business of Preparation.
Much less will any be affrighted from the holy Communion, by being commanded to kneel when they re∣ceive it. Which is no more than they do at their daily Prayers; and therefore should the rather be incli∣ned to do here, when we pray and give thanks for the greatest blessings: which we cannot do in too humble a manner. We worship also and adore our Blessed Lord, in this holy acti∣on: and therefore, one would think, should be disposed of our selves, with∣out any injunction, to fall down upon our Knees, in token of the worship which we give Him. Which is noPopish Ceremony; being not so much as injoined by that Church in the act of receiving; nor observed by the Pope himself (who when he receives, rather sits, or leans a little for∣ward, upon his Throne) but an an∣cient devout Posture of the best Chri∣stians, which the people of the Ro∣man Communion, observe, by long custom, without bidding: And there∣fore should much more be chearfully observed by us; when we are enjoin∣ed to keep to the ancient reverence, wherewith the Saints of God recei∣ved the pledges of our Saviours love. Vouchsafe, I beseech you, to give this small Book, wherewith I present you, a careful Reading, and I doubt not it will free you, not only from these, but from all sorts of scruples, if any of you be troubled with them; which now hinder many people, from the greatest duty, and comfort too, of our holy Religion.
Which if you would be perswaded to perform often; the profit which would redound to you thereby, would be as great as the Credit which it would do to our Church and Religion. For no man can come seriously to the holy Communion; but with some Resolutions of being better than he hath been: which Resolutions are not presently broken, but last for some time: And therefore if there were not too long a distance between one Communion and another, it is likely they might last for ever. For before the force of the first Resolu∣tion were quite lost, it would be backt and strengthned with a second: and so being re-inforced from time to time; while it remained in some power, would become so firm, that it would never be broken.
Make a trial, I earnestly intreat you; and suffer not this pains, which I have taken to serve you, to be thrown away, without that good ef∣fect.Which it will not be, if you make the trial with the same serious∣ness, wherewith I have written this Treatise. In which you will meet with nothing to entertain the fancy, not so much as with fine words and elegant composure; but with good store, I think, of solid sense, to in∣lighten the mind, to inform the judgment, to pierce the heart, to stir up holy devotion; nay, to turn the will, and produce godly Resolu∣tions: which if they be pursued, and have their fruit unto holiness, will in the end bring you to Eternal Life. And that such Resolutions may be both produced and pursued, I will here add one observation more, for the removing the greatest of those hindrances to Holy Communion, which lie in the way of those who pretend to Religion. It is this:
That doubts and scruples, being the weakness, and sickness of the Soul,they that readily entertain them, and then suffer them to remain there quietly and peaceably, are in a very ill case; nay, ought to look upon themselves as in a very dangerous condition. For it is a sign all is naught within; and that they de∣ceive themselves with a vain opi∣nion of their being Religious. For they who are truly so, groan under their doubts and scruples, as under a sore Disease; and therefore will not let them long dwell with them, but seek with all speed to have satis∣faction: which when it is offered, they receive with all readiness of mind, and are not loth to be cured; but rejoice that they are set at liber∣ty to serve God without impediment, and that there is nothing left in their Souls to oppose their duty. Whereas bad people, in a quite contrary way, give admission to those scruples and doubts into their minds, with a secret pleasure; and
having entertained them, let them rest, and take up their lodging there very willingly: because they will plead their excuse, they fancy, for not doing their duty; and be a de∣fence to their lazyness, Worldly mindedness, and other naughty af∣fections.
In short, Doubts and Scruples ne∣ver arise in good mens minds with∣out grief, nor stay there without much trouble; and therefore they long to be rid of them; and are glad when they are discharged; be∣cause they hinder the performance of their Christian Duty: but bad men not only listen to them willingly, but embrace them as welcome Guests, which they cherish, and never part withal, without difficulty, and some sort of inward displeasure; because they desire the Worldly Spirit that is in them should not be left without all excuse, but have something to say for it self, when it is pressed by theforce of Religion, against its incli∣nations. Search, and try your selves by this mark, and the Lord give you a right judgment in all things, for Jesus Christ his sake. In whom I remain Your Faithful Servant, S. Patrick.
Discourse I. THE NECESSITY OF Receiving THE Holy Communion. THE neglect of the Holy Communion of Christ's Body and Blood was so general, and so long continued, in the late distracted times, being laid aside in man whole Parishes of this Kingdom for near twenty
years together, that in some A∣ges of the Church it would have been interpreted a downright A∣postasie from Christ, and a re∣nunciation of the Christian Faith. And, though, blessed be God, since the Happy Restauration of his Majesty to his Throne, and the settlement of the Church up∣on its ancient foundations, it hath not been so generally neglected; yet it is not so much frequented as it ought to be.
No, not upon such great and solemn dayes as this; when we are assembled to commemorate that stupendous Grace, which our Lord purchased for us by his pretious Blood, and bestowed up∣on his Church, in sending the Holy Ghost the Comforter: to be a Witness of his Resurrection and Exaltation at God's right hand; and to confirm us in the belief of all that he hath taught and ap∣pointedin his Church. For we content our selves on∣ly with the Common Prayers (and I wish I could say, that they are duly attended) and with the Ser∣mon: and then turn our backs on that part of the Divine Service, which is properly Christian; and consequently is above all other, most acceptable unto Christ, and unto his Holy Spirit. Which I shall therefore at this time press upon your Conscien∣ces; as a means to revive that ancient Devotion, wherewith such Festivals as this was kept: which now, alas! is wanting a∣mong us. And I shall do it from those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 26. wherein he recommends this duty unto us upon this particu∣lar account; that as oft as we eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, we do show the Lords Death till he come.
In which words it is easy to observe these three practical truths. The two first whereof are plainly supposed; and the o∣ther is affirmed and enjoined. I. The first thing here suppo∣sed is; that it is a Christian Du∣ty, to eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, here spoken of; that is, to receive the Holy Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood. II. The second is, that it is a Christian Duty, which ought to be often performed. And then, III. It is here plainly asserted, that when it is performed, the thing designed in it, and which we ought to aim at, is, to show the Lord's Death till he come.
The last of these will be suffi∣ciently explained, in the hand∣ling of the other two; viz. the Duty; and the Frequent repetitionof it: unto which I shall confine my Discourse. And of the first at this time. I. THat it is a Christian Duty, incumbent upon every one of us, to eat this Bread, and drink this Cup: that is, to receive the Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood. This is supposed in the words. Which are not to be understood as a mere permission, that we may do this, if we think good, and when we think good: but as a command of something we ought to do. For when he tells us what it is we do, when we eat this Bread and drink this Cup, (in which we show forth Christs Death) it plainly implies that it must be done, and is not left to our choice,
whether we will show forth the Death of our Lord or no. Of which more anon: when I have laid some other things be∣fore you, which will convince you, if they be considered, of the Obligation that lies upon you, to the serious performance of this Duty. And for our clear and orderly proceeding, I shall cast my Dis∣course into this method. I. First, I shall show you, that there is a plain institution of this Sacrament; and a command that it should be received. And then, II. Secondly, I shall show from the practice of the Apostles (after hat time when they first received it with our Saviour) that it was no temporary command; but of Everlasting Obligation. III. Thirdly, That there is more han their practice to interpret
the meaning and obligation of this command. IV. Fourthly, That in this Dis∣course of St. Paul to the Corinthi∣ans, there are evident proofs of the necessity of its performance. V. Fifthly, That the very Text shows the same, by the end for which it was instituted. VI. Lastly, That all these reasons are exemplified, by the practice of the Universal Church of Christ. I.
And first, let it be considered that this Holy Sacrament, is a Divine Institution, Ordained, Commanded, and required by Christ Himself. Who, the same night that he was betrayed, took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave itto them, saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the New Te∣stament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Matth. xxvi. 26, 27, 28. Here is as manifest an Institu∣tion of this Sacrament, and as for∣mal a Command to take and eat and drink what Christ then gave, as can be contrived in words. Unless they be plainer which we read in other places: for the In∣stitution is recorded by the two next Evangelists, St. Mark and St. Luke; and here again, in this Chapter, by St. Paul. Which two last named say, that our Saviour added these words in the Institu∣tion of this Sacrament; This do in remembrance of me, Luk. xxii. 19. 1 Cor. xi. 24, 25. Which enjoin this duty by as express a Com∣mand, as those of old; Remem∣ber the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: And, Honour thy Father and thy
Mother. Which may henceforth be blotted out of the number of the Commandments, if we take this to be none; This do in remem∣brance of me. For we can see no difference at all in the way and manner of the expressions, where∣in these things are delivered: much less any such difference, as makes the former to be enacting words (as Lawyers speak) and the latter to enact nothing.
Now, if there were nothing, but this express command alone, to be urged for this duty, one would expect, it should be suffi∣cient to awaken every man to the performance, who hopes to find mercy with God, and to be saved by Christ Jesus. For ye are my Friends (saith he himself, who knew no other terms of it, Joh. xv. 14.) if ye do whatsoever I com∣mand you. Which he had said be∣fore, in the very first words ofthe Gospel for this day, Joh. xiv. 15. If you love me, keep my Com∣mandments. How are we then the Friends of Christ? Where is our love to him; if we do not this, which is one of the things that he hath commanded, in as downright and solemn terms, as any other thing whatsoever? His Friends? No; He that shall break one of the least of my Commandments, saith he again, and teach men so, he shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven: that is, he shall not have any share there∣in; but be slighted and rejected, as he slighted that Command∣ment, Math. v. 19. And therefore what will be∣come of those, (I beseech you consider it) who break not one of the least, but one of the greatest of his Commandments; as this cer∣tainly is? For it is his
last, and dying Commandment; and there∣forenot the least. The same night that he was betrayed, he took Bread, &c. (saith St. Paul here in this Chapter, v. 23.) The very night before he suffered, he instituted this Sacrament, and enjoined his Disciples to do this in remembrance of him: as a means no doubt to make all the rest of his Com∣mands the better observed; by preserving him, and his wondrous love perpetually in their memo∣ry. Where will they appear then, who refuse, or neglect to do this? Or what will they be able to say for themselves, who have no re∣gard to such a remarkable Com∣mandment?
For suppose it had come only in the form of a request, and not with the authority of a com∣mand; could any sensible heart have refused to perform it? What? not yield to the desire of such a Friend, as well as such a Master, who hath laid such obligations upon us, as none of mankind ever received, nor can receive, but from him alone? This is strange: this is unaccountable. For all the World looks on him, as a man of a barbarous nature, void of all hu∣manity; who denies the last suit of a dying person; though a mere stranger to him: especial∣ly, when it will put him to little or no trouble; but rather be a pleasure to perform it. What a wretched Creature then is he, by what monstrous name shall we call him, who puts away from him the last request of a dying Friend, and of a great Friend; one that hath merited ten thou∣sand times more of him, than his request comes to? This adds the most hideous ingratitude to his Crime; and is moreover such a shameful violation of the sacred Laws of Friendship; that itmakes him most odious both to God and man for ever. And yet their guilt is not so small as this; who mind not those last words of our blessed Sa∣viour, Do this in remembrance of me. Which are more than a Request; nay, more than a command; be∣ing his last Will and Testament, which he was about to seal with his blood: and the last Will of him, who loved us better than his own life; who dyed, that we might live; who of his own ac∣cord laid down his life, which no body had power to take away. For he had all things, even An∣gels themselves at his command; and more particularly, was our most gracious Lord and Master, and hath the most unquestion∣able Authority over every one of us.
Who cannot therefore neglect this his last Will and Testament,without the most dreadful aggra∣vations of such disobedience, nay contempt; as will remain with∣out a Name, till that terrible day, when he shall come himself to charge men with this guilt of slighting his dying words. Think of it I beseech you, what sort of command this is. And (to use the words of an Excellent Man) if you have any sense of shame, you cannot; any sense of duty, you dare not; any sense of love, you will not neglect it: but come as oft as you have opportu∣nity, and do this in remembrance of him. Whose Command ought to over-awe you, as he is our Lord; since he might have ex∣pected to have prevailed with you, by his bare intreaties, as he is our Friend.
For it may be further added unto this consideration, that it is a command of a peculiar nature:having no reason for its perform∣ance but purely our regard to his will and pleasure, and our true love and affection to him; which is hereby tried, more than by other duties of Religion. Unto which there is something in na∣ture to incline us; and it is made our manifest interest by the frame of our Souls and Bodies, and by the constitution of that Society one man hath with another; to be just (for instance) and mer∣ciful; to be sober, faithful and grateful; to live peaceably with our Neighbours, and obediently to our Governours; and to com∣mend our selves also to God by Prayer, and to give him thanks, &c. But of doing this, we should never have thought, had not our Lord required it. And therefore the performance of it, is a pure respect to him; the mere effect of our Faith in him; and a sin∣gular
proof of the love and the re∣verence, which we bear towards him: as the neglect of it is an evident demonstration, that what∣soever natural vertue men may have, they have no Christian; and so have no title to go to that blessed place, where Christ our Lord and Saviour is. This is the First: upon which I have staid the longer, because it layes the Foundation of all that follows. For II.
Secondly, Upon this Precept of Christ, the Apostles built their practice, after his Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension to Heaven; from whence he sent the Holy Ghost to confirm that which he had instituted and or∣dained. For immediately upon this, on the very day that theHoly Ghost came down, the num∣ber of Christians being inlarged by the addition of three thousand Souls to the Church, all those Converts, continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in Prayers. Act. ii. 42. Which shows that they did not understand, the command of our Saviour about this matter, to be one of those, which the He∣brews call the precept of an hour (that is, to be observed only at that present time, when it was commanded) but to be of perpe∣tual obligation, in all future times: For as soon as ever any man became a Christian, he lookt upon this as one part of his Chri∣stian duty; as much as hearing the Sermons of the Apostles, and Prayers.
I am loth to spend the time, in going about to prove against vainCavillers, that by breaking of bread is here meant, this holy action of receiving the Communion: and not their bare eating together. But to give full satisfaction in that matter, let it be briefly consider∣ed: First, that breaking of Bread is here placed in the midst, be∣tween other holy actions, preach∣ing, fellowship, (or communica∣ting to one anothers necessities) and prayers; and therefore, in all reason, must be concluded to be it self of that nature: not a com∣mon, but an holy action.
And besides, secondly, their eat∣ing at a common Table, if it be at all mentioned in this Chapter (Acts ii.) under the phrase of breaking bread, is spoken of v. 46. and therefore not intended here. No, nor there neither, I shall show hereafter, for even in those words also [they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, andbreaking bread from house to house, or at home, &c.] the breaking of bread belongs to the holy Com∣munion. And to put all out of doubt, thus the Syriack (an anci∣ent Translation) understands it; expresly turning it thus, in the Eucharist. As it doth also Act. xx. 7. Ʋpon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, &c. that is, when they came to re∣ceive the Eucharist, (saith that Translation) which was a part of their Lords days work; nay, the principal part; for this was the thing for which the Disciples came together, and not merely to hear the Apostle preach. And who can give any reason, why it should not be so now, as it was then? when in familiar speech it was as usual with them to say, they would go to Church to re∣ceive the holy Communion; as it
is with us to say in these days, we will go to Church to Prayers, or to hear a Sermon. III.
But more than this, not only the practice of the Apostles, and first Believers, after they were divinely inlightned by the Holy Ghost, expounds the meaning and the obligation of this Precept to be perpetual: but Christ himself showed it so to be, after he went to Heaven, and was exalted at Gods right hand. For appearing to St. Paul, to make him one of his Apostles, and, in order to it, revealing himself and the whole Christian Religion to him, which he gave him commission and au∣thority to preach; He declared this to be a part of his Will, and a piece of his holy Religion. For I have received of the Lord (saithhe in this Chapter, v. 23, 24. &c.) that which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also, he took the Cup, saying, This is the New Testament, &c.
Observe here, an evident proof, that what our Lord did with his Apostles at his last Supper, he in∣tended should be done by them and by others, when he was gone. For sending one, who was not then with him, nor had any knowledge of him while he was on Earth, to preach his Gospel; he gives him particular instructi∣ons about this matter; to take care to see this done, in remem∣brance of him. So St. Paul (who was the man to whom he appear∣ed,and gave a special Commissi∣on, after he went to Heaven) avows to the Corinthians in this place: telling them, that he de∣livered nothing to them but what he had received of the Lord: and what he delivered to them, was this, that they should do what the Lord Jesus had done with his Apostles, in remembrance of him. This he received from him: that is, it was of the Lords Insti∣tution, and to be practised by his order and special command; and therefore called, the Lord's Supper, v. 20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper. Where it is called the Lord's Supper, not because it was eaten by the Lord with his Apo∣stles (for at that Supper the Co∣rinthians were not present; nor was that now done, in this place where they came together) but
because it was instituted by the Lord: both then, when he eat that Supper with his Apostles; and now again, when he appear∣ed to St. Paul, and required him to see this practised, in the Churches which he converted. And accordingly, was now pra∣ctised in this Church at Corinth; to whom this Discourse of St. Paul is directed. IV. In which we find many things more, to prove this to be a ne∣cessary Christian Duty: which was the fourth head, mentioned in the beginning. I shall single out two: which will make it evidently appear to all unprejudiced minds.
I. The first is very remarkable; that the Apostle takes a great deal of pains, and spends a greatdeal of time, in showing the man∣ner, how the holy Communion ought to be celebrated among them. Which he would not have done, if this had not been a ne∣cessary duty, incumbent on them, by vertue of Christs Command, and a Divine Institution. Do but consider this, I beseech you, and be at the pains to pon∣der at your leisure, how serious, earnest, and laborious the Apo∣stle is here (in this eleventh Chapter of his Epistle) to make the Corinthians sensible, by a long Discourse about it, after what manner they ought to approach to the Table of the Lord: repro∣ving their scandalous behaviour at the Communion, directing them how to reform it, and make a due preparation to receive the benefit thereof. And then tell me, or rather tell your selves, was there any cause, for a reasonable
man, to write so much to show how, and after what manner the thing should be done, if the very doing of the thing had not been necessary, and under the obliga∣tion of a Command? Can the manner and way of doing an action, be matter of du∣ty; and yet that action it self be no duty at all? Or can a man of common sense be very solicitous in giving directions, how men should order themselves in a place, and about a business; into which they may never come, but let it alone?
Can the Apostle be supposed, to say so and so you ought to eat this Bread and drink this Cup; and yet there be no command ty∣ing them to eat it and drink it at all? And so and so you ought to prepare your selves to partake of Christs Body and Blood; and yet after that preparation, they mightchuse, whether they would do the thing for which they were to be prepared? Surely we cannot imagine the Apostle to have had so much idle time to spare; nay, to be so im∣pertinent, as to busy himself in ordering the circumstances of an holy action; if the action it self had not been a necessary, nay, a very weighty duty, and of ex∣ceeding great moment: which therefore he was highly concern∣ed, and took due care, should be duly performed.
II. To which add this consi∣deration: that had not this been a divine Institution, and, the pra∣ctice according to it, a duty in∣cumbent on them; it is not to be conceived, that the Apostle would have suffered the Corinthians to have run so great a hazard, as they did, by the rude manner of doing that action; if theymight innocently have omitted it; and, without any guilt, not have done it at all. Nor would the Corinthians themselves have been so unreasonably cruel to their own Souls, as to have incurred the dreadful danger of Damna∣tion and Death, by an unprepa∣red participation of this Sacra∣ment; if they could have satisfi∣ed themselves that it was no duty to participate; or not of such consequence, but that it might with safety be let alone.
He that eateth and drinketh un∣worthily (saith the Apostle) eateth and drinketh damnation to himself: and for this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep. That is, the divine judgment be∣ing passed against you, hath sei∣zed on you; and struck many of you with sicknesses; others with infirmities, aches and pains, and some with Death; for your rio∣touseating of the Supper of the Lord. Doth it not concern you then, unless you be content to lie still under this scourge of God, till you be all cut off, to be better advised, and not expose your selves in this manner, to the wrath of God: which, it is plain by terrible Executions, is more than kindled against you? Now, unto what course doth he direct them, that they might avoid these Judgments? Doth he advise them to abstain from the Holy Communion, for fear of pro∣phaning it! to forbear to come to the Table of the Lord, lest there he stretcht out his hand against them, and gave them their Deaths wound?
This had been the shortest, and the safest way, according to the ignorant resolutions men make in this present Age, to prevent the danger of Damnation: untowhich the Apostle, no doubt, would have charitably directed them; if he had not known that the thing it self was a duty, and such abstinence from it a sin. He could not otherways have refrained, when he beheld the Sword of Divine Vengeance thus hanging over their Heads, and many already lie bleeding under it, being strucken down to the ground by Sicknesses, Plagues and Death; he could not I say in this lamentable case have abstained, from calling to them with the greatest earnestness and compassi∣on; saying, why do you thus ven∣ture your Souls and Bodies to destruction? Why do you not rather stay away, and wholly for∣bear to approach to the Table of the Lord, where you are in dan∣ger to be undone, for your un∣worthy receiving the sacred pledges of Gods love?
But we hear no such language; because the Apostle had not thus learnt Christ; nor thus received of the Lord. Who commanded and expected that they should not ab∣stain from the Sacrament (as the manner now is) but come to it: net rudely indeed, as they did, but in an holy, decent and prepa∣red manner. Which it had been in vain to discourse of; if it would have been as well, or would have sufficed, to abstain from the act of receiving. This was an invention, not thought of in those early dayes: when they took themselves not to be Christians, if they did not frequent the Holy Communion; as St. Paul proves they were not good Christians, if they did not take care to come in an holy man∣ner unto it.
That's the thing to which he presses them; and the only way, he knew of, to avoid Damnation. Abstaining from the Communi∣on, would not secure them: but let a man examine himself; and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, ver. 28. Not to eat and drink of that holy food, he could not give them a licence. He had no such authority; but lay under an obligation to enjoin the doing of the thing, and to press it earnestly: as a duty that could neither be safely omitted, nor practised without serious Ex∣amination of themselves, that they might not come together to condemnation, v. 34. To come to∣gether for this purpose, to eat and drink that Bread and that Cup, there was a necessity: their only care was, that it might not be to condemnation.
Which things, being well con∣sidered, do convincingly demon∣strate, that this is not only a du∣ty,but a weighty duty, strictly enjoined, and not to be omitted: no, not in that Church, where the profane doing of it, had brought down Death and destruction up∣on them from Heaven. V. The same is evident from the end, for which our Lord insti∣tuted this Sacrament, and com∣manded us to receive it: which is, the publication of the Lords Death till he come. Thats the meaning of this word , Ye do show: you do pub∣lish, the word signifies, and tell it abroad: you profess this, and de∣clare it to all the World, that Christ died for you, and is Lord over you, having purchased you by his blood; and that you own him so to be, and are the Servants and Worshippers of that
Jesus;who gave himself to be Crucified, and to die for you. This is the general meaning of this holy action. Wherein we publickly own Christ, and pro∣fess his Religion: and give it out to all the World, who see what we do, that we are his, and that we are sensible of it, nay, glory in it, and intend to continue his for ever? Now, who can have the confi∣dence to call himself a Christian, and not think he stands bound thus to own Christ Crucified? And therefore he is bound to do that, whereby he doth own him: which is to receive the holy Sa∣crament. Which as often as we do, we show forth the Lords Death: and as often as we neg∣lect, we do as good as say we are ashamed of him, and of his Cross; or that we repent of our Christi∣an Profession.
For if to do this, be to show forth Christs Death, then not to do it, is to stifle and smother it, as much as in us lies: so that no such thing as the Death of our Lord should be published, or known in the World. This I am sure is a true conse∣quence: and our neglect of this duty, will be thus interpreted by our blessed Lord, when he shall come to take cognizance of it. Why? will some say, we te∣stify the contrary, every time we say the Creed: when we make an open and solemn confession of our Faith in him.
But let such persons observe, how they argue in this against themselves. For our Lord, in whom they profess to believe, re∣quires that we should not merely in words, though never so express, but in plain actions also represent his Death and Passion for oursakes; and thereby our high ob∣ligations to him. That's the Doctrine of the A∣postle in this place. For to what end do you break the Bread, but to show the breaking, i. e. the wounding and crucifixion of the Lords Body? And to what end do you pour out the Wine; but to represent the shedding of the Lords Blood, by those wounds he received for our sake? And for what end do you eat that Bread, and drink that Cup, but to shew that we are made one with him, and have Communion with him in his Death and Suffer∣ings?
This is the general end of this Sacrament, gratefully to comme∣morate the Death of Christ; to show, express, declare, and pub∣lish his Death for us, and our in∣terest in it, in plain and signifi∣cant actions. Which not beingperformed, in obedience to his Command, the Faith which we profess in him doth but con∣demn us of shameful infidelity to him. As for the particular ends of it, they are as many as the uses are, which we can make of his Death and Passion. Wherein, whatso∣ever love God the Father showed unto us, in giving his dearly be∣loved Son to die for us; whatso∣ever kindness God the Son ex∣pressed, in offering himself freely unto the Death, and making himself a Sacrifice for our sins: and whatsoever confirmation God the Holy Ghost hath since given us of this love, and this kind∣ness; it is all here commemora∣ted. Whatsoever worship, honour, and service is due to our ever blessed Redeemer, and most bountiful Benefactor, it is all here
acknowledged; and after a most peculiar manner, and with a spe∣cial respect to him, performed. Whatsoever strength we can derive from our Feasting with Christ upon his Sacrifice, and from the oblation we make of our selves, Souls and Bodies unto him, with most powerful Pray∣ers and Thanksgivings: what∣soever comfort we can enjoy in Communion with God, and in Communion with his Church: whatsoever Peace we can have in renewing our Covenant of Friend∣ship with him, in remission of sins, in receiving the power of the Holy Ghost, in the hopes of eternal life, in all holy intercour∣ses between Heaven and us: all this is to be expected, and may be obtained in the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament.
And therefore as this one thing, the Annunciation or pub∣lishingof Christs Death and our relation to him, is the general end; and these comforts, these establishments in Faith, and Hope, and love and obedience, are the particular ends of this Instituti∣on: So all these lay a strong ob∣ligation upon us duly to observe it; unless we be content to renounce our interest in Christ: who hath made this the most so∣lemn badg, and authentick mark of our Christianity; and the great means of conveying to us the benefits of his Death and Pas∣sion, as well as a pledge to assure us thereof. And this one argument alone, taken from the end of its Institu∣tion, is sufficient to convince us that this Sacrament was intended by Christ, to be continued in his Church till he come (as my Text speaks) that is, till his last com∣ing to judge the World: for till
then it will be useful, nay neces∣sary for all these holy ends which I have briefly named. And who∣soever he be that hopes for mer∣cy at that dreadful day, without the careful performance of this duty, is a presumptuous person, and vainly expects it: because he lives in the neglect of the very best way of preparing himself, for that great account, which must then be made of all our actions. VI.
But now let us suppose, that the words of the Institution had been so ambiguous, that they might possibly (if we had had no further explication of them) have been thought to be limi∣ted to that particular feast which Christ did eat with his Disciples, and extended no fur∣ther: yet the practice of the A∣postles, and the practice of the Church in the Apostolical times, and in all succeeding times ever since (which are the best Inter∣preters of the Scriptures) do ex∣pound the words to be a lasting Institution; and an Institution of such moment that it ought to be most punctually observed. And did not Christs own Apo∣stles, think you, understand their Masters meaning, when he insti∣tuted this Sacrament? Or if they had not understood him then, would they not afterward have understood him; when the spirit was so plentifully poured out up∣on them, that they discovered the greatest secrets: even the thoughts and designs of mens hearts?
Hath the universal Church in, and after those times, and during all Ages since, lived in an error; and taken up an unnecessary pra∣ctice,or made too much stir a∣bout it, and been too busy and officious in it? Was there not in this very Church of Corinth (as the Apostle shows in the next Chapter) a miraculous abun∣dance of miraculous gifts? the spirit of wisdom, the spirit of know∣ledge, the spirit of faith, the gifts of healing, of working miracles, of pro∣phesying, of discerning spirits, of divers kind of tongues, of interpre∣tation of tongues? And could not all those gifts, all those spiritual powers, and supernatural assist∣ances, inable them to understand the words of Christs Institution? Was not that indeed, the true Age of the Spirit? Were they not infinitely more inlightned, than any can pretend to be now, or hope to be hereafter? And could they not discover by their illumi∣nations (if it had been true) that which some vain
Enthusiastsdream of, that where there was such plenty of the Spirit, there was no need of such outward Or∣dinances, as the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Could they not see this so clearly, and be so sensible of it, as that they should not have been so much concern∣ed, as they were, about the pra∣ctice of this duty, in that Church, if there was no need of it, or our Saviour never intended it should be of much moment? Nay, as that they should not have with such danger to themselves (as I noted before) have repeated it in their Church, if our Saviour ne∣ver intended any such repeti∣tion?
Surely, these things carry such evidence in them, that to add more light, in so clear a case, would be (as we say) to hold a Candle to the Sun. And there∣fore I shall here make an end ofmy proofs: supposing I have said rather too much than too little in this argument; and that you stand fully convinced, the Cele∣bration of this holy Communion, is not only of divine Institution, to be used by the Church in all Ages, but must of necessity be duly practised by us, if we hope to be saved. And if that be true, hearken then I beseech you what follows thereupon. I. What shall we then think of those, who live in the constant neglect of it? Suffer me to propose this single plain question to you. Whether the willful continuance in any known sin, be not a damnable State? A state of direct opposi∣tion to our Saviour; and conse∣quently
a state wherein there is no Salvation? Can this be denied? and it is as undeniable, that a constant neglect of a known Pre∣cept of Christ, a Precept so uni∣versally owned, so universally practised, as you have heard, in the Church of God, is a wilful sin. What is it else? or what can make a sin willful, but acting against a clear knowledge, and conviction, and means and oppor∣tunities, of doing otherways?
Consider of it, I beseech you, again and again. If willful sins do not actually damn, being con∣tinued in; let us know, for what sins they are, for which men are damned: or do you think there is any such thing as damnation at all? Certainly, if there be dam∣nation, it is for wilful sins: and if there be wilful sins, they are sins deliberately committed a∣gainst a known Law: and ifthere be any known Law among Christians, this is one; that they ought to receive this holy Sacra∣ment, in remembrance of their Lord and Masters Death for them: and therefore the constant, the affected, the upbraided, the re∣proved, and yet not reformed, o∣mission of this duty, is most cer∣tainly a deliberate, nay a pre∣sumptuous omission of it; or else there is no such thing as presump∣tion in the World.
What will you think then of your selves, I ask again, if from time to time, from month to month; nay, from year to year, you wilfully neglect a plain, an evident, an undoubted Precept of our blessed Lord and Saviour? a Precept commanding us to com∣memorate his Death, to represent his Passion, to admire his Love, to praise his Kindness, to partake of his Graces, to share with himin his Comforts, to knit our selves faster to him in holy Obedience, and to rejoice in hope of feasting with him and all the Company of the blessed in his Heavenly Kingdom? If you have not been hitherto convinced of this duty, your sin is the less; and may in some mea∣sure admit of an excuse. But if, being now convinced, you stand out, and still neglect the perfor∣mance of it; then can you not in any wise have the least excuse for your wilful disobedience. And if you be not now convinced, by these things which have been re∣presented to your minds; I must say, it is because you wilfully re∣fuse, because you will not receive conviction. And this wilful re∣fusal to be convinced, this shut∣ting your Eyes against the clear light wherein this duty is shown to you, is still another wilful sin;
added to the presumptuous neg∣lect of the holy Communion. II. Satisfy your selves about what I have now proposed: determine what is like to become of you, if you continue in a wilful sin (as the neglect of the holy Com∣munion most certainly is, when the will of Christ, in an express Law commanding it, is made known to you and pressed upon you) and then I may be the less earnest in beseeching you, to re∣main no longer under this heavy guilt. For how can you, with your Eyes open, run your selves into Eternal Damnation? what need is there that I should be∣seech you, not to throw your selves headlong into the Fire that never shall be extinguished? It is sufficient to intreat you once
more, to consider what hath been said, to believe it, and to keep it in mind: and then you will make an amends for former neg∣lects, by a more careful and zea∣lous performance of this duty, in time to come. Especially if you consider how by neglecting this duty, you neg∣lect all those invaluable blessings, which are represented, offered, and communicated to us in the right performance thereof. This is the only Argument whereby I shall further urge you: but I will press it in a few parti∣culars.
I. And first, there is nothing wherein all Christians do more universally agree than this, that God in giving his Son to die for us, demonstrated the greatest love that was ever shown to man∣kind. Which incomparable lovewe all agree likewise, is repre∣sented, expressed and recommen∣ded to us, in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. And can we think fit then, to neg∣lect this holy Communion? For do we not therein neglect and undervalue that wonderful love, which in the holy Communion is most effectually represented, laid before us, and exhibited un∣to us? Is the love of God so inconsi∣derable a thing, as to be slighted and passed by with careless neg∣lect? Is the Death of Christ, wherein that love appeared, so small a thing, as to be forgotten, or seldom thought of; and that although he hath instituted a Sa∣crament on purpose for its Com∣memoration? And do we not forget and slight it, when we regard not that Institution, and make no such Commemoration?
I know how loth men are to yield to these convictions; and how desirous they are to support themselves in a belief, that they neither undervalue that love, nor forget this Death, though they do not attend at the Table of the Lord. For they remember both, they say, in their own private thoughts; and give God thanks for his inestimable love in giving Christ to die for them.
But suppose they say true; that they have such a sense of God and of our blessed Saviour; as not altogether to let them slip out of their minds, nor wholly forget their benefits: yet let them weigh this seriously, that where a known divine institution, appointed on pur∣pose for the Commemoration of Christs Death, and of Gods love therein manifested, is neglected; it must be confessed that the same love of God, and death of Christ is in avery sinful degree undervalued and forgotten. For no Friend will think himself remembred by him; who lays aside that very thing, which he left him, and solemnly desired him to wear, in token of his remembrance. Let such men consider also, that they stand bound not only to re∣member or call to mind Christs Death privately, but openly to make that solemn and publick Commemoration of it, which is commanded by our blessed Lord. And in like manner, it is not suf∣ficient to have a value of Gods love; but we ought to show our esteem of it, in the practice of that Institution, wherein that love is signally represented to us. In brief; we deceive our selves if we imagine we remember Gods love in the Death of Christ as we ought to do; while we do
not express and show our re∣membrance by that sign and to∣ken which he hath appointed as a Testimony thereof. If we do it not in this way; He will look upon us as forgetful of him and of his love. II. And by forgetting that, it is not to be conceived how much mischief we do to our selves and others. For we are all agreed that the consequence which St. John draws from what hath been now said, is good and strong; Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 Joh. iv. 11. Which mutual love the Apostle presses by such Argu∣ments in that Epistle, as demon∣strate a man hath nothing of God in him, who wants this grace? which contains, at least, one half of the duty of a Christian.
Do we not need then to havethis love inkindled, or rather in∣flamed, nourished and increased in us, by all means? And is there any means so effectual, as the consideration, the solemn con∣sideration how the great God hath loved us, though utterly un∣worthy of his love, nay deserving his heaviest displeasure? And where is this represented so lively to us, as in the holy Communi∣on? Which Christ hath also ap∣pointed on purpose, to be a sa∣cred Bond of love, unity, peace and concord among Christians; by their all eating of one and the same Bread, and drinking of one and the same Cup.
Which while they neglect, how can they pretend to the love of God? or how can they hope to have this mutual love one to ano∣ther, rooted in their hearts? when they never or seldom com∣municate together in the most holy things? never own that they are members one of another; nor link themselves together by that common tye of Charity, which their Lord hath instituted, and commanded them to use, for this very end, among others; that they may be knit together in one body, be of one mind and heart, and live in peace? No, they are all broken in pie∣ces, they are torn in sunder, and continue so; and hate and ma∣lign, and bite and devour one another: and that with a most implacable rage and malice, to the great scandal of Religion; the spoiling of humane Society; the danger of over-turning Govern∣ment; and thereby ruining all our outward comforts. And shall we heighten this guilt by adding this aggravation to it, that we love to have it so?
If we have any kindness leftone for another, nay any kind∣ness for our selves, let us not re∣fuse the means of a cure: this So∣vereign means, which alone will prove an effectual remedy. Being a remedy of Gods own prescrip∣tion and appointment, for the quenching all our unnatural heats, and the killing all our un∣christian hatreds, and the bury∣ing of all our animosities and quarrels, so that they shall never rise again: Or if they do, be im∣mediately extinguished, and laid again in their Graves, by laying a new obligation upon our selves in this Sacrament, to love one another; and to walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour, Eph. v. 2.
III. In which Sacrament I might represent how many com∣fortsthere are contained, besides those of love; comforts infinitely more satisfactory, than those vain, those perishing pleasures, of which sensual men are so gree∣dy, that they make them neglect this holy Communion: and thereby lose those divine, those heavenly joys, which Christ, in the serious use of it, imparts un∣to his members.
But, to shorten this Discourse, let it suffice to ask you, what is there in the love of God towards Mankind, which you can think more valuable, than the Covenant of Grace, by which alone, you have the promise of remission of sins assured unto you? And con∣sequently, how can you forget that most pretious blood, which ratifies, which confirms and seals that gracious Covenant? Or how can you neglect that special means, which the love of God ourSaviour hath ordained, for the preserving the remembrance of his most pretious blood-shedding fresh in your minds? If you do truly remember that blood which was shed, that bo∣dy which was broken for you; you must at the same time judge it fit and necessary, to demonstrate you remember it, by making that Commemoration of it, which our Lord requires: and not neg∣lect to see that represented to the Eye, and expressed by real acti∣ons lively signifying the Death of Christ; which you pretend grate∣fully to Commemorate in your hearts. It is much to be feared, that they do but deceive their own Souls, who pretend to the one without the other.
For did not God frame and fa∣shion you in your Mothers Womb? And doth not he whoframed you there, know your frame d your mould better than you
do your selves? And did he not therefore appoint this outward representation of his love, in the holy Communion, because he knew otherwise you would not be sufficiently sensible thereof? What other reason can there be assigned for this Institu∣tion, but the wise goodness of God; who knows that divine things accommodated to sense, do, by affecting the Eye, better affect the heart, than it would be affect∣ed without such sensible applica∣tions? This is the reason, why he hath made spiritual things to become in great measure sensible; in accommodation to our nature, and compliance with our frame; which he best knows, because it is of his own contrivance. Who hath clothed our Spirits with flesh: and therefore moves theinward powers by Which if we slight, these means of being affec spiritual things, which God most perfectly understands how our minds may be best moved, hath accommodated and appoin∣ted for that end: it is evident we despise the Wisdom of God; or are vainly conceited of our selves: and presume to think that we can be as well affected, without these outward means and sensible helps, which he hath instituted for our spiritual improvement. A strange presumption, this! But which every one is guilty of, who contents himself with bare thinking of Christ and of his love in dying forus: without the use of those sensible signs, which he hath appointed, to awaken our minds, unto a more lively and deep ap∣prehension and sense of his love, than any thing else can give us.
which considerati∣ be added; that the pport and comfort, the fe of every Christian Soul, is to be in a state of Friendship with God; by continuing in the Holy Covenant we have made with him, and he with us in Christ Jesus. If this be not pre∣served carefully; all true joy in this World is lost together with it.
Now, do you not find your selves too prone to break your Baptismal Vow; and thereby to violate that Covenant, wherein you stand engaged, and sacredly promised to keep? And shall not that Covenant, after you have violated it, be solemnly and spee∣dily renewed; that the breach between God and you may be healed, and you may notwith∣standing look upon him, as your Father? And is not the Sacra∣mentof Christs Body and Blood appointed for this renewal? Do you know any other solemn way of being reconciled again? What account then can be gi∣ven of it, that so many having broken this Covenant, are not at all concerned to renew it? but remain separated from God, and from holy Communion with him? How come we to be so careless of our Souls, so negligent of God, so unconcerned in the Covenant of Grace, as wilfully, continuedly, from time to time to forbear that Holy Ordinance; wherein not only this Covenant is renewed, but so many mercies of God, as you have heard, commemorated and represented; so many joyes, so many comforts and spiritual assistances communicated unto us?
There is no account to be gi∣ven of this matter; no reason thatcan be assigned but only this: that men will not seriously consi∣der, either their duty, or their interest. Or if they do, when they are clearly represented to them, they forget and lay aside all those considerations; and do not immediately pursue them, whither they would lead them. And so they turn to something else; which takes up their thoughts and their time, and in∣gages their affections: till they be carried away Captive by the Lusts of the Flesh and of the World; beyond the power of any means, that we know of, to rescue them from destruction.
But I hope better things of those, who duly attend to what hath been said; and that all those who have not now prepared themselves for this Holy Duty, of showing forth the Lords Death, whereby he purchased, among o∣therblessings, the great gift of the Holy Ghost (which it would have been most proper, on this day, to have most solemnly ac∣knowledged) will speedily set themselves about it; and be rea∣dy against the next opportunity: that is, against the next Sunday, or at least the next after that; and so for the time to come be careful to perform this duty, as oft as the Christian Religion re∣quires. Which, I shall demonstrate in the next Discourse, is much oftner than men imagine. The end of the first Discourse.
Discourse II. THE FREQUENCY OF Holy Communion.
HAving demonstrated in the foregoing Discourse, that it is a duty indispensably lying upon all Christians, to re∣ceive the holy Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood; a duty of great weight and importance; for the neglect of which I do not see, how we can atone, by the performance of any other duty whatsoever: I proceed to show,that it is a duty which ought to be frequently repeated; for as oft as ye eat this Bread (saith the Apo∣stle) and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come. Which plainly insinuates, that they did this often: and that it was their duty so to do, shall be the subject of this present Discourse. And here now, in the very en∣trance of it, I must acknowledge, that we are not told either in this place of Scripture, or any other, how often we ought to Commu∣nicate, or how frequently the Church ought to make this Com∣memoration of Christs Death and Passion for our sake.
Of which observation men now make a very bad and preposte∣rous use. For, finding that our Lord hath only said, This do, in remembrance of me, but no where said, when, at what time, or times, it is to be done, they imaginethat they satisfy his will; if they do not wholly withdraw them∣selves from his Table, though they come never so seldom thi∣ther. And truly, by this sort of rea∣soning, that because we are no where told how often we should do this, we need only take care to do it sometime or other; it may be thought sufficient, if we do it but once in our whole life. And so dangerous are such con∣ceits, which men frame to them∣selves from such Observations, that vast numbers (though other∣wise not wicked) live in a con∣stant neglect of this Duty, till they come to die: and then, up∣on their Death-Beds calling for this Sacrament and receiving it, they think they have fulfilled the will of our Lord, in doing this, as he hath commanded; because, though he hath commanded it to
be done, he hath no where com∣manded when, or how oft it should be done. From whence we may certain∣ly conclude that this is a false consequence, which men draw from the silence of the holy Scri∣ptures in this matter: because it is so dangerous and pernitious, that, in a manner, it quite de∣stroys our Religion; by taking away this part of it, which is the principal; and making it unne∣cessary as long as a man lives, so he be but sure to receive when he is at the point of Death.
Of that indeed no man can be assured: but supposing he doth re∣ceive the Communion at the very last gasp, he is thus far safe and not guilty of the breach of this Commandment, if this conse∣quence be true: that because our Saviour hath no where appointed the time, or said how frequentlywe should do this in remembrance of him, we do comply with his Institution, provided we do it sometime or other. Now to destroy this false no∣tion, from whence such absurdi∣ties flow, I shall in the first place show you; that the quite con∣trary, naturally and necessarily follows from this observation, of our Saviours appointing no time, for the performance of that which he required to be done in remem∣brance of him. From whence mens wicked hearts draw this conclusion, as I have said, that it may suffice to do this now and then, though never so seldom. I.
But the true, the genuine, and honest conclusion which follows from thence is this: that ourLord having named no fixed set∣led time or times for the perform∣ance of this holy action, it is an argument that he designed and appointed it as a constant, com∣mon, and ordinary part of the Christian Service, which he would have performed in his Church at all times.
Let those words of Christ, this do in remembrance of me, be well weighed, and there is no man can infer less from thence, than that if he had intended this should be done only at some such great and solemn times, as the Passover was among the Jews (when he first instituted this Feast, and eat it with his Disci∣ples) he would not have suffered us to be ignorant of his meaning, but told us in plain terms, that upon some certain days, and at some extraordinary Assemblies, this should not be forgotten: Butthat he having named no time whatsoever, we ought to look upon his words, as instituting this holy action to be a part of that Worship, Honour and Ser∣vice, which he expected from his people in all their Religious As∣semblies. For being ordained in remem∣brance of him, it is most reason∣able to think he intended this Commemoration should be as con∣stantly made, as they met toge∣ther to acknowledge him for their Lord and Saviour, and on∣ly Mediator with God the Fa∣ther. And being a Commemoration or∣dained instead of all the Sacrifi∣ces, whereby, under the Law, they daily implored the mercies of God, or gave thanks for them; it ought, in all Conscience, to be as continual a rite of Religious Worship as those Sacrifices were.
And thus, when men had up∣right hearts, and unbiassed affe∣ctions, they did honestly under∣stand our Saviours meaning; and accordingly made this a constant part of their Divine Service: Which is the next thing I would desire you to observe. For I would not have you to rely mere∣ly on my reasonings and inferen∣ces (though I verily think this would appear, a true way of ar∣guing, and a right conclusion un∣to any unprejudiced mind, if we had no more to justify it) but as a further evidence of this; nay, as a full conviction that we ought so to take it, I beseech you seri∣ously to consider; that II.
Thus the Apostles and the first Christians understood the mean∣ing of our blessed Saviour in thisInstitution. And can we have any better Expositors of his words, any surer directors of our pra∣ctice, than such great Servants of his, who were filled with the Holy Ghost? Who never met to∣gether to worship God, and our Saviour; but this was a part, and a principal part too, of the ser∣vice they performed in those As∣semblies. If I can make this good, the other will follow: for there can no other account be gi∣ven, why they did this as con∣stantly as they assembled them∣selves for Divine Service; but be∣cause they took that to be our Sa∣viours meaning and intention, when he said, This do, in remem∣brance of me.
Now there is nothing more apparent in the holy story, than this, that the Apostles, and those whom they first converted, made this a daily part of the offices of Religion.For we read that when three thousand Souls joined themselves to the Church upon the day of Pentecost, they continued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellow∣ship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayers. Act. ii. 42. Where break∣ing of Bread, I proved before, sig∣nifies their receiving the Eucha∣rist; and now observe, that the words we translate continued sted∣fastly (which in the Greek are ) signify, that they were constant and assiduous in this holy action. For the word imports frequency, as appears from other places; particularly from Rom. xii. 12. Where there is the same word in the Apostles Command for Prayer; and we translate it, continuing instant in Prayer. And Coloss. iv. 2. it is joined with watching thereunto with thanksgiving. From which Obser∣vations we gain this; that as fre∣quent
and instant as they were in Prayer, so frequent and instant they were in breaking of Bread: for they were , con∣stant and unwearied in them, both alike. Now what this constancy or frequency was, is expounded in the 46. verse: where St. Luke saith, they continued (the same word again) daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, or at home; as the word is better translated in the Margin of our Bibles. Where we see that breaking of Bread at home, in their own pri∣vate Houses, was as
daily, as their going to the Temple publickly: and can be meant of nothing, but their receiving the holy Commu∣nion every day. For no man can so much as imagine a reason, why breaking of Bread should be men∣tioned as their daily practice athome, together with their resort to the Temple service abroad: but to signify that they commu∣nicated among themselves, in the service of the Eucharist or Holy Communion, proper to the Faith of Christians; as they communi∣cated with the Jews in the service of the Temple, common to all the Disciples of Moses. You may impute this, it is pos∣sible, to the warmth of their zeal: but remember withal, that this zeal was grounded upon know∣ledge; which they wanted not in those dayes. And the know∣ledge they had of Christian Reli∣gion taught them; that when our blessed Saviour commanded them to do this, in remembrance of him, naming no time when it should be done, he meant it should be done always in their Christi∣an Assemblies: as the perfecti∣on and Crown of that Service,
for which they Assembled. III.
And indeed, if we had not had these records of the practice of the Apostles, and of the first Christians, to explain the mean∣ing of our Saviours Institution; yet we should have had reason to think it was so in the Apostles days (and therefore the meaning of our Saviour) because this pra∣ctice of receiving the holy Com∣munion every Day, continued in the Church for some Ages. I can∣not say, in every place (for we have no Records of that, but ra∣ther of the contrary) but in ma∣ny places, and in the most fa∣mous that are come to our no∣tice; and where the vigour of Christian Religion remained; and where they were awakened, by more than ordinary dangers, to consider their obligation. Thus we find St. Cyprian in his Exposition of the Lords Prayer, takes that Petition, give us this day our daily Bread; to signify, in the spiritual sense, our desire to be fit to receive the Eucharist every day, for the food of Salvation. And in his Epistle to the Church of Thibaris, speaking of a more grievous and fiercer fight of per∣secution hanging then over their heads, he tell them, therefore the Souldiers of Jesus Christ ought to fortify and arm them∣selves well against it, with an un∣corrupt Faith, and robust Vertue; considering that they did for this end quotidie calicem Christi sangui∣nis bibere, &c. every day drink the Cup of Christs blood, that they might also be able to shed their own blood for Christs sake. In which words he addresses his Discourse to the
Laicks, as well as the Clergy: ex∣hortingall the faithful unto the constancy of Martyrdom; which Men, Women and Children in∣dured. Nay, long after this, we learn from St. Hierom (in his Apology to Pammachius for his Books a∣gainst Jovinian, and other places) that this Custom continued at Rome, and in Spain; as well as in Africk: where St. Austin tell us (in his famous Epistle to Janua∣rius) that in his time, some did quotidie communicare, &c. daily communicate of the body and blood of our Lord; though others, he ac∣knowledges, did it only on cer∣tain days. St. Basil also begins his Epistle to Caesaria Patritia in this manner; to communicate every day, and partake of the holy body and blood of our Lord Christ, , is a commendable and profitable thing: and then adds, that they did communicate four
times a Week in his Church, on the Lords day, Wednesday, Friday, and the Sabbath, that is Saturday; and on other dayes, if the memory of any Martyr fell upon them.
Nay, three or four Ages more after this, such a sense of this De∣votion remained, that Walafridus Strabo (in his Book of Ecclesiasti∣cal Affairs, c. 20.) sayes, it seems to be very full of reason, that Chri∣stians, especially Clergymen, should every day be imployed in divine Offi∣ces; and, when some very grievous spot of mind or body doth not hinder, receive the Lords Bread and Blood, without which we cannot live: imi∣tating the wholsome diligence of the primitive Church; concerning whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that they persevered in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayers: and a little after, they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, andbreaking Bread from House to House &c. quoting the words I named before. All which, and much more that might be said, make it ap∣parent, that the Church in the best times, and the best men in the Church, in after Ages, lookt upon this as an ordinary part of Christian Worship: which Christ intended should be per∣formed in his Church, as oft as they Assembled for Divine Ser∣vice. And what other ground could they have for it, but this; that Christ having confined it to no time, they thought, in rea∣son, it should be taken for a duty he expected from them at all times, when they came to wor∣ship him, and make their thank∣ful acknowledgments unto him.
IV. And truly, we can gather no less from the very nature of this holy action; which sufficiently shows it was our Saviours mean∣ing, that it should be a daily part of the Churches Service. It be∣ing, as all know, a solemn Thanks∣giving unto God, and a Form of Prayer and Petitioning (which every one confesses are acts of Worship to be constantly per∣formed) and also a commemora∣tion of that upon which the effi∣cacy of all our Prayers and Thanksgivings depends, viz. the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross: which is here likewise represen∣ted unto God, as that which ap∣pearing always before him in the Heavens, intercedes for us, and makes all our Sacrifices accept∣able to his Majesty.
And besides all this, is the pe∣culiar worship which the Church gives unto Christ, as a grateful acknowledgment of his unparal∣lel'd love, in laying down his life for us, to purchase the most in∣estimable benefits; which he herein also assures unto us, and bestows upon us. Which is in part declared in these words, up∣on which I have built my Dis∣course, wherein we are told the end of this holy Sacrament is, to show or publish the Lords Death: that is, show it with praise; predi∣cate, extol and magnify (as the word  imports) pro∣claim with our highest praises, the loving kindness of the Lord; in the glorious work of our Re∣demption, through his most pre∣tious blood. But is more fully declared in the very words of the Institution, when he said, Do this in remembrance of me: which showthat our doing this, is the pecu∣liar honour, we do our blessed Lord; by making a publick com∣memoration that he took our na∣ture upon him, that he died for us, that he obtained thereby a glorious Victory over all our E∣nemies; that he purchased for himself and for us immortal glo∣ry; and is now at Gods right hand, in full power to bestow it upon us. In memory of all these things, saith our Saviour, do this; that when I am dead, I may al∣ways live in your hearts; and the knowledge of all these things, may go down to all posterity; and be commemorated from one Generation unto another for e∣ver, with thankful praises: but especially the memory of my Death may be transmitted to them; and be celebrated with continual acknowledgments.
For it was but fit that he shouldbe publickly honoured in that, which when he suffered, exposed him to the greatest contempt. And no doubt it was the design of God in appointing this Rite of holy worship, to have his Death commemorated with Everlasting praises, which, for the present, had brought him into the utmost disgrace. To which purpose is that passage, in an Easter Sermon, ascribed to Caesarius Bishop of Arles: because he intended to remove out of our sight the body which he had taken, and to place it in Heaven; it was necessary that in the same day, he should consecrate for us the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, to the end, that we should honour by the type, that which had been once offered for the price of our Salvation.
In short this is the proper wor∣ship of God Incarnate, and of ourCrucified Saviour: and therefore cannot be thought by wise consi∣derers, to have been intended to be left unto uncertainty, whether we would perform it or no, or when we would be pleased to perform it: but to have been or∣dained as a daily Service, which should be continually performed unto Christ.
Which, in truth, the continual necessities of the Church re∣quire: it being the principal Act whereby we have Commu∣nion with Christ; and partake of the Sacrifice he made on the Cross. We are united unto him, as Members of his Body, in the other Sacrament of Baptism; wherein also his holy Spirit is be∣stowed upon us, as a principle of life and motion sutable to our Religion: which directs us unto this Sacrament as the chief out∣ward visible means of preservingour Union with Christ, by ha∣ving constant Communion with him, and with his holy spirit. Whose influences he here com∣municates unto us, for our growth and increase in spiritual life and holiness: and we therefore, in reason, should be desirous con∣stantly to receive, because we constantly want them; and are too apt to start aside from him, unto whom we ought to keep our selves stedfastly united, by Faith, and Love, and uniform univer∣sal Obedience. Put now all this together, that it is an act of holy worship; a worship altogether as peculiar to the Church, as the Sacrifice on the Cross is peculiar to Christia∣nity; the only worship where∣with we honour our blessed Lord and Saviour; a Commemoration, nay, a representation of that which makes all our Services ac∣ceptable
unto God; and the prin∣cipal way and means whereby we have Communion with Christ; from whom we stand in continual need of the Communi∣cation of his grace: and we shall soon be satisfied, that the plain∣est, and most reasonable answer that can be given to those, who ask, how often did Christ intend we should eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, is this; as of∣ten as we assemble publickly to worship God our Saviour. For there is no worship peculiar to him but this; nor is there any, wherein we have such Commu∣nion with him, as in this: by which we do truly and indeed participate of the Sacrifice offered unto God upon the Cross, as the Jews and the Gentiles did of their Sacrifices offered up on their Al∣tars.
Thus the Apostle discourses atlarge in the Chapter before my Text, 1 Cor. x. 16, 17. &c. where he takes it for an undeniable truth, that Christians do com∣municate with God their Saviour, in the merits of his Death, by re∣ceiving the holy Eucharist. And thence proves it to be unlawful for them to partake of the Gen∣tile Sacrifices; by proving that to eat of their Sacrifices was to be accessory to their Idolatries: as the Jews by eating of such Sa∣crifices as were offered among them, did partake of the Altar (or did communicate with the Altar) that is, Communicate with God, whose Altar that was upon which the Sacrifices were consumed. Which evidently supposes that Christians also did in the Eucha∣rist, partake of a Sacrifice, and were thereby joined to Christ, who was that Sacrifice. Which though carried by him into the most holy place of the Heavens, there to be presented unto God, is no less participated by Christi∣ans, in this holy Feast of the Eu∣charist, than the Jews did parti∣cipate of their offerings of thanks∣giving on the Altar. I know very well, it will be objected, that by understanding our Saviours meaning in this In∣stitution after this manner, we prove a great deal too much; and argue our publick service to be defective; when it wants this peculiar worship of Christ, which he ordained.
To which I shall only say this, that if by discoursing thus, we prove no more than is true; our worship must be confessed to be but imperfect, when the Holy Communion is wanting: not so perfect, at least, as that of the an∣cient Christians was. Which we had much better honestly ac∣knowledge,and beseech God to accept for Christs sake, of such services as we do perform, though, in some regard, and in compari∣son, imperfect ones: than, by going about to defend untruths and establish false notions in Reli∣gion, to make our selves more guilty before God. I know also it will be urged against what I have said; that surely it is sufficient, if we every day pray to God in Christs name, and for his sake desire our Prayers may find a gracious Audience; praising him also, as our Saviour and Redeemer and Intercessor at Gods right hand: though we do not use these visible signs, which he hath appointed.
But, if this be intirely suffici∣ent, so that our Christian wor∣ship may be justly thought intire, compleat, and perfect, without doing this in remembrance of Christ:then for what end was it institu∣ted by him? Why did he appoint it, if our worship be compleat without it? Then it is as need∣less and superfluous an addition to the Christian Service, as we seem now, by our intire neglect of it or seldom performance, to imagine it to be. Which, since no Christian dare say, because it disparages the wisdom of our Saviour in ap∣pointing it, if all be perfect with∣out it; we must therefore, to our shame, take the other course, and say; that we are faln into a state of imperfection, but hope our less perfect services will be accepted, by vertue of that most perfect Sacrifice of Christ, which we commemorate publickly, as oft as we are able. V. And that might very well be oftner, than we do commemo∣rate
it; for I shall now proceed to tell you (as an Introduction to the account I am about to give, how the Service of the Church came to be so defective) that when Christian people grew less de∣vout, yet still they did not fail to perform this peculiar service to Christ, every Lords Day, and Holy Day, at the least: that is, on those days of the Week, as you heard out of St. Basil, when the memory of any Martyr was celebrated. Which in time becoming the pra∣ctice of many Churches, made an ancient Writer about Divine Offices (mentioned by
Cas∣sander in his Book of Liturgies) affirm, that men imployed in se∣cular businesses, received the Communion, even in the primi∣tive times, only on the Lords Days and other Festivals: inter∣preting, as many think, the pra∣ctice of the most antient times,by the Customs of his own. It is possible indeed that he had a better reason for what he affirm∣ed; because we find something in Scripture to countenance this opinion, that very early some Chri∣stians did content themselves with so doing. For in Acts xx. 7. we read, that at Troas upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread (i. e. to receive the Eucharist) Paul preached unto them, &c. From whence it should seem (saith our learned Mr. Thorndike) that in this Church at Troas the Eucha∣rist was celebrated, even in the times of the Apostles, not every day as it was at Jerusalem, but only on the Lords Day.
For the first day of the Week being mentioned as the time, when they came together to break Bread, it seems, saith he, to stand against the rest in termsof difference; as if upon other days they did it not. And thus much I believe is certain, that when the Church was multiplied, all Christians could not meet together every day: but some one day, some another; and all on the Lords Day. Which being the principal day, it came to pass in process of time, that it was the only day of the Week when they celebrated the Eucharist: but on that day none omitted it, no more than they did the rest of the Christian Service. And thus, it seems to me most reasonable to understand the matter here at Troas: where they did not omit the Commu∣nion on other days (for I cannot perswade my self, but that they were conformable to the Mother Church of
Jerusalem) but such as could assemble themselves, and attend upon Divine Service daily'did receive it; and on the Lords Day all the Christians in the City came together for that purpose; and whatsoever business they had, which hindered them on other dayes, it did not hinder them on this: but they all came to do their duty to their Saviour, and make a publick Commemoration of his love. And in this they were so strict for a long time, and it was ac∣counted so great a fault to be ab∣sent, that if any persons were found not to have Communicated for three Sundays together, they were to be Excommunicated, and separated from the Society of the Church, by the Canons of three several Synods mentioned by
Zo∣naras upon the eleventh Canon of the Apostles: which orders them to be cast out, as an offence to the Church, who entred into the Church and heard the holy Scrip∣tures,but did not stay for the Prayers, nor receive the Holy Communion. Which was thought so necessary, that the Deacon who before the Communion (as you shall hear anon out of St. Chryso∣stom) cryed, all you who are under penance, you who cannot pray (i. e. with the faithful) go out; is ap∣pointed by the Constitutions cal∣led Apostolical, to stand with the Sub-Deacon, at the Door of the Church, and hinder all the rest, who were not under Pennance (and so bound to Communicate) that they should not go out till they had received the holy Sacrament. And unto this pitch of perfe∣ction, if not higher, our first Re∣formers desired to bring the Ser∣vice of the Church. I say, if not higher, because in the first Com∣munion Book of Edward VI. there is a Rubrick which supposeth daily Communion, not only in
Ca∣thedralsbut in other places: as there is another which takes care the people should be admonished and quickned; when they are negligent to come to the Com∣munion upon the Sunday, or Holy-Day. Which shows (as the learned person above-mentioned observes) that they affected the frequenta∣tion of this Service, according to the primitive pattern; so far as they thought it attainable: desi∣ring that even upon other Holy Days, as well as Sundays, it should be celebrated; in the Mo∣ther Churches, at least, as pat∣terns and examples unto the rest. And thus much Mr. Calvin him∣self roundly declares (after he had commended the ancient cu∣stom of communicating daily, and condemned the custom of com∣municating only once a Year, as a Diabolical invention) that the Table of the Lord ought to beprepared for Christian people, at least, once a Week: and that all should be exhorted and stimula∣ted (and the slothful chidden) to flock, as hungry people, unto such a Banquet: As his words are in his IV. Book of Institutions C. xvii. n. 46. And so it is still enjoined, in one of our Rubricks, that in Ca∣thedral and Collegiate Churches, and Colledges, where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall re∣ceive the Communion every Sunday, at least, except they have a reason∣able cause to the contrary. Now nothing, you have heard, was thought a reasonable cause in an∣cient time to keep any of the peo∣ple from the Communion, except such sins as threw them into the number of the
Penitents: For none of the rest were suffered to go out of the Church, but stayed to receive it. Nay, such wasthe devout affection of the pri∣mitive Christians, while they re∣mained one heart, and one Soul, that they never celebrated the Communion (as we learn from Justin Martyr his first Apology) but they sent it to those Believers who were absent (particularly to those whose bodily infirmities kept them from the publick As∣semblies) that they might have Communion with the Church; and it might appear, by their partaking of the same Bread, that they were one Body, with those who were present.
And here let me briefly tell you, that this Rubrick or Rule, ought in reason to be the rather observed (as it will hereafter in this and other Cathedrals) that the people who live near, or come, upon occasion, thither, may have frequent opportunity to Communicate with the MotherChurch. Where anciently Chri∣stians were very desirous to re∣ceive this holy Sacrament, as oft as they could; that they might testify there was but Ʋnum Al∣tare, one Altar, as they called it, one Christian Society and Com∣munion; unto which they all belonged, and with whom they were in Union: Particular Pa∣rishes in the Diocess, being not distinct Churches, but parts and Members of one Church, which is the Mother Church, from whence they all, in ancient time, did originally spring.
For so we find in the Monu∣ments of the Church, that a Bi∣shop and his Clergy having made Conversions in some considerable part of a Country, there they sea∣ted themselves, and from thence spread the Gospel into neighbour places; who all lookt upon them∣selves afterward, as dependingupon that one prime place, as a stream upon a Fountain: which they owned by communicating there, with the Bishop and his Clergy, as oft as it was possible for them so to do. Thus it is apparent, by the History of the Acts of the holy A∣postles, that the very first Preach∣ers of Religion began in Cities; and afterward carrying the glad tidings of the Gospel into the ad∣jacent Towns and Villages; those Towns and Villages lookt upon themselves as but one Church with that City, and thither re∣paired, as oft as they could, to testify their unity therewith. Es∣pecially at the high Festivals: when anciently there was such a multitude came to receive, that in some places the Church could not contain them. So we learn from a Letter of Leo the First, Bi∣shop of Rome, to
Dioscorus Bishopof Alexandria, in the Fifth Cen∣tury: where he advises him, that when any great Festival makes the Assembly more numerous, and there meets together so great a Company of Believers, that one Church cannot contain them, there is no question but the obla∣tion of the Sacrifice must be renewed; when the first company is gone, and the Church is filled again with the presence of a new Assembly, Epist. 81. And St. Austin tells us (in the fa∣mous Epistle before-named) that the Thursday before Easter, the numbers of the people were so great in some places, that the Sa∣crament was celebrated both Morning and Evening: whereas on that day the custom was to ce∣lebrate it only in the Evening. Which as it shows the won∣derful decay of Devotion among us, in comparison with ancient times, so reproves that grand er∣ror
which is now crept in among us, even among well-disposed peo∣ple, in many such places as this. Where the people imagine, that if they Communicate in the Pa∣rish Churches of the City where they live; they need take no no∣tice at all of the Cathedral there. No, they rather indeavour, and sometimes with a factious kind of zeal, to advance the credit of their Parish Churches, in opposi∣tion to that great Church, from which they all flowed, and on which they still depend. This is quite out of the way of ancient Religion, which taught men to bear the greatest regard to the Mother Church, where the Principal Pastor of their Souls was seated (and thence called the Cathedral) and to desire with him immediately to communicate, as oft as they had opportunity, or could conveniently.
For to do otherwise, was in effect to throw off all respect to him, or very much to neglect him and his See; and was lookt upon as the principle and begin∣ning of Schism, by breaking the unity of the Church: and in time led men to that pestilent fancy, which now very much prevails; that every Parish Church in the Diocess is a distinct Church; which hath all power within it self. VI.
We therefore who are Priests and Deacons, placed in a Cathedral, should, above all others, be wil∣ling, nay desirous to comply with the Order of our Church, now re∣cited: and not easily admit of any cause, as a reasonable excuse for our forbearance. For, let me further acquaint you, that, afterthe people contented themselves with receiving every Sunday, at least; still the Priests and the Dea∣cons, and such, as were not in∣tangled in secular business, con∣tinued the ancient custom of re∣ceiving the Communion every day. This we learn from Micrologus, and Walfridus Strabo before-men∣tioned, and the old Book of Di∣vine Offices in Cassander; and from Rhegino, who lived not much a∣bove seven hundred years ago. In whose Book of Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline, we find this memorable re∣cord; that if any Priest, or Dea∣con, or Sub-Deacon, or any other of the Clergy, being in a City, or a place where there was a Church, did not come to the daily Sacrifice, he should not any longer be accounted a Clergyman; if, upon reprehension, he did not amend.
And can we think it unreason∣ablethen to be tied unto less? which is, to attend upon this Sa∣crifice (as it may be truly called, in many respects) every Lords Day, at the least? We should ra∣ther think it an honour, and high priviledge, that we may wait upon him so oft at his Al∣tar: and look upon our selves as bound to do him honour, who hath so highly honoured us, by restoring this Commemoration of him in his Church, as near, as we can, to its primitive perfection. VII.
And, as a motive to it, let me now proceed to tell you, that when Christian People grew less frequent in receiving the holy Communion; this neglect was attended with a great decay of holyness and good manners. As when they grew less devout, theygrew more negligent in this holy duty: so this negligence produ∣ced great sloth and carelessness, in all the other duties of a Chri∣stian Life. For becoming less sen∣sible of their obligations to their Lord and Master Christ, who bad them thus remember him, they became unmindful of the rest of his Commands; by forgetting this, which was intended for the making of a perpetual Sacrifice of their Souls and Bodies to him. As we may be convinced, by obser∣ving what a wide difference there is between the first Christians, and us in these dayes: that is, between them who had Christ continually in their thoughts; and us, who seldom remember him. Then their thoughts were, in a manner wholly imployed, in contriving how to get to Heaven; and now all our thoughts are,
how to get as much as we can in this present uncertain World. Then they had but one Soul, in the whole body of Christians; and we are so many men, so ma∣ny minds. Then they would lay down their lives one for another, now we kill and destroy, at least hate and bite, and are ready to devour one another. Then they were for doing all the good they could to others; now we are all for our selves, and it is well if we be not contriving mischief, and doing injuries, or ill offices to our Neighbours. Then they feared no dangers; but now we are unwilling to suffer any thing. Then they lived in absolute obe∣dience to the worst of Gover∣nours; but now we are apt to quarrel with just Authority, and to find fault with every thing that is done by our Prince, and our Superiours.
Unto what can we more pro∣bably ascribe this difference, than to their frequenting and our neg∣lecting of the Holy Communion? In which opinion I am not sin∣gular, for Dr. Jackson, I remem∣ber (sometime Dean of this Church) thought it very likely, that the Wars of Kingdoms, the Contentions in Families, the infi∣nite multitude of Law-Sutes, the personal hatreds, and the universal want of Charity, which hath made the World so miserable and so wicked, may, in a great degree, be attribu∣ted to the neglect of this great Sym∣bol and Instrument of Charity. Which could not but closely knit us together in Brotherly love and affection, if the nature of it were duly considered. For that is such, saith Mr. Calvin, in the place before-named, as shows it was not intended to be received once a Year only, but to be in fre∣quent
use among Christians: that in a frequent memory they might repeat the Passion of Christ; and by that Commemoration support and strengthen their Faith, praise the loving kindness of God, and cherish mutual Charity among themselves; nay, give a testimo∣ny of that one to another, whose Bond they beheld in the unity of the Body of Christ. For as oft as we communicate of the Symbol of Christs Body, we strictly ty our selves mutually one to another (by giving, as it were, and receiving a token and pledge thereof) to perform all the offices of love and kindness: so that none of us will do any thing, whereby our Brother may receive any harm; nor omit any thing, whereby we may be helpful to him, when his necessities require, and our abilities are suffi∣cient.
VIII. And now, in the last place, I shall further show the great ne∣cessity of this duty; by represent∣ing to you this sad truth: that as the seldom Celebration of the Ho∣ly Communion, was attended with a lamentable decay of holy Living; so thereby the Christian Worship it self was no less wo∣fully corrupted and depraved. For from hence have risen, I can clearly show, sundry dangerous corruptions in the Roman Church: of which we complain very just∣ly; but do not charge upon the right cause. I will mention three or four.
I. First, The Priest's commu∣nicating alone by himself, which in truth is no Communion, arose from that gross negligence, whichI am now perswading you to amend. The Church of Rome hath thus far preserved a right notion of the holy Communion, as to conceive it to be a part of the daily Ser∣vice: upon which the people, as you have heard, attended, more or less, for some Ages. But in process of time, they, growing cold, left only the Priests and Deacons to communicate with him that ministred: and the Priests and Deacons also growing remiss, he was at last left alone. Who, in some places, continued to say all the Prayers, and read the
Epistle and Gospel, and all things else belonging to this Ser∣vice, until he came to the Con∣secration; and there broke off: but, in other places, he ventured to proceed further; and conse∣crated, and received the holy Communion by himself alone.Which last way of proceeding, being found most for the profit of the Priests, it grew to be a cu∣stom in the Roman Church, for the Priest that officiated, to com∣municate alone, when there was no Body to receive with him. For if there had been no Communion, there would have been no offer∣ings; and therefore they conti∣nued the Communion, though there were none to communicate: nay multiplied private Masses, that there might be as many ob∣lations as ever. This is one corruption, which hath most certainly sprung from the indevotion of Christian Peo∣ple. II. Another, as bad or worse, is this; the giving the holy Com∣munion in a Wafer.
For the ancient custom being, as we read in Honorius Augustodu∣nensis,for the several Families in a Town to bring to the Priest, the flower, with which the panis Dominicus, as he calls it, the Lords Bread was made; or else to join together to bring a Loaf ready made by a common contri∣bution to it; which was called their oblation, and the Host (being for the representation of our Sa∣viours Sacrifice on the Cross) when the Church was increased in number, but grew less in san∣ctity (as his words are) this Loaf dwindled from a great one into a little one, according to the small number of Communicants: till at last, there being no Communi∣cants at all, it shrunk up into a Wafer; that is, a little thin bit of Bread, in the form of a small piece of money (the people offer∣ing such pieces of money in stead of Meal) being just so much as the Priest could eat himself, when
there was no body to receive with him. This is the Original of Wafers; which still retained the name of the Host, after it was no longer the offering of the people, nor a representation of Christs Sacri∣fice: these Wafers having brought in this corruption, that now there is no breaking of the Bread, in re∣presentation of the breaking of Christs Body. Though it be ex∣presly mentioned, in the Institu∣tion of this Sacrament, where we read, that Christ took Bread, and brake it, &c. and is so much be∣longing to the essence, as we speak, of the Sacrament, that the Sacrament took its name from hence; and is called in Scripture, breaking of Bread. Behold here again, what Chri∣stian people have done by their indevotion.
Which hath given occasion tosuch a considerable depravation as this. For St. Paul speaking of this part of the Eucharist, calls it the bread that we break, 1 Cor. x. 16. and our Lord himself explain∣ing the Mystery of this Bread, saith positively, this is my body, which is broken for you, xi. 24. Which evidently shows, that the Bread ought then to be bro∣ken, or else it cannot be Christs Body broken for us: and therefore that this breaking of the Bread is not such a superfluous thing, as the Church of Rome now makes it (for the Bread is not broken there) but such a part of this Sa∣crament, as without it, the suf∣ferings of Christ upon the Cross are not fully represented to us. But thus, as I said, the negli∣gence of Christian People, in not frequenting the Holy Communi∣on, hath maimed this Sacrament. Nay,
III. The Doctrine of
Transub∣stantiation, in all probability came from the same original. For the Priest being left alone at the Communion, they found it neces∣sary to magnify what he did there, as much as it was possi∣ble: that so the people might bring their offerings more freely, though they did not receive to∣gether with him. And they mag∣nified his operation so much, till at last it brought forth this pro∣digious conceit; that he held the very natural Body and Blood of Christ in his hands, after the Consecration. Which fancy ob∣tained the more easily, by the help of the Wafers now mention∣ed: which having neither the form, nor figure of Bread, nor being like any sort of food, used in the World, served to banish out of peoples minds, the thoughts of any such thing as Bread, whichthey received in the Holy Com∣munion. See here again how men have spoiled our most excellent Reli∣gion, by neglecting the constant practice of it. For this Doctrine of transubstantiating the Bread into the very natural Body of Christ, is the more absurd; be∣cause in reality there is not so much as true Bread presented un∣to the Priest to transubstantiate; if such a feat could possibly be wrought. For the best Christi∣ans, after these Wafers were in∣troduced lookt upon them as un∣fit for consecration; being un∣worthy of the name of Bread, and not being at all broken; and there∣fore did ad Christum & Ecclesiam nihil pertinere, not at all belong to Christ or his Church: as
Ber∣noldus a Priest of Constance adven∣tured to speak, in the Eleventh Century. For he is that ancientWriter, whom Cassander menti∣ons, as the Expounder of the Ro∣man Order; and commends, as a pious, prudent person, and well skilled in the Ecclesiastical Tradi∣tions; excepting only the indig∣nation he expressed at the redu∣cing of the oblations of Bread for the use of the Sacrifice, into this form of Wafers, much different from the form of true Bread: which he called therefore in con∣tempt mites of nummulary oblations (being in the form of little pieces of money) and ascribes to them an imaginary shadowy lightness, which deserve not the name of Bread, they are so thin: and in∣veighs against them in more and sharper words than these; which Cassander (in his Book of Liturgicks, cap. 27.) saith he, thought it not expedient to tran∣scribe in that place. But what he hath transcribed abundantly
shows how wise and good men resented this change in the Sacra∣ment; by reason of which the Divine Service, and the Religion of the Ec∣clesiastical office, as that Author speaks, was much, every way, con∣founded.
IV. Lastly, This very thing hath turned the holy Commu∣nion, in that Church, into a pro∣pitiatory Sacrifice, offered up to God both for the quick and the dead. Which hath proved a most horrible abuse, having no other original than that now named: the peoples not communicating, but leaving the Priest alone at the Altar. Who, being loth to lose the oblations, as well as the peo∣ples Company, began to speak very high things of the sa∣ving efficacy, which from this action of the Priest alone, re∣dounded even unto those whodid not Communicate with him. Which opinion being once re∣ceived, as a popular conceit, men gave money freely and abundant∣ly for private Masses; out of a perswasion, that thereby they should procure remission of sins, both for themselves and for o∣thers; both for those alive, and those who were dead. By which things I hope you see the great mischief of neglect∣ing the holy Communion; which hath even undone the Christian World: for it hath spoil'd Christs holy Religion, and turned it in∣to quite another thing; by most gross depravations of it. Which have had this effect, e∣ven upon us, who are called Re∣formed; that they have rooted out the principal part of Gods Service from among us, and made it lame and imperfect. For the Church of
Rome, having retainedthe custom of celebrating the Communion every day, but turn∣ed it into a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead, though none but the Priest partake of it; this is the use which the Enemy of Man∣kind hath tempted us to make of their abuses: to perswade our selves that so long as private Mas∣ses are abolished, we need not trouble our selves to be frequent in the Celebration and Commu∣nion of the Eucharist.
Now this is even according to the hearts desire of our grand Ad∣versary the Devil; who can be content with such a Reformation as this, while we retain the very root and foundation of all the abuses which we have reformed: viz. Negligence in frequenting this Holy Sacrament. Which I hope we shall be careful also to reform at last; if men will but lay to heart, such things asI have laid before their Eyes.
Which let us see, that though the particular time of communi∣cating be not named in Christs Institution, yet that is no argu∣ment, we may take our own time for it, and do not offend God so it be done some time or other: but quite contrary, that our Lord intended it should be per∣formed at all times, when we assemble for Divine Service. Thus the first and best Christians un∣derstood it; thus they practised, and transmitted this practice un∣to Posterity, who for some Ages continued it; and though it be not continued till these times, yet we are forced to acknowledge, that the remembrance it import∣eth (as that excellent man Mr. Thorndike speaks) is so proper, so peculiar to the profession we make, that our Assemblies never look so like the Assemblies of Christi∣ans,as when it is celebrated: But are really naked without it; or, at least, want the Crown of that Service for which we assemble; that most excellent piece of Ser∣vice, which is peculiarly appro∣priated to the worship of our blessed Lord and Saviour. By the neglect of which, the love of God and the love of one another is de∣plorably decayed; and the Chri∣stian Religion also so depraved, that they who reformed it in ma∣ny things, have not been able to restore it to its integrity.
And therefore now that God hath put it into the heart of our pious Metropolitan, to call upon us and enjoin us, to live more strictly according to the Rules and Orders of our Religion, by celebrating the holy Communion at all our more solemn Assem∣blies; I hope none of us will be any longer disobedient and refra∣ctoryto so godly a motion: but rather forward to comply with the Command of God, and of our Governours. It may not be in the power of man perhaps, so to command the occasions of this World, as that all should be always disposed to communicate; yet in so great a number as here come together to worship God, there cannot but always some persons or other be found, who are not so encum∣bred, but they may be fit, if they please, to receive the holy Com∣munion with us. Certain I am it ought so to be; and what ought to be, may be, and will be, if the reason upon which it depends be duly considered. If it be not, so that for want of persons disposed to communicate, the holy Sacra∣ment of Christs Body and Blood, cannot be celebrated every
Sun∣day; it is a wilful neglect, forwhich nothing can be alledged, but too much love of this World: which arises from too little a sense of the love of our blessed Sa∣viour, and too small valuation of his inestimable benefits. Which I beseech you, let us awaken our minds to weigh and ponder; and then we shall make it part of our business, to contrive our affairs in this World, in such a manner, that there never want some Company at the Holy Com∣munion. And it is no hard mat∣ter so to order things, that some receiving one Sunday, some ano∣ther; all may receive, at least, once a Month.
What should hinder, if we have any mind to it, and will set our selves about it? what can stand in the way of such a blessed, and comfortable Reformation as this? Of which though we have not heard a word from the great pre∣tendersto Religion, in an Age wherein so much hath been talkt of the Reformation of the Church; yet all the true Children of it, who understand and seek its good are sensible, that the continual celebration of the Eucharist, and the Discipline of penance to pre∣serve the people in a disposition fit to receive it, are such points of reformation in the Church (as the great man before-named expresses it) that without restoring these, all the rest is but mere noise and pre∣tence; if not mischief. And these are the things at which the Order of our Church aims, for as it earnestly sighs and groans (as you read in the Com∣mination) towards the restoring of publick penance (which is the only means established by the A∣postles, to maintain the Church in condition to communicate con∣tinually) so it enjoins, as you
have heard, the continual cele∣bration of the Eucharist, in Cathe∣dral, and Collegiate Churches, and Colledges, every Sunday at the least: which supposes it would be still more agreeable to its desires, if it were done also upon other Festi∣vals. Now what should hinder us, I ask again, from coming thus near to the primitive Devotion, though we do not come up quite to the utmost perfection of it? Unless it be the fancy which works in many minds, that to Communicate three times in the Year (as the Church injoins eve∣ry Parishioner, at the least, to do) is sufficient for any Christian. Which may well be called a fan∣cy; since it is manifest, the Church names three times in a Year, as the very lowest degree of Devotion, less than which it would account prophaneness: and
I have demonstrated, that we have little or nothing to say for our Communicating so seldom as once a Month; but only this, that in most places it is no oftner administred. In the Mother Churches it will hereafter be more frequently: which will, in some measure, conform us to those ancient Churches which communicated every Sunday. For all the Coun∣try Churches in the Diocess, being but parts of the Mother Church; it may be truly said, the holy Sa∣crament of Christs Body and Blood, is administred once a Week, in all our Churches.
Where I beseech you let us ne∣ver want a competent number of Communicants: And, that we may not, do not any longer ima∣gine that you show sufficient re∣spect to our Saviour, if you re∣solve to come thrice a Year. Iwish every one were careful of do∣ing so much; but, let me further tell you, they that set themselves such a stint, will be in danger too oft to fall short of that: And therefore it is far safer, and more becoming to aim at, and endea∣vour after higher attainments; by coming more frequently to the Table of the Lord. Hear how sharply that great person, St. Chrysostome, inveighs against those, that contented themselves with receiving only at the Festivals, especially at Easter. It is in his third Sermon upon the Epistle to the Ephesians: where having expounded the last words of the first Chapter; which re∣present our blessed Lord as the Head of the Church, advanced far above all principalities and powers, &c. He thus begins his Sermon. Let us reverence our Head; let us think with our selves of
what Head we are the Body: a Head, to which all things are subject: what an honour is this, to be, in some sort, viz. in our Head, advanced above the Angels and the Archangels? Let us reverence then this kin∣dred, this affinity, which we have with Christ our Head. Let us fear, lest any of us be cut off from this Body; lest any of us fall away; lest we appear un∣worthy of our relation to him. If any body had set a Dia∣dem, or a Crown of Gold upon our Head, would we not have laboured by all means, not to appear unworthy of those live∣less stones? And yet, now that there is not so little as a Diadem put upon our Head, but Christ himself, which is infinitely more, is become our Head, we make no account at all of it. The Angels reverence it, the
Archangels and all the Heaven∣ly Powers do him honour: we only who are his Body, neither for this reason, nor for the o∣ther, have any considerable re∣gard to him. What hope then is there of our Salvation? Think upon that Royal Throne; think up∣on that exceeding great honour God hath conferred upon thee: and it will be more powerful than Hell fire it self, to affright thee into a due regard towards him. With a great many more such like efficacious words (which I do but abridge) he presses his people to the great∣est purity of life: and then, at last, comes in particular, to press them from this Argument to a religious care of receiving the holy Communion.
I see, saith he, many of youreceive the Body of Christ, but it is rather from custom, and for order sake, than out of rea∣son and understanding If it were the holy time of Lent, saith one, or if it were the Epiphany (that is Christmas Day) saith another; who would not pre∣pare himself to partake of the Holy Mysteries? Is it then Christmas, is it the time of Lent, that makes a man a worthy Receiver? I thought it had been sincerity of Soul, holiness and purity of Life. With these come always: without these thou hast no right to come at all. For as oft as you do this, you show the Lords Death (quote∣ing my Text) that is, you make a Commemoration of the Sal∣vation wrought for you, and of the benefit Christ bestowed upon you.
Consider then, how abstemi∣ous, how careful were they, who did partake of the old Sa∣crifices, under the Law. What did they not do? What ex∣pence were they not willing to make? They were always pu∣rifying themselves, that they might partake of the Altar. But thou, coming to a Sacrifice, at which the Angels are asto∣nished, circumscribest the busi∣ness, and confinest it to certain periods of time (thou wilt re∣ceive it at Easter, at Christmas; then thou wilt be pure and clean to partake of it.) But how wilt thou appear before the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus, who darest with impure hands and lips to touch his Body? For so it is: at other times you will not come, no not though you be pure; but at Easter you will needs come, though you have lately perhaps been bold tocommit some great transgres∣sion. O the power of Custom! or rather, O the power of Pre∣sumption! The daily Sacrifice is in vain; we stand at the Al∣tar to no purpose; there is no body to partake with us: but then (at Easter) abundance of Company by all means will croud in upon us; though as unworthy as at any other time. I do not speak this, that you should receive without any more ado; but that you would prepare your selves to receive worthily, oftner than you do: considering, if thou art unwor∣thy of the Sacrifice, if thou art unworthy to partake; how art thou worthy to pray with us? Thou hearest the publick Of∣ficer, making Proclamation, All ye that are under penance, depart. They then that do not partake,
are under penance. If thou art one of those, thou oughtest not to partake: for he that parta∣keth not, is in the number of the Penitents. To what pur∣pose doth he proclaim, depart, all ye that cannot pray? (viz. with the faithful) and yet thou impudently stayest, and dost not depart? But thou art none of those, and therefore thou dost not depart. That is, thou are in the num∣ber of those that may receive, and art invited to it; and yet thou regardest it not, thou ma∣kest no account of this matter.
Mind, I beseech you. There is a Royal Table spread; the Angels minister there; the King himself is present; and thou standest gaping carelesly; refusing to partake with him. What a shame is this! Dost thou appear there in filthy Gar∣ments, and art nothing con∣cerned about it? No, thy rai∣ment is pure: why then dost thou not approach and partake? How comest thou to be here, if that be not thy business? For all that are in their sins, are first thrust out: and therefore thou that stayest, ought to par∣take of the mysteries; or else thou art impudent and wicked too. Had it not been better, if a man invited to feast with a great person, had not appear∣ed, than to come, and not to touch a bit of the meat? Even so it is with thee; thou art come to this holy Banquet; thou hast sung the Hymn with all the rest; by this very thing thou professest thy self in the number of the worthy, in that thou didst not depart with the unworthy: how comes it to pass then, that when thou stay∣est,thou dost not partake of the Lords Table? I am unworthy, thou sayest. Then, I say again, thou art unworthy of that Communion, which is in the Prayers: For not only for the holy mysteries, but for the Prayers also, and for the Hymns, the Spirit de∣scends always. A great deal more, saith he, might be added (as indeed he doth say much more, which I have omitted) but that I may not burden your minds, this may suffice. And they that are not reclaimed and brought to a better mind, by what hath been said; will not be mended, though we should say never so much. And these things are said by us; But, O that he who pierces the heart, he that gives the spirit of compunction, would
vouchsafe to prick every one of our hearts! That these things may be deeply ingrafted there, and, in his fear, sprout and bring forth fruit: so that, with all confidence and freedom we may approach unto him, and it may be said as it is in the Psalms (though to a different sense) Thy Children are like O∣live Branches, round about thy Table. The end of the second Discourse.
Discourse III. A RESOLUTION OF DOUBTS About Receiving the Holy Communion.
THE Necessity of this Holy Duty, the high Obligati∣ons we have unto it, and the reasons why it ought to be frequently performed by Christian People,have been so fully and so plainly laid before you, in the two preceding Discourses; that I cannot but think, all that will take the pains to consider them, must be convinced both of the one, and of the other; of the duty, and of the repetition of it frequently.
For I have shown, that it is a part of the daily service, which Christ appointed in his Church; a principal part of that service; whereby we maintain our Com∣munion with him, and with his benefits: and therefore cannot be neglected, as now it generally is; without the greatest offence to him, and as great dishonour to our holy Religion. Which I have demonstrated hath been ma∣ny wayes corrupted and depra∣ved, by the lamentable careless∣ness of Christian People, in this great office of it. Who must beperswaded therefore, if they make any Conscience of their wayes, to resolve to do this in remembrance of their Saviour, oftner than they have done.
And what impediment there can be, to the putting such re∣solutions in Execution, I cannot imagine; unless it be some par∣ticular exceptions, which they, in their own private thoughts, take, not against the duty, but against their performance of it; at least for the present. For how necessary, how beneficial soever it be in it self, and may be unto others; yet unto them, some fan∣sie, it is not so: but rather they ought to forbear the Communi∣on, until they be satisfied about some things, in which they are doubtful. For while those doubts and scruples remain in their minds unremoved, they think they have a just reason to hinderthem from coming to the Lords Ta∣ble: nay, they say they dare not come, for fear of offending the Di∣vine Majesty; and so perswade themselves they are as religious in staying away, as others may be in going thither. Now these exceptions which they make against their perform∣ance of this duty, are generally drawn from one of these three heads. First, From the form or man∣ner wherein the holy Commu∣nion is now administred in our Church. Secondly, From the Company to whom it is administred, and with whom it must be received. Thirdly, From the person him∣self who is called upon to receive it: who judges himself altogether unfit for so solemn a duty. Unto all which I doubt not to make a satisfactory Answer; if
men be as willing to be rid of their scruples, as to retain them: but shall most largely indeavour to satisfy the last; because it is the greatest and most weighty. I. About the first of these [the form or manner wherein the Holy Communion is administred, in this Church] a long Discourse cannot be expected, for it is not proper, in this place. Nor is there any need at all of it: but it may suf∣fice to say a very few things in answer to it. For let it but be considered, first, how
various the minds of men are, how weak and captions, which disposes them, too oft, to boggle at every thing, with which they have not had a long acquaintance: And then you will, next of all, grant me, that it isimpossible for any man before hand, to know or imagine, till he speak with them, what such minds will object or scruple a∣bout this matter. For some have a fancy against one thing, some against another: That which one allows, another dis-approves: and that which he disapproves, ano∣ther allows: And the very best constitutions, it is possible, are disapproved by many narrow, weak, and scrupulous minds. Now this being granted, which cannot be denied, that it is im∣possible, in so many several ways wherein several men wonder, to trace every mans errors, find out his particular conceits, and pur∣sue him from scruple to scruple, till no more be started, all that is pertinent to be said in this case, will be reduced to so small a com∣pass; that there is but one advice only, which can be given for such
mens satisfaction. Which is this, That seeing it is certainly our Christian duty, to communicate to∣gether at the Lord's Table, in some form, manner and method or other; they that are dissatisfied with that or∣der and method, which our Church uses, ought in Conscience, to apply themselves to their spiritual Pastors privately, and make known to them their objections against it, with a mind ready and desirous to receive satisfaction. For in an age which abounds with such various fan∣cies, and conceits as we some∣times meet withal, no Minister of Christ can be able to guess, be∣fore he confer with them, what every one of his flock will object to the present established way of Worship; and therefore cannot out of the
Pulpit attempt an An∣swer to them without running the hazard of speaking at random,and beating the air; in guessing that to be objected which is not, or omitting that which is; and which, perhaps, he could not ima∣gine would have been objected. For which reasons, it is impossi∣ble, even for the Press it self to meet with every particular ex∣ception; though a large Book should be written on the sub∣ject. And therefore the short, the sure, and the easy way to certain satisfaction, is, for every one that hath any thing to say, against the manner and form of divine administrations among us, which hinder him from communica∣ting; to address himself to his spiritual Guide, whom God hath set over him (or to some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods word) and to lay open his whole mind before him, that he may free him from his scruples.
Unto this every man is bound, because he is bound to communi∣cate; but cannot, he sayes, till these scruples be removed: which therefore he ought to indeavour to have removed; by this means, which is of Gods own Prescrip∣tion. And being used uprightly, with a sincere desire to be rightly informed, and a humble willing∣ness to learn; and being continu∣ed with constancy, from time to time, and not presently laid a∣side, because the mind is not im∣mediately convinced; will, I doubt not, by Gods blessing, in the issue dispossess that man of his doubts, and bring him to confor∣mity, who seriously tries it, with patience. II.
As for the second head, from whence objections are drawn a∣gainstthe practice of this Christi∣an duty; viz. the Company which partakes at the Table of the Lord; which some perhaps think unfit for them to communicate withal: I shall answer to it a little more largely.
I. And first, I take it to be un∣doubtedly certain, that no Man or Woman, who professes and understands Christianity, and do not contradict their profession by a prophane and scandalous con∣versation, can lawfully be denied the Holy Communion, when they present themselves to receive it. For who were they for whom Christ prepared this Table, but his Disciples? And what other rule have we whereby to judge who are his Disciples, but only by mens professing Christianity, and by their living (for any thing that appears to the contrary) su∣tableto this profession. If such as these may not be admitted to the holy Communion (and con∣sequently we receive with such) then none are to be admitted; but we must turn all people what∣soever from it: and so, breaking all Christian Communion, for want of Company to partake of this Sacrament, extinguish the Ordinance it self, which Christ hath most solemnly appointed.
II. Now this being setled as a well-grounded truth, it follows that no good Christian can be forward to judge others to be un∣worthy to communicate: but ra∣ther will be very scrupulous, lest he offend in so judging. For it is so much against the rules of Christianity, to pass such cen∣sures on others, that they who are too forward to do it, are as unworthy, for any thing that Ican see, as any other persons whom they censure. Because they act contrary to the Christian Re∣ligion; which makes it a sin to be hasty in condemning our Neighbours: there being such great danger that we may be mi∣staken. For though a man have con∣tradicted his Christian profession in some things, yet this is a truth wherein we all agree; that who∣soever is a true penitent, and pur∣poses to leave those sins whereby he hath contradicted it, is, by that repentance, restored to Friendship with God: and there∣fore really worthy to receive the holy Communion. Now whe∣ther a man, whom you judge un∣worthy, have this serious, setled purpose or no, is very hard for you to know: since you cannot see into any mans heart, nor know what is between God and him in
secret. But he coming to the Lords Table, you ought rather to judge that he doth so purpose and re∣solve: because he is invited thi∣ther upon those terms, and no other; nay, required to come so prepared, or else not dare to ap∣proach unto it. For so you find it, in the Exhortation that is read, when the Minister giveth warn∣ing for the celebration of the holy Sacrament. And so he speaks a∣gain at the time of the Celebra∣tion, in those known words. Ye that do truly and earnestly re∣pent you of your sins, and are in love and charity with your Neigh∣bours, and intend to lead a new life, following the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways; draw near with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort.
III. And that leads to the next.Our Church, you see, proceeds according to the undoubted Rule, I named at first: for its Consti∣tutions do not admit, but exclude all scandalous persons from this holy Sacrament. And therefore you ought not to depart from its Communion, when any Minister thereof doth admit such evil Li∣vers to it; because it is his per∣sonal fault, who alone is to be charged with it; and not any fault of the Church, which ought not to bear the blame, nor upon this account to be forsaken. Nay, that Minister himself perhaps may not be in fault; ha∣ving no knowledge of the scan∣dal: and therefore not to be bla∣med:
And more than this, he per∣haps who complains of the scan∣dal, is the very man upon whom this blame will light at last. For if he knew of any such notoriousevil Liver, who was admitted to the Communion, his duty was not thereupon to withdraw him∣self from it, but to make proof of the scandal whereof such a man stood guilty; that he might not, without amendment, and open Declaration of his repen∣tance, be admitted to it again. Which this Exceptioner neglect∣ing to do, his abstaining from the Communion, because of such of∣fence, is the effect of his own neg∣ligence in another duty of Chri∣stianity. And so he becomes dou∣bly guilty; both in with-draw∣ing himself from the holy Com∣munion; and in not acquainting those with the crimes (which he pretends for the cause of his with∣drawing) who were concerned to redress them.
IV. And, lastly, suppose that, after information given, they, whoare concerned, do not take care to redress those things, but such scandalous Livers be still admit∣ted to the Communion; yet, this not being the fault of private per∣sons, but of those who have pow∣er to exclude them, it ought not to keep any good Man or Wo∣man from the Table of the Lord. For there can be no reason, why any man should be hindred by this from doing his own duty; because another man doth not discharge his. And let it here be seriously considered, that if this were a just hindrance, it would have hin∣dred Christ, and his Apostles, and the primitive Christians, from communicating. For there was ill Company among the very first Communicants; Judas, the Tray∣tor, in all likelihood, being there when our Lord himself admini∣stred. And in this Church of
Co∣rinthit is evident, there were such disorders, that many did eat and drink their own Damnation: and yet it did not hinder good Chri∣stians from partaking with them to their Salvation. And the very truth is, if this were a sufficient reason to hinder us from Communion, it ought also to hinder us from being Chri∣stians; and make us forbear to become members of any Church or profession. For there is no Church, but consists of a mixt multitude, good and bad, and therefore compared by our Savi∣our unto a Net; wherein all sorts of Fish were caught, Math. xiii: 47, 48. and unto a Field wherein wheat and tares sprung up, which must grow together, till the Har∣vest, lest by an indiscreet indea∣vour to gather up the Tares, the Wheat be also rooted up with them, ver. 24, 25, 29, 30.
And therefore this scruple dri∣ven home, will destroy Christia∣nity; as it hath done in some places: where men have divided and subdivided, till, by their se∣paration from them whom they accounted wicked, they have crumbled into nothing; and left no Church at all remaining, but what was in their particular per∣son. That is, none: for the Church is a Society; and there is no Society, nor can be any, but we may find some exception or other against every person in it: and particularly against such per∣sons, who judging others unwor∣thy to Communicate with them, abstain on that account from the holy Communion.
For, besides the suspition of rash judging, and pride that is in the thing, they are apparently guilty of a gross sin; in not com∣ing to the holy Communion ofChrists Body and Blood, accord∣ing to his Commandment. The secret reason of which, perhaps, they do not declare; and so o∣thers have as much authority to judge them unworthy, as they to judge others: and, by this means, all of them, if this be a just excuse, may let the holy Communion alone. I hope you see by this short Discourse, whither such excep∣tions as these lead; and there∣fore that you will no longer be guided by them: but, notwith∣standing the faults you think you can find in any person there pre∣sent, be perswaded by the weigh∣ty reasons you see for it, to do your own duty at the Table of the Lord.
III. Where we should have more Company, than is usually seen there, were it not for another hinderance, arising, not from o∣thers, but from mens selves alone. Who are wont sometimes to say, we would come to the Table of the Lord, being convinced it is our duty; if we were worthy of so great a benefit: but we are de∣terred from it, by the considera∣tion of our many sins, or great frailties. We have, at least, too many diversions by business, too many avocations by the affairs of this World: for I am alway in a hurry, saith one; I have no lei∣sure to examine my self; or I am not disposed for so serious a work, saith another. We had better forbear, than be rash, say all of this sort: it is safer to honour the
Sacrament by a fearful and reve∣rent abstinence from it, than by a careless and unprepared for∣wardness to partake of it, pro∣phane it. In a word, we con∣ceive our selves to be utterly un∣fit, therefore we dare not come to it. Now in answer to this third Exception against the perform∣ance of this duty, which hath a shew of humility in it, and looks like a pious care not to do good things in an ill manner, I have many things to propound to your consideration; which are so con∣vincing, and will so unmask the dangerous deceit that lurks un∣der such pretences, that they will not suffer you to be cheated by it any longer.
I. And, in the first place, eve∣ry one who complains of his un∣fitness, and makes that the reasonof his not coming to the Holy Communion, ought to consider, both whose fault this is, and whe∣ther it be not likely he shall grow still more unfit every day than o∣ther; that is, be more in fault, by not receiving it. For you will not, you cannot say it is our Sa∣viour's fault, who commands you to come, that you are not sit to come to it. Whose fault is it then, but your own? And why do you not then amend it, lest you still grow greater strangers to him; nay, Enemies, by evil works, and by continuing to neglect the means of living better?
For this very unfitness, which you alledge for your forbearing the Communion, is your sin; and will you turn your sin into an Apology, and make it serve for your Plea, for the neglect of a plain duty? Can you think that this will pass at the Bar of theDivine Judgment, when you ap∣pear before it? Dare you thus ex∣cuse your neglect of the Sacra∣ment, by acknowledging another crime? When an accusation, a just accusation lies against you, will you then go about to turn it into a defence of your self, as you are bold to do now? I come not to the holy Com∣munion it is true, but it is because I am unholy; I am sensible of the looseness of my life, which is not strict enough; I am not in Charity; or, at best I am World∣ly minded, and too much distract∣ed with the affairs of this life.
This is the plea of some men: who do not mind, how, after a strange manner, they make one sin an excuse for another. For this is the plain sense of their Plea, God, we hope, will be mer∣ciful to us in forgiving one sin, because we commit another,which is the cause thereof: Par∣don, that is, the neglect of the Sacrament, because they neglect to fit themselves for it. For none can deny, that it is one sin not to commemorate the Death of Christ, as he hath appointed: and it is also another, to neglect a due preparation for it. And so instead of amending one, such men add another to it; heaping evil upon evil, and aggravating their Condemnation by their ve∣ry pleas and excuses.
Of which they could not be thus senslesly guilty; were this plain truth duly considered; that there is the same reason to be scru∣pulous about this unfitness, whereof they complain, that there is to be so, about their unworthy receiving. And yet, they take no notice of the one, any further than only to make it an excuse for the other. What unjust, what partial deal∣ingis this? What kind of Chri∣stians are these? who, if they were serious and in good earnest religious (as some of this sort would be thought to be) would be as afraid to remain unfit, as they are to receive while they so continue. They would be as scrupulous, lest they should of∣fend God by staying away, as they seem to be, lest they should offend him by coming to the Communion. For they would see, that it is very unequal deal∣ing with God and with their own Souls, to be very nice about the doing that which God hath com∣manded; and to have little or no scruple about the omission of it. What is this, but to fancy that when God commands a thing to be done by us, we may safely let it alone, if our not doing it pro∣ceed from a fear of doing it wrong? As if we did not offendhim, by not doing what he bids us, as much as by doing it amiss: and our total neglect of a duty, were not as great a provocation, as an undue performance. Do but consider it thoroughly, and you will find there is as much cause to be solicitous about the one, as about the other. And if all they that are now full of fears about unworthy receiving, would but be fearful also of continuing unworthy to receive (i. e. of sinful neglect of the holy Com∣munion) this equal fear on both sides, would make them solici∣tously diligent, in fitting them∣selves to be worthy guests at the Lord's Table. That so, they may neither offend by coming, nor by staying away: but approach in a becoming and well-prepared manner; and find grace and fa∣vour with God to come every day, more and more prepared.
For by coming, as well prepa∣red as our affairs in this World will admit, with serious resolu∣tions to amend our lives; we grow still more fit, if we frequent it, to come better disposed to the Table of the Lord; with stronger resolutions; and consequently with more fruits meet for repen∣tance of amendment of life. For by doing our duty, as well as we can, we learn to do it with great∣er perfection; especially if we continue to do it, though for the present with many imperfecti∣ons. But alas! will some say, we are not only utterly unfit and un∣prepared for the present, but it is not in our power to fit and pre∣pare our selves, in any sort, to be meet partakers of these holy my∣steries for the future.
To which, it is necessary, that I say something before I proceedfurther: because, if this be true, all my labour will be lost in per∣swading men to dispose them∣selves for the performance of this holy duty. 1. And here the same question might be askt such persons, which I askt at the first, how comes it not to be in your power, and whose fault is it, that you are not able to fit your selves? But I omit this, because it only throws the guilt upon such complainers, but doth not convince them of the falseness of their Plea. There∣fore I rather demand of such men, how they can pretend to Christianity, and say, that they cannot leave off their habitual course of sinning? What? Is there no power in the Christian Religion to alter a mans heart; and to bring him to repentance and reformation of
life? Cannot he, who, by being made a Christian, is regenerate with the holy Spirit, cease to follow and to be led by those carnal Lusts and Worldly desires, which at his Baptism he renounced? Cannot he, for instance, forbear habitual Drunkenness, Swearing, Extor∣tion, and Prophaneness? Is it impossible for him to be at peace with his Neighbours? to lay a∣side all wrath, bitterness, and wilful animosities? How is he then born again of the Spirit? By what power were men chan∣ged and renewed in the begin∣ning of our Religion, which we have not now, since we have the same Religion? Or to what pur∣pose are we exhorted every day, to beseech God to grant us true re∣pentance, and his holy spirit, that those things which we do at that pre∣sent may please him; and the rest of our life be pure and holy; if no such
thing can be obtained from our Heavenly Father; no, not by importunate Prayers unto him for it? Do not, for shame, say any longer you have no power to fit your selves for the holy Commu∣nion, that is, to become better: unless you will renounce Christi∣anity; and declare there is no∣thing in it, but vain words, emp∣ty shows and appearances.
2. Which this sort of men I am sure cannot do, having some∣thing in them, which will satisfy them, if they attend unto it, that they do not say true; when they pretend they cannot leave off those sins, which keep them from the Communion. For how can they be called sins, if it be im∣possible to do otherways? And if they be no sins, how can they hinder you from Communica∣ting?Why do your Consciences accuse you of doing amiss, if you could not but do as you did? They never accuse you in other cases, where there is an utter im∣possibility, under which you la∣bour. For instance, if a Neigh∣bours House be on fire, you do not accuse your self for not run∣ning to help to quench it; when you lay lame in Bed, and disabled to move out of it. But if you set the House on fire, you could not but think you did him a great injury: or if you stood by in per∣fect health and soundness, when it took fire, and would not stir hand or foot to help him; you could not but look upon your self as unneighbourly, unkind, and cruel. In like manner if it were as impossible to forbear a sin, as it is to stir when you are bound hand and foot, your Consciences would never accuse you. But the upbraidings you feel there, the secret checks and remorse, the suspitions and fears, which your Consciences are troubled withal, plainly declare, that it was in your power; and that you lie, and do not the truth (as St. John speaks) when you pretend the contrary. In short, if you cannot possibly reform those sins, which make you unfit for the Communion, how come you to charge them upon your selves as sins? If they be sins, your own Consciences tell you that you can avoid them: and if you can, why do you not go about it? and by do∣ing this, prepare your selves to do the other: I mean to receive the holy Communion; for which you will be fit, when you have quitted those sins wherein you live.
3. For the sins which you say you cannot reform, are either sins of weakness, or sins of will∣fulness. If they be only such weaknesses, as can scarce possibly be avoided, by the care and watchfulness of good men, but they are, upon some occasions, surprized with them: surely these do not make you unfit for the holy Communion; for then all men living, for ought we know, must be unfit. If they be sins of wilfulness, then you do, in these very words, confess that they may be reformed: For wilful sins, in the judgment of all mankind, are such as by care and diligence and watchfulness over our selves, may be avoided. As wilful Drunk∣enness, is not being intoxicated, with some liquor, of whose strength we were ignorant; but losing the Government of our selves, when we were aware of the danger, and could have pre∣vented it.
4. But this, in effect, hath been said already: and therefore, to bring this matter to a speedy issue, let such as say they have no power to prepare themselves for the Communion, by amend∣ing their lives, consider; that e∣very man hath power to do, what he can do. To say otherways, is a contradiction: for it is to say, he cannot do what he can. Now do what you can, and I will un∣dertake, God shall not charge you with what you cannot. But if you do not what you are able; you will be charged both with that, and with the guilt of not doing that, unto which in time you might have been enabled. For God hath promised that they who seek shall find; that he will open to them that knock, andgraciously answer them that call upon him faithfully. Why then do you not address your self to the doing that, which you cer∣tainly can do? for instance, call upon God, and earnestly impor∣tune him for the help of his grace (which is a thing you can do:) for, in so doing God will not be wanting to you; but inable you to that, which, for the present, it may not be in your power to do. 5. Unto which (lastly) let this be added, which is of great mo∣ment. You that say, you cannot prepare your selves for the holy Communion; have you ever tri∣ed? have you gone about the work, and made a serious and hearty attempt towards the re∣formation of your selves? If you have not, how come you to be so bold as to say, you cannot do
that, which you have not yet tri∣ed and indeavoured to do? what a prevarication is this, with God and your own Consciences? though I doubt this is the case of most of those men, who plead in∣ability; when they never in good earnest, made an experiment what might be done, in the use of such means as God hath ap∣pointed, and are in our power to use.
But if you have tried, and mis∣carried; why did you not try again; and after that, again and again; and that with greater di∣ligence and care than before? For this you could have done; and why should it be judged rea∣sonable in our Worldly affairs, to attempt over and over again the same thing, wherein we have failed at the first, in hope of bet∣ter success at last: and not be thought fit, nay, why should wenot be willing to use the same re∣peated diligence, notwithstand∣ing such like discouragement, in the weighty concernments of our Souls? And since we find by experi∣ence we can do the one, for we do it; we ought to conclude that we can, if we set our selves to it, do the other. For a Soul can do more for it self, than for any thing else; if it will but consider what a valuable being it is, and where its true interest lies: in the love and favour of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
This is the first answer to the pretence of unfitness. And what was last said, may serve for an answer also to those that com∣plain of hardness of heart, and want of affection in the perfor∣mance of this holy duty. Let them do it as well as they are able; and they will find ac∣ceptancewith God, and grow more affected with his love. And for an Answer to those also, that say they are never the better for coming to this Sacrament. It is certain they were something the better, by their very coming thi∣ther; if they did not come with∣out a resolution of amendment: for that resolution was a good thing, and the work of Gods grace. Which though they did not keep, they should not there∣by have been discouraged from coming again, but rather have renewed it; which had been still a better thing. And they ought not to have given over the at∣tempt, upon a new miscarriage; but still laboured and indeavour∣ed to settle this resolution so sted∣fastly, by constant renewals of their Covenant with Christ; that at last it might have stood un∣moveable, in all those tempta∣tionswhich were wont to over∣throw it. This is the way of Christ; not to sit down contented with complaints of our unfitness to have Communion with him; but never to rest satisfi∣ed, till by our earnest and repeated indeavours, we be better disposed.
II. And there is this great rea∣son to inforce such indeavours, which these complainers would do well to lay to heart: that if they be unfit for this holy duty, of Commemorating the Death of Christ, and receiving the tokens and pledges of his love; they have no cause to think themselves fit for other holy duties, which are confessed by all to be of daily use; viz. for Prayer, for Thanks∣giving, and praising God: Which duties, if men be not fit to per∣form, they ought to look upon themselves as not fit to live in theWorld, or to go out of it: but if they be not unfit for these, then how can they say, they are unfit for this; since our part in the holy Communion, is wholly per∣formed by devout Prayer, and Praise and Thanksgiving, with such Faith and Love and holy re∣solutions as ought always to ac∣company those holy actions? And our part being thus per∣formed, what reason have we to think that God will not per∣form his; by accounting us wor∣thy to receive those blessings, which he there imparts? For he is always more ready to give, than we are to receive: and we are not unmeet to receive, when we are thus disposed to ask. To this purpose you may re∣member, I alledged St. Chrysostoms words in my former Discourse. Art thou not worthy to partake of the Sacrifice? then art thou not wor∣thy
neither to pray: but thou oughtest to depart when the Deacon cries, Be gone all you, that are in penance, &c. For the holy Communion is a special way of praying and ma∣king Supplication to God, through Christ Jesus: for which they can∣not be unfit, who are fit to pray to God in his name at all. No, I am apt to think that many men who pretend this, do not really think themselves un∣fit; but use it only as a shift to excuse themselves from the per∣formance of their duty. For should the Minister of God upon this score keep those from the Communion, who now keep themselves from it; saying to them (as of old) Be gone, you are not fit to partake with us; they would take it very hainously at his hands, and be apt to reply; We are as fit as many whom you admit to partake with you; you
do us an injury in thrusting us away from the Table of the Lord; where we see those entertained that are no better than our selves. For which ill resentment, of such a supposed judgment passed upon them, what reason can be given but this; that they have no such opinion of their own un∣fitness? For if they had, they would be pleased rather than an∣gry, that other men are of their mind: as they desire they should be in other cases. They would be far from looking upon it as an indignity, to be told they are not fit to Communicate: it being the thing, which they themselves pretend doth keep them from the Communion. But herein they dissemble with us, and cheat their own Souls; having no such thoughts of themselves, but are only loth to be at the pains of
thinking seriously what is to be done there, and of raising sutable affections and purposes in their heart; that they may be accep∣table to God our Saviour. This idle lazy temper frames such excuses, and makes them pretend unfitness; which they are by no means willing to own, if another charge them with it, but rather think they are affron∣ted by it. Just like those that pretend to be sick, and therefore lie in Bed, when they have no mind to make or receive those Visits to which they are obliged: but would be troubled, if another should tell them they look very ill, and had best go to Bed, and send for a Physician; for they fear their case is dangerous.
III. These things seem to me sufficient to take away this ex∣ception of unfitness: but for thefurther conviction of all such per∣sons, as alledge this for the rea∣son of their not receiving the ho∣ly Communion, let it be consi∣dered; that there are other du∣ties of Christianity, which are of indispensable obligation, if we hope to be saved; and those far more difficult to be performed, than the duties now mentioned, or this to which I exhort you: for which if you be not fit, as is pretended, how will you be able to undertake the other, where you will find much greater hard∣ship and severity? That is, how will you be able to deny your selves, and take up the Cross, if it fall in your way; and follow Christ in that bloody path wherein he is gone before us?
An injury will be intolerable; an indignity insufferable, to pass by affronts and abuses (which arethe smallest parts of the Cross of Christ) will be beyond your pow∣er; if you cannot do so easy a thing as this, which Christ hath com∣manded in remembrance of his sufferings: whereby you are to prepare, and arm your selves with resolution to atchieve the other. This is a thing to be seriously pondered; because it is so neces∣sary to be able to indure hardship as a good Souldier of Jesus Christ, and perform those difficult tasks when we are tried by them, that otherwise it is in vain to pretend to the Christian Religion. For our Lord Christ himself hath said Matth. xvi. 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, &c. Which is often repeated in the Gospel, with peremptory as∣severations; that unless he do this, a man cannot be his Disciple;
and that he who takes not up his Cross and follows after me (as our Saviours words are, Matth. x. 38) is not worthy of me.
These sayings of our Saviour show that this work of self denial and taking up the Cross and bear∣ing it, is not more harsh and troublesome to flesh and blood, than it is necessary to make a man acceptable unto Christ: who will reject those as unworthy of him, that are not thus disposed. Now how they will be able to go thorough with this tedious and irksome work, who stick at the sweet and pleasant labour of ma∣king themselves fit to receive the tokens and pledges of Christs E∣verlasting love; whereby they should be incouraged and anima∣ted unto the other, I leave them to judge. For my part, I can see no hope of it; but look upontheir condition as desperate, un∣less they dispose themselves even for the suffering of the Cross, by fitting themselves for the de∣vout Commemoration of the sufferings of Christ upon the Cross.
Which is so easy a duty com∣pared with the other, that I may shame all those who refuse to per∣form it, when it is required of them, in such opprobrious words as Naaman's Servant made bold to reprove him withal, 2 King. v. 13. If the Prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, wouldst th not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith unto thee, wash and be clean? So say I, if our Lord should now require you to con∣flict with the greatest hardships, would you not obey, rather than perish? How much rather then, when he saith unto you, do this in remembrance of me? Which isso easy to be done, that there is no trouble in it; but all pleasure, all comfort, and joy, to think what Christ hath done for us, and intends to do. All the trou∣ble and the pains is, only to fit and dispose our selves to partake of this high pleasure and satisfa∣ction; of being assured that we are beloved by him, and that he will love us for ever, if we conti∣nue in his love by keeping his Commandments. IV. Which small pains, if men will not undertake, but having passed this judgment on them∣selves that they are unmeet to re∣ceive the holy Communion, con∣tinue so to be; I do not under∣stand why they should not, with∣al, judge themselves not to be Christians.
For all Christians are Members of Christ, a part of his Body: buthow can any man be a member of the Body, and not be in Com∣munion with the head? and how is it possible to be in Communion with the head, and yet unfit to Communicate with him? These things cannot stand together; but overthrow one the other.
For they that are members of Christ, are united to him: and they that are united to him are in Communion with him, and derive continual influences from him: and they that are in such Conjunction and Communion with him, must be fit to Com∣municate with him at his Table. Else they are not his Friends: and if not Friends, then Strangers, or Enemies. For what medium is there between these? Or how can men pretend to be Friends to Christ, by being in Covenant with him; and refuse to com∣memorate his Death, which sealsthat Covenant, because they are unfit, always unfit to make that Commemoration? These things are utterly incon∣sistent. Either we must confess we are not in Covenant with him; or we must not affirm, that we are altogether unfit, to com∣memorate that Death, which con∣firms and seals that Covenant. V. It will be much to the same purpose, if I add, that he who is not in some measure fit for this holy Sacrament, cannot be in any measure fit for the Kingdom of Heaven; and Eternal Life with our blessed Saviour. But it may be fit to press this a little; because the same thing, in effect, repre∣sented after divers manners, be∣comes the more apt to meet with, and affect all sorts of people.
Consider then, in what dispo∣sition do you think you stand forSociety with Christ in Eternal Life and Bliss, in the Heavens; if you are not disposed to have Communion with him in this holy Sacrament here upon Earth? What likelihood can you fancy of having His Company there, if He cannot have your Company here? That which keeps you from the one, will exclude you from the other. I mean, those things, whatsoever they be, that make you unmeet to partake of his Ta∣ble at present, will make you un∣meet to feast with him in his Heavenly Kingdom hereafter. The terms of admission unto both are the same (for he that duly partakes of the holy Com∣munion, hath an earnest given him of Everlasting Bliss) and therefore there cannot be different terms of exclusion; but the very same also.
That is, those sins which exclude men from the Kingdom of Hea∣ven, are they which exclude them from the pledge and earnest of it, in this holy Sacrament. And those sins which do not shut the gate of the Heavenly Kingdom a∣gainst them; cannot be a bar to their receiving the Sacrament: Satisfy your selves what those sins are of both sorts, and you will withal satisfy your selves that you are not unfit to come to the holy Communion, unless you be unfit to enter into Heaven: and if you be unfit for that, I do not see how you can rest satisfied, if you have any care of your Souls, till by becoming capable to be received thither, you become ca∣pable to be entertained at the Lords Table.
For which every sudden passi∣on, every rash word, every sin that is committed by surprise,against the setled purpose of our Souls and serious indeavours, will not make us utterly unfit; be∣cause such things will not shut us out of Heaven. But those gross, those deliberate and habitual sins, that bar the Door of Heaven a∣gainst us, are the same that put a bar against our coming to the Lord's Table: and the same that keep us from partaking of that, are they that will keep us from being partakers of the other.
And therefore resolve, what it is fit for you to do; the matter being come to this short issue, that if you are not fit for the Lord's Table, neither are you fit for Heaven: if you hope you are so fit for Heaven that you shall not be thrust out of it, then are you not unfit for the Lord's Ta∣ble. Why then do you not come thither; when you cannot stay away, without acknowledgingthat you have no interest in Christ and his Eternal Love? So the ancient Doctrine was, as we learn from St. Austin, who (in his first Book concerning the de∣serts and remission of sins, Cap. 24.) tells us, that in his Country they called Baptism SALVATION, and the Sacrament of Christs Bo∣dy by no other name than LIFE: from an ancient and Apostolical Tradition, as he thinks; whereby the Churches of Christ hold for certain, that no body can attain either Salva∣tion or Life in the Kingdom of God, without Baptism, and the par∣ticipation of the Table of the Lord.
Which none can gainsay is thus far true, that we know of no o∣ther gates but these; Christ hath appointed no other, to let us into his Kingdom: and that they who are unworthy to partake of the holy mysteries of his Kingdom,cannot be worthy to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven it self. VI. If obstinacy (as he speaks a little before in that Book) did not knit its stubborn sinews, a∣gainst the force of evident truth, I might here make an end. But some still persist in their excepti∣ons and say; if we be not unfit, yet we fear we are: and how shall we free our selves from these fears and jealousies, which ex∣treamly disturb our minds, and put us into such disorder; that we cannot compose our selves for the holy Communion? In the last place therefore, I answer to this by asking a few plain and easy questions: upon which, if you will Examine your selves, you will soon arrive at satisfaction. Do you not make profession of Christianity?
Do you not believe what that Religion teaches? Do you not indeavour impar∣tially to practice according to that belief? Do you not discern or distin∣guish the Lord's Body? that is, make a difference between this holy food, and other meat and drink? Do you not understand the ends for which it was appoin∣ted? What can hinder you then from partaking of the Lords Bo∣dy, if therein you intend those ends?
Here is a sure and infallible Test, unto which, if you bring your selves, you may try thereby, whether you be fit or no to have Communion with Christ in this holy Sacrament: and determine the case with such certainty, as to be no longer perplexedwith doubts and fears about it. 1. The first of these questions, need not be long considered, for by receiving Baptism, and being present at the Prayers, where the Creeds are openly owned, you make a profession of Christianity: and therefore you are thus far fit, and have a right and title to come and make this profession still more solemnly at the Table of the Lord. 2. The second also is soon re∣solved, whether you believe with your heart, what you profess with your mouth? For these doubts and fears, which you have, lest you should receive the Communion unworthily, and thereby incur the divine displeasure, suppose Faith in Christ, as the Lord and Judge of the World: and that you look upon this as one part of a Christians Duty, which ought to be performed with
care and great circumspection. 3. The third also need not cost you much labour; for by read∣ing over the rules of life delivered in the Gospel, and comparing your manner of life with them; you may be satisfied, whether you impartially indeavour to practise ac∣cording to your belief? That is, do you not willingly rest under any habit of sin, which excludes from this Sacrament, as they do from Heaven: but make it your seri∣ous business to break them all? Then you ought to use this means among others, which God hath appointed, and call upon him for his aid (without which nothing can be effected) in this sort of Supplication: for weaknesses be∣wailed, and indeavoured daily to be reformed, do not exclude us from either of them. But they rather require our diligence and constancy in the receiving this
holy Sacrament; that we may grow strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Which we therefore want, because we neg∣lect this means of obtaining it; or are possessed with such vain fears, as quite damp that Faith which should be exercised in the use of it. 4. For which fears there is no cause, when you are thus quali∣fied; provided also you discern the Lords Body in the holy Com∣munion: that is, consider what that Bread and Wine imports, which you see upon the Table of the Lord; what they signify and represent unto you; and what spiritual grace is imparted to you by their means: which your very Catechism teaches you, is the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and recei∣ved by the faithful in the Lords Supper.
5. Of this therefore you can∣not be ignorant: and if you be∣lieve it, and expect it; under∣standing also what your eating and drinking of that Bread and Wine means; and for what end you come to the holy Table; what can there remain to be done, to make you know certain∣ly whether you may partake thereof safely, nay profitably or no, but only the last thing I men∣tioned?
6. Whether you intend to do there, what the Lord Com∣mands; and to receive those be∣nefits which he there imparts? Not eating and drinking, that is, as at a common Table, to satisfy your hunger, and quench your thirst; not receiving with the same common spirit, and the same unattentiveness, wherewith you receive other food: but com∣posing your self seriously, as atthe Lords Table, in a holy place, where he is present, thankfully to Commemorate his Death; to partake of that Sacrifice which he offered for us on the Cross; to give up your selves, Souls and Bo∣dies unto him; and to thank him that you have the honour to be his Servants, and that he hath purchased you at so dear a rate, as with the price of his own most pretious blood; to implore the continuance of his gracious and ready help upon all occasions, &c. If, I say, with this Spirit, and for these and such like ends, you approach to this holy Commu∣nion, you need not have the least fear of being rejected as unwor∣thy Guests, but ought to be con∣fident that you shall be welcome to that holy Feast, as those that are faithful unto Christ. For wanting none of these conditi∣ons, which are all that can be
thought requisite; you want no∣thing to make you fit and prepa∣red to have Communion with Christ, in the merits of his Death, which is there commemorated. Yes, will some perhaps further object, there may be something still wanting: For how came the Corinthians to be so severely pu∣nished, as we read they were, for their unworthy receiving the Communion, if these things be sufficient to make men meet par∣takers of it? Do you not think that they had all the foremen∣tioned qualifications; and yet they did eat and drink their own Dam∣nation? I answer, No; it is most ma∣nifest, from the very words which mention their Damnation, that they were not thus prepa∣red.
1. For first, they proceeding to partake of these Holy Myste∣ries,at the end of their Feasts of Charity (which was a common meal, where they eat and drank all together for the maintaining Brotherly kindness among them) they so perfectly confounded and blended these two (the Holy Feast on Christs Sacrifice, and the com∣mon Feast on ordinary food) one with the other; that they made not the least distinction: but did eat this holy Bread, and drink this holy Wine, as they did com∣mon meat and liquors; not dis∣cerning the Lords Body, as you read v. 29. of this Chapter. This was one horrid sin which they committed; not to consider what they were doing: for they went to the Lord's Table, as if it had been still their own Table; and did not distinguish between this Sacred and their ordinary food.
2. One cause of which undis∣cerning spirit (which would notlet them see the difference) was their riot and drunkenness at that Feast of Charity; which ought to have been only a sober refresh∣ment. They revelled upon that good chear, which should only have filled their hearts with love to God, the Giver of all good things, and to their Christian Brethren; and thereby have pre∣pared them to be partakers of a diviner food, which followed the other. This was another fearful sin, of which you read, v. 21. where the Apostle saith, that as some were hungry at that Feast of Love and Friendship, so o∣thers were drunken.
3. Which leads me to take no∣tice of a third Crime; that the rich despised the poor; and that in so vile a manner, as not to suffer them to feast with them, but to separate from them, and to eat and drink by themselves: andalso to eat and drink up all the provision; leaving the poor little or nothing. For in eating (viz. at the Feast of Charity) every one taketh before, his own Supper: and so it came to pass, that one was hungry and another drunken. 4. Which suggest this further crime consequent upon the for∣mer, that they turned a common Feast into a private; the rich looking upon what they had brought to it as their own: Whereas, in truth, they had no longer any propriety therein; now that they were come toge∣ther into one and the same place, ver. 20. Where there ought to have been no difference made be∣tween one man and another; nor any part of the provision lookt upon as continuing any mans own proper food, after it was brought thither for the entertainment of all.
5. And that was another ag∣gravation of their guilt, that they committed all these crimes, in that holy place, where they assem∣bled for the most holy action of their Religion; to commemo∣rate the Death of Christ, ver. 22. What, have ye not Houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, &c. Which que∣stion supposeth, that they might in their own private Houses, have eaten their own Supper, alone by themselves, or with whom it pleased them to invite: but in the House of God, and in his di∣vine presence, it was intolerable; because there they met upon no private but a publick account, to thank God for his love in Christ, and to testify their mutual love to each other.
6. Which they were so far from doing, that they did the quite contrary. For true love de∣lightsto keep others in counte∣nance; but they put such to the blush, as were in a poor and mean condition, and could bring nothing to the common Table but themselves. Who were by the Laws of the Feast, and by the rules of Charity, to have feasted at the charge of the rich; and with as much freedom and confidence, as if they had brought the provision themselves: but were lookt upon with such scorn, that it made them sneak; like wretched Beggars, that were to be content with the scraps which the rich would leave them. That's the meaning of the last words of that Exprobration, ver. 22. and shame them that have not: that is, are not able to bring any thing to eat and drink at the Feast of Charity. These were the grievous scan∣dals committed in that Church;
some of them in the very act of holy Communion; and all of them in their preparation to it; and in the holy place, where they were assembled to worship Christ, with mutual affection one to a∣nother. Which therefore brought down heavy judgments upon them, as you read, ver. 29. He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation (or judgment, as the margin of the Bible hath it) to himself, not dis∣cerning the Lords body. Which that it is spoken of the Church of Corinth, the next words shew; which inform us also, what this judgment, (that is, grievous punish∣ment) was. For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep. Now what is all this to you, who are not guilty of any such crimes? For no such scandals as these, are committed among us,
now adays any where. And there∣fore why should you fear so much as the judgment, or sen∣tence, to suffer the grievous pu∣nishments now mentioned; see∣ing you are not guilty of their faults? Which I have purposely represented, as they are set down by the Apostle; that finding your selves free from them, you may not fright your selves away from the Communion, by a dread of that damnation which fell upon them. But will not fall upon you; who cannot be accused of their Crimes, nor of any other like to them: if you discern the Lords body; and in a solemn man∣ner come to commemorate his Death and Passion; renouncing all your evil wayes, and being in perfect Charity with all men.
Upon such God will pour down his blessings; and not plague them with Diseases, Sick∣ness,and untimely Death: much less with Eternal Damnation, to suffer the punishment of Everlast∣ing Fire. Which as it is not meant in the Apostles words (as I have shown elsewhere) so will not be the portion of those, who come thus prepared to the Table of the Lord: but rather of those who stay away, out of a pretence of unworthiness; when the true reason is, because they will not be at the pains to prepare them∣selves to partake of it. Or if it be timorousness of spirit, and a scrupulous fearfulness that keeps them from it; let them seriously weigh what hath been proved in this Discourse, that they have the same reason to be fearful they shall not enter into Eternal Life; For they that are not fit to have Communion with him in these Types and Figures of him: how can they be presumed to be fit tohave the immediate sight and in∣joyment of his Divine Majesty? And what serious Christian is there, that can live with any comfort, who hath no hope of that? How can he be quiet, or take any rest, till he hath rid himself of every thing which he thinks makes him unmeet to have fellowship with Christ, in the Sa∣crament of his Body and Blood; that so partaking of it religiously, he may have no cause, not to look upon himself, as an heir through hope of Gods Everlasting Kingdom, by the merits of the most pretious death and passion of his dear Son.
Who invites all those to come and feast with him, that abide in no habitual sin (such as shuts out of the Heavenly Kingdom:) and they ought to come without any fear of provoking his Majesty, without any apprehension of dan∣gerto themselves thereby: nay, draw near with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to their comfort, and high satisfaction; and to the joy of the Church of Christ: which is highly honoured, by having a∣bundance of worthy persons in it, fit to communicate with their Lord at his Table. Such worthy Communicants let us all, for our parts, study to be: by resolving now, and indea∣vouring ever hereafter, to quit all known sins, and to live sute∣ably to our Christian profession and Belief. Then let nothing hinder you, from taking frequent occasions, of presenting your selves to the Lord at his Table.
Let no scruples, fears, and doubts, that stick in your mind, hinder you; but rather get them pulled out by some skilful hand. Do not believe you are religious, be∣causeyou are scrupulous; but rather suspect your selves not to be so, be∣cause you neglect the great duty of Religion. And of this be scrupu∣lous, above all other things, lest you offend God by not coming to the Communion, or rather, do not dare to be so bold and fear∣less, in a matter of such great danger. Let not the fault of others who communicate, be a stop to your performance of that duty. That is, if they sin one way, let not that tempt you to a sin of another kind: If they go wrong on the right hand; be not you moved thereby to turn too much to the left.
Let not the danger of unworthy receiving, deter you from recei∣ving; but only from receiving un∣worthily. Of which there is the less danger, if you be really afraid of it; for that will move you to be careful to prevent it. And re∣member,that nothing will make you more unworthy, than neg∣lect of it. And therefore let not the thoughts of your imperfections hinder you; for they will al∣ways hinder: and staying from the holy Communion is not the way to be more perfect; but coming to it. Nay, let not the breach of your resolutions, by relapsing in∣to sin, after you have communi∣cated, keep you from communi∣cating again: but rather come the sooner, and take the first op∣portunity that is presented you, to renew your Covenant with God, to strengthen your Christi∣an resolutions, to fortify your selves against temptations, and to obtain assurance of a pardon for the unfaithfulness to your Savi∣our. To fall is not so dangerous, as not to rise again presently after we are faln.
Much less let business hinder: for if you be honestly imployed in honest business, it is part of your preparation for the holy Commu∣nion. And let no man say he wants time to fit himself to receive it; for this, is in effect, to say he wants time to live well: Of which if you take a constant care, that's the main preparation. And for the composing your mind, and considering the ends for which you go to the Lords Table; take as much time as your condition of life, and the circumstan∣ces of your condition will allow: and that is sufficient. Be not hindred from the Hea∣venly Comforts, of which you may there partake, by an opini∣on of the necessity of a long exa∣mination of your selves before-hand: for that necessity arises only from long neglect of the Communion.
Receive frequently, as the first Christians did; and then you will be as ready for this, on all occasions, as you are for other duties of holy Worship. For you will be well acquainted with the state of your own Souls, and with the nature and end of this part of your Religion: especial∣ly, if you take some account of your selves every day; which will make your account short and easy before the Commu∣nion. And let not dulness and indis∣position be thought a reason why you should forbear to receive it: but rather come thither, to be quickned. And if you continue dull there; yet belive you have pleased God, by doing as he com∣manded, though not so lively as you desired. Let us not hear any man say, I have not profited thereby; and
therefore had as good stay away. For it is very profitable to do our duty constantly, to express our gratitude to God, to receive the tokens of his Love, to tye our selves faster to him in renewed resolutions of holy obedience, to be put in fear of offending him, and in hope of his favour: and there is no man that with any kind of care partakes of the ho∣ly Communion, but receives more or less such benefit as this by it. Let no fancy therefore of this nature hinder you: but oppose to them all, the necessity of doing your duty, as well as you are able. Some for instance complain of hardness of heart, and there∣fore dare not come: but let such understand, that it is yielding and compliance, to do what Christ hath commanded; and not to do it, is
that very hardness which they be∣moan. And if any quarrel or conten∣tion happen among Neighbours, let not that hinder neither: but rather let them come to the Com∣munion and there be reconciled. It is too much that w have faln out one with another; let us not fall out with our God too. If these contentions have ri∣sen up to heats, and anger, nay wrath and evil speaking: do not continue them by refraining ho∣ly Communion; but, repenting of the evil, extinguish all by re∣newing your Fellowship with God, and one with another. It hath staid too long if one Sun hath gone down upon your wrath: be a∣fraid to let it rest a whole Week, till another Communion day be come and gone.
And suppose this wrath im∣provesinto hatreds and enmities, which you think you discern in some hearts against you; let not that hinder you (though it do them) but come rather and te∣stify you bear no hatred towards them, but are in charity with all men. To love an Enemy, is the highest proof of our love to God our Saviour. And if you be at any time in∣gaged in a Suit of Law, let not that hinder your performance of this duty: For Suits at Law, to recover or defend that which you judge your right, are not sinful; nor is it difficult to manage them without sin, with a Friend∣ly and Christian mind: both parties referring themselves to an indifferent judge, and resolving to acquiesce, as common reason directs, in his sentence; for
there would be no end of contention,if every man should be a judge for himself. And do not say, it is too great presumption, want of humility and modesty, to be seen oft at the Lords Table: For it can be no presumption to love him very much; and to accept of the ho∣nour he doth us, in inviting, nay commanding us there to at∣tend him: it will rather be rude∣ness, and careless neglect of him, if we do not frequent it.
And as for other hinderances, if we have some Relation or Friend that is sick, or we our selves are something out of or∣der; or we have been in a Jour∣ney; or had a Visit to make which could not well be avoi∣ded; or had a Friend came to see us the day before the Com∣munion (with whom we could not but in civility, spend a gooddeal of time) these, and such like, I am ashamed to do more than mention; they are so tri∣vial: and by no understanding Christian can be thought a rea∣sonable cause for putting by the intention, we have at any time of receiving this holy Sacra∣ment. I shall only add therefore, that the want of something to offer at the Communion (which the poor and needy may make an exception against coming to it frequently) is no reason to keep any body away from it. For God who accepted of the Widow, that cast a mite into the Treasury, would have accepted her, if she had not had a mite to give: she having a willing mind, to give him, even all she had.
Some must receive relief out of the oblations, and it is not re∣quired,that such should make any, but only the oblation of themselves. Or if out of the a∣bundance of their Love and De∣votion, they do as the poor Widow did, offer all they have; they may, and ought, to receive back again, out of the offer∣ings, much more than they gave. Let not these therefore, nor any other exceptions, keep us any longer from this holy duty. The ends of which, if we often call to mind, or rather constant∣ly keep in mind; with a reso∣lution frequently to come to the Table of the Lord, and there to snow the affection we have to him, and the earnest desire of our Souls to partake more and more of his grace; that we may be inabled to live better and bet∣ter, and get a more absolute
conquest over all those evil lusts and affections, which struggle for the Mastery in us (and by perswading us to neglect the ho∣ly Communion, get a great ad∣vantage of us) we shall be well enough disposed to partake of it, with great fruit and profit, and no less comfort and joy in God: And that at any time, when an opportunity presents it self; though we have no notice, till it comes, of the opportunity. Suppose it be, when we go to see a sick Friend or Neighbour, who is desirous to receive the Communion; or when we come, upon occasion, into a Church, where we are Strangers, and did not know it would be there at that time administred: I make no question, it will be far more acceptable to our Lord Christ, if with no other preparation thanI have now mentioned, we take the boldness to approach to his Table; than if, out of a mista∣ken humility and caution, we turn our backs of it, and go a∣way, because we had not so much time, as we desired, to dispose our selves for it.
For the Lords sake, let us root out those false notions, whereby we are prejudiced against our cer∣tain duty, and be at the pains to settle true Christian Principles in our minds; with a stedfast pur∣pose to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: and then we shall find no cause at any time to re∣fuse holy Communion with him; but rather be stirred up to em∣brace the occasion, with ardent love and devotion. Which, the more it burns in our hearts, the fewer scruples we shall have in ourminds. And those few, if there be any, that remain, will soon be overcome; when we feel what mischief they do us, by keeping us from the most advan∣tageous means of being eternally happy: Nay, from that present happiness, which the sweet tasts of His love, and of the benefits He hath purchased by his Death and Passion, impart unto those Souls, which devoutly partake of the holy Mysteries of Salvation. Which were ordained by our Lord, saith Theodoret (upon Hebr. viii. 4.) for this very end; that beholding the type of them, we may call to mind the sufferings them∣selves he indured for us; and may thereby have our love inflamed to∣wards our Benefactor; and expect the enjoyment of the good things, which are to come hereafter.
Conclusion. THus, I hope, I have cleared the way to the Table of the Lord, so that there is no ob∣stacle left in it, to hinder your chearful approach unto it; if you have any will to partake of it. And the consideration, of what I have represented in my First Discourse, hath, I trust, formed such a will in you: as the second cannot but dispose all those who seriously weigh it, to have a will to do it frequently. Unto which I shall press you by these two Arguments, and so conclude.
I. The first is the great con∣cern we have made show of a∣bout our Religion, and the fearswe have pretended, lest we should be so unhappy as to lose it. If we be in good earnest concerned for it, why then, I beseech you, do we not take care to keep it, by being truly Reli∣gious? Is there any reason to think, that they are troubled with fears of losing one half of the Communion, who can be content with none at all? Or with what Conscience do they find fault with the Church of Rome for taking away the Cup from the People; when they themselves live as if the whole Sacrament were unnecessary? It is a false zeal, which de∣claims against the Priests recei∣ving alone; and doth not bring men to receive with him, when they may: but suffers him still to remain at the Altar, with a very small Company.
In these things we accuse and reproach our selves; demonstra∣ting we are not led by Religi∣on, but by humour, Worldly Interest or Faction. For no man can be thought to be truly soli∣citous for the preservation of Re∣ligion; when he makes no use of it, nor receives any benefit by it. Cannot he live without the name, who lives without the thing?
It we be unseignedly desirous to maintain the estate of Reli∣gion here established; let us se∣riously comply with its Institu∣tions; and serve God duly in all its Offices: being afraid of this above all other things, lest God should therefore remove our Can∣dlestick out of its place, because we will not walk in the light thereof; therefore deprive us of the opportunities of the HolyCommunion, because we have no list to Communicate. Unto which duty let us stir up our selves, that it may stir us up to all other. For what other way do we know like this; nay, what other way but this, for our preservation. II. That's the second thing; We of the Church of England profess to depend wholly upon Heaven, in the use of spiritual Weapons alone, for our prote∣ction in times of danger: dis∣claiming the Lawfulness of ta∣king up Arms to resist the Su∣preme Power, upon the account of Religion. Are we not strange∣ly forgetful then, if we accu∣stom not our selves to the use of these spiritual means, for our safety and security: especially this, of which I may say, as
Da∣vidof the Sword of Goliah, there is none like it? What account can we give of such foul neglect of him, unto whom we say every day, there is none that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God? Is not this to expose our selves to be a prey unto our Enemies, if ever they have as much power, as will to devour us? For we openly de∣clare, by not seeking aid conti∣nually from above, in that way wherein we are more likely to obtain it, that we depend upon nothing at all; but are the most defenceless of all Mankind. So they would have thought, in ancient dayes; when they look'd upon those, as left un∣armed and naked, who were not for∣tified with the protection of the body and blood of Christ. Which are the words of St.
Cyprianwho argues thus (in his 57. E∣pistle) since the Eucharist is made on purpose, that it may be a de∣fence and safeguard, unto those who receive it; let us arm those whom we would have to be safe a∣gainst the Adversary (speaking of the fight of affliction they were to encounter) with the munition of the Lords plenteous fullness. For how can we teach, or provoke them to shed their blood for the Confession of his Name; if entring the Com∣bate we deny them the blood of Christ? Or how shall we make them fit for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we admit them not first to drink in the Church, the Cup of the Lord? Consider, I beseech you, how we in this Church profess
to lean only upon the hope of his heavenly grace: which is so necessary for us, that we acknowledge in ano∣therCollect, that the Church can∣not continue in safety without his succour; and therefore pray him, to preserve it by his help and good∣ness. Shall we not then seek this succour most solicitously? shall we not implore this Heavenly Grace, with ardent cries; espe∣cially in this powerful way of prevailing with him, by repre∣senting to him, what Christ hath done and suffered for his Church, which he purchased with his own most pretious blood? We aban∣don all care of our selves, when we thus forsake the only help we have to rest upon. Nay, it is to contradict our Prayers; when we say we have no other Hope, and yet do not flee to him, our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. It is, at least, a vain and sensless leaning on him, which makes us neglect him;and lay aside, the principal sup∣port which he hath left us, for our incouragement and comfort in all our distresses. If we really depend on him a∣lone; we had need apply our selves unto him, with warmth of affection, and great diligence. If we rely on his help and goodness, let us take care to please him in all things: that so we may ob∣tain the favour, either to have the evils turned away from us which we have deserved; or to be fortified against them with such a pious constancy, that they may be stedfastly indured. If we do not thus study to ap∣prove our selves his faithful Ser∣vants, we foolishly confide in him; against his own express Declarations, that he will not patronize us in Irreligion, and contempt of his Authority.
But if we faithfully obey him; then we surely trusting in his De∣fence, need not fear the power of any Adversaries: but rest assured, that he will keep his Church and Houshold continually in his true Re∣ligion; that they who do lean only upon the hope of his heavenly grace, may evermore be defended by his mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
Books Written by the Reverend Dr Patrick, and sold by Rich∣ard Royston. THE Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise shewing the Ne∣cessity, End, and Manner of Re∣ceiving the Holy Communion: together with sutable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in the Year; and for the Principal Festivals in Memory of our Bles∣sed Saviour: The Sixth Edition. The Devout Christian instruct∣ed how to pray and give thanks to God: or a Book of Devotion for Families, and particular per∣sons, in most of the concerns of Humane Life. The Fifth Edition in Twelves.
An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves. Jesus and the Resurrection ju∣stified by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth. In two Parts, in Octavo. The Book of Job Paraphrased, in Octavo, New. The Book of Psalms, In two Parts, Paraphrased, in Octavo. The Proverbs of Solomon Para∣phrased, with the Arguments of each Chapter, which supply the place of Commenting. A Paraphrase upon the Books of Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon. With Arguments to each Chapter, and Annotations there∣upon, in Octavo, New.
The truth of Christian Reli∣gion, in Octavo, New. The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christians love to it, in Octavo. A Book for Beginners, or, a Help to young Communicants; that they may be fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit, The Sixth Edition.
The Works of Dr Hammond, in Four large Volumes, viz. Vol. I. A Collection of Dis∣courses chiefly Pra∣ctical. Vol. II. A Collection of Dis∣courses in Defence of the Church of England, 1. Against the Ro∣manists. 2. Against other Ad∣versaries. Vol. III. A Paraphrase and An∣notations upon all the Books of the New Testament. Vol. IV. A Paraphrase and An∣notations upon the Books of the Psalms.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon [the ten first Chapters of] the Proverbs, MS. Thirty one Sermons Preach'd upon several Occasions. With an Appendix to Vol. 2.
