R740 R3077 11880798 50315
THE REFORMATION. A SATYR. Tempora mutantur, & Nos mutamur in Illis. HOW Roman-like did our Old Rebel Dye, With His last breath profaning Majesty? And braving Heav'n it self, He w'd not stay (Lest 'twere a piece of cowardise) to Pray. And cannot all this Gallantry Engage Some Zealot, spurr'd up to Poetick Rage? But not a word—there's not one Ballad made, C—s I see, will have but slender Trade, For Rhymers now begin to Renegade. I wonder'd not at Converts of the Citts, Yet still I thought those Epidemick Wits Wou'd ne're have Grace enough for Proselytes. But edifying Ketch does seldom fail, And when All miss, He's certain to prevail. Jack's a great Bug-bear—for his very sight Did our bold Whiggish Oracles so fright, That there's not one of all the Canting Fry, Can Write a failing Brother's Elegy. Nay, lesser yet—Their Club will not afford A Farewel Speech; unless 't be for a Lord. The meaner Tyburn Saints have nought to say, Besides their Pater-Noster, and Away — Away they march to their True Friends below, Cursing the blabbing H—rd as they go. But Sh— smiles to see 'em come so thick, For He's resolv'd to play another trick, And have one Bout at Politick Old Nick: For Steph—Vows they cannot live in Hell, Except they make the Little Dev'ls Rebel, And after, Vote It to a Common-weal.
'Tis pleasant, Faith, to see a Babe of Grace Masking Geneva-Looks with Loyal Face; Then gravely tell you, that He never stood Too fierce a Stickler for the Brother-Hood And ne're meant Mischief, but for Publick Good. Thus Pious Wh— deeply Read in Lives, French Leagues, Scotch Covenants, and Narratives, Though (the next Oxford Sitting) He design'd T'Impeach Minc'd Pyes as Popishly inclin'd, Has now made Tender Conscience so comply, He'll allow Surplice, Cross, and Litany. Nay any thing, for th' Godly Reformade Seems so to hate the Salamanca Trade, That now a Passive Lecture He'll disgest, As well as Meroz at Forbidden Feast, Though Jackel spoke with Sacred Nonsence blest. Next B—l wisely turning with the Tide, Thinks to shake off the once-Beloved-Side, And doth the whole Design so much resent, You'd almost Swear, He Lov'd the Government: Yet still He closely favours the Intrigue, And quits the Sh—from this Holy League. Arn— that early Martyr for the Cause, So maul'd in Jack'napes Lane by Popish Claws, Was pity'd, till some Tell-tales understood That He, like Priest of Baal, in zealous mood, First Scratch'd Himself, and then did Murder cry, And Hang'd a Brace of Tories by the by, No Engine kills like a Religious Lye. But He, and Stout Sir Tr— (that cou'd Vote For Freedom with as Popular a Note As any of the House) begin to shrink, Humbling themselves with Penitential Chink. So W—ms, who the same brave Motto wore As Cataline, and Cassius, did before, Doth now His Latin Posie Paraphrase, Will's For the King, (If not against His Gr— And Tr— laying down that Great Command, Will All His Taunton Forces now Disband. And thus, Forsooth, whilst Loyalty's in Fashion, W' are like to have a Hopeful Reformation, But Subtle Roger bids Us have a Care, 'Tis dang'rous yet to Trust these Saints too far, 'Tis Ten to One, if Jove's Great Mercy can Of Whig, or Trimmer, make an Honest Man. LONDON, Printed for Charles Corbet, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane. 1684.
