R70AA 99831108 35570
THE DOVVNFALL OF BABILON: OR The mistery of Iniqutiy opened. Wherein is declared the grounds and reasons of our departing from Rome, and that we had just cause to separate from her, and that in depar∣ting from her, we have not departed from the Church of Christ, but returned to it; also that to heare a false and unlawfull Minister in the Execution of his Office, is unlawfull, and a breach of every one of the ten Commandements. Rev. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Come out from amongst them, and be ye separated saith the Lord, and touch no uncleane thing, and I will receive you, &c. 2 Cor. 6. 16. What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idolls. 1 Iohn 5. 21. Babes keepe your selves from Idolls. Hosea 4. 17. Ephraime is joyned to Idolls, let him alone. Jer. 15. 19. If thou wil take forth the pretious from the vile, thou shalt be be a my mouth: let them returne unto thee, but returne not thou unto them. BY S. R. LONDON
To the impartiall Reader. Courteous Reader. THE sum and substance of this Treatise, tends to prove a necessity of disclaiming of the ministery of Rome, according to the Statutes of Eiz. 27. 1 &. 2. the words of the Statute are these; it shall not be lawfull for any Seminary Priest, or ecclesiasticall person whatsoever, made or ordained without or within any of her Majesties Dominions by any authority delivered, chalenged, or pre∣tended from the Sea of Roome, by or of what use, name, or degree soever the same shall be called, or knowne to be, or remaine in any part of her highnesse Dominions, and every person so offending, shall be judged a traytor, and shall suffer as in cause of high Treason, and every person that shall wittingly and willingly receive, relieve, comfort, ayde, and maintaine any such Priest, or ecclesiasticall per∣son shall be adjudged a fellon without benifit of Clergy, and suffer death, lose and forfet as in case of fellony. So that it appeares that such as owne the Pope to be a true Mini∣ster, and retaine any ordination, delivered from him are guilty of Treason, and such as receive and maintaine them are guilty of fellony and Treason, and that the Ministery of England, is derived es∣centially from the Pope; see Francis Mason of consecration pub∣lished by Authority 1614. and Yates moddell of Divinity, pag. 157. printed 1622. so Dr. Crammer was ordained a Priest and Bishop by the said Popes authority, and others received it from him, unto which aforesaid Statute our nationall Covenant doth well agree, and require this Nation to use all meanes according to the word of God, and their place and calling to extirpate the said Popes Priest∣hood, and the words of the Covenant are; that we shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavour the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, and all other ecclesiasticall Officers depending on that hierarchy, in which number are all the Bishops, Ministers by what names or titles soever they are called, or however reformed; and therefore unlesse this Kingdome use meanes and extirpate them, they are all forsworne, and therefore marveile not if we write and speake against them: who owne the Pope to be a true Minister of Christ, and derive their Authority from him and so worship the Beast. Rev. 15. 9, 10, 11. Also that not onely the said Statutes and our late Covenant doth inforce and warrant our separation from the aforesaid Ministery; but also the word of the Lord doth require and approve of this our de∣parture from them, this is the old way; for in the begining God sepa∣rated the light from the darknesse, Gen. 1. 4. for what Communion hath light with darknesse, 2 Cor. 6. 14. true beleevers are the light, but now ye are light in the Lord. Ephes. 5. 8. by darknesse is meant un∣beleevers; so the Israleites were to be separated from the wicked. Numb. 16, 21. to depart out of Babilon, Esa. 52. 11. and the wicked hate the godly scatter, persecute, and put them to death, the great flock tirannize over the lesser on Luke 12. 32. but the sheep neither will nor can persecute the wolves, but the wolves both can and will persecute the Lambes of Christ; many are desirous to know the grounds and reasons of our departing from the Ministery, no doubt some of them desire to see the Truth, and to receive it; however as we judge our separation to be just and necessary, and have done it upon mature and serious consideration, so we have no cause to be a∣shamed of what we have done: Therefore I have here declared the causes and grounds of our practice, they appeare to us unanswerable by the word of God, and though I know more may be said for to warrant our practise; yet I judge what is here said, sufficient for such as seeke the Truth in the love of it; for our parts we have in conscience to Gods Command, done what we have done, herein many of the Saints of God have been stripped of all outward comforts with life it selfe, for witnessing to this his Truth, so that we may say to God, it is for thee and for thy sake that we beare the blame men cast upon us, for doing what we have done: what ease or pleasure think ye it can be to us to swim against the streame, to be deprived of our names, Estates, Liberties, and lives, what plea∣sure is it to the flesh to be stript of all these things, what get we from men but reproaches, and persecutions; we have no incourage∣ment
from the world, and had we as little from God and his word, we were of all men most miserable: yet are we happy because we are one with Christ, and our lives is hid with Christ in God; we have that Spirit which assisted the Saints of old which will not leave us in our temptations, he who hath said he will never leave us nor forsake us, esteemes us as the apple of his eye, we enjoy all the sweet promises of strength and comfort; so that we cannot be miserable, if the world do their worst, the worst they can do can but make us partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel, which is our glory, we are resolved what ever can come not to returne to Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom more; we are a kin to those spoken of Heb. 11. and as we ought, so we expect the like assistance from God, they had when he shall please to give our enemies leave to try our patience: therefore we have departed from them that submit not to the doctrine of Christ, but prophane the things of God, and commit Idolatry, we have left that Church which is the mother of the dead, and chose the mother of the living, we have left that Church which consists of stones, and walles, painted Cullers and Beasts, Rev. 18. 2. that fol∣low errour and Antichrist & are come to them that follow Christ, ad his truth, we have left them that would intrude upon us intollerable burdens with tyranny, that assume to themselves more then Paul e∣ver did to have dominion over our faith, and would force us to beleeve that which Gods word requires not, and we are come to them who are free men, who injoye the liberty of the Sonns of God, where we are free from all the Taskemasters of Egypt, and have liberty to witnesse to the Truth, and oppose all errour with∣out danger or feare, we have left them that sought to keepe us, and draw us from the simplicity of the Gospel, and are come to them who have imbraced the Faith of Christ, and keepe his Ordinances pure, we have left them that sought to destroy us in our names, E∣states, Liberties, and lives for our indeavouring to informe and re∣claime them from their Idolatry; so that they refuse to be healed, & do live in such things as themselves confes are evill, also that we have found that our staying with them did obscure and hinder the truth, and settle them in their lees: Surely none will marveile at our depar∣ture from them, if they consider that we have more cause then Paul had to depart from the Jewes, Acts 13, 46. we judged it our duty to repaire to that Church which was most apostolicall, most agree∣able to the word, where we might have liberty to live according to
Gods word, do most good, and injoy the liberty and freedome of conscience, so that upon consideration it will appeare thus, our de∣parture from them is not to be disallowed but commended, the uni∣ty of Idolaters with the Pope, and what is his, we have broke and imbraced the unity of the spirit, and the fellowship of the Saints, &c. and seeing a vile person is contemned in the eyes of the righte∣ous how can he go to them to be taught, Psal. 15. 4. and 141. 4. can the godly set themselves against the wicked and yet go to them to be taught, and joyne with them as brethren in the Sacrament, Prev. 28. 4. and as I may not offer mine offring when I remember  brother hath ought against me, Mat. 5. 23. and 9. 13. much lesse may partake in another mans offering when I have ought against him, Mat. 18. 15. in this ensuing Treatise, I have as in the presence of God declared what I beleeve is the truth, namely that the Popes Priest∣hood is to be removed, and the high places demolished, but it be∣longeth onely to the civill Magistrate to do it, it is our duty to speak against these things, and to depart from them, (I meddle not what men are in their persons, but what they are in Reference to the Ex∣ecution of their unlawfull Offices of Priesthood) and if the Magistrate will not do it, it is not our faults: search the Scriptures whether the things be so or no, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things, and power to do his will, to his glory, and thy comfort Amen. Farewell.
THE REASONS OF THE SAINTS Departing out of BABYLON. AND the Angel cried mightily with a strong voice, come out of her my people, &c. Rev. 18. 4. this Baby∣lon is to be understood spiritually for Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11. 8. and 17 5. and as they went cleane out from the shaddow, as appeares Gen. 13. 1. Esa. 52. 11. Ier. 51. 6 45. So should all that are the Lords come out of Babylon, So∣dom, Egypt, spiritually, it being the substance, Gods Command is to every one, every man flye, Esa. 52. 8. Obj. This is ment of Rome locally from which Countrey they were to come out, because of the Judgements and Plagues that were to come upon them? Answ. You grant more then I affirme; for, 1. If they were to come out of the Country, then much more from their worship rules, it be lawfull to do that out of Rome, which is forbidden in Rome, Rome in her latitude recheth as farre as her power and jurisdiction, which is as farre as the power of the Beast reacheth, and how farre that is, see Rev. 17. 24. 7. 15, 16, 17. with 18. 3. which is as farre as the power of the ten Kings reacheth.
And all those have not forsaken Rome, that retaine any thing of hers, what the matter of the false state is you may see Rev. 18. 2. with 21. 8. she constitutes her Church by houses in the boundes of the parish, by which all sorts of prophane are made members, so that if the Divell dwell in the parish, they will make him a member of their Church, so do her daughter, Psal. 137. 8. and do not some make all England a Church, and so farre as England agrees with Rome in her constitution, matter, Lawes, Ordinances, Cerimonies, Offices, Officers, Ordination, Doctrine, Government, so according∣ly do more or lesse partake of her, and is in substance one and the same, and if I must come out of the false state, then must I come fro their worship and Officers, and if I may stay with them, why not also with the assembly, and if with both, how shall I obay Gods Command; Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 17. &c. and seeing God hath called me forth, I dare not appeare there againe with my person all pre∣sence, 2. It cannot be ment of the Country, because the Command is generally to all Gods people, and therefore is not to be confi to those who dwell in the Country of Roome locally, 2 Cor. 6. 17. 3. These words were spoken to the Corinthians that beleeved, 2 Cor. 6. 17. and Corinth standes not in Roome locally but is  from it. 4. If it were to be understood of Roome locally, then such as be∣leeve might not dwell there though they should worship God pure∣ly, nor may any beleever goe into tha Country upon any lawfull occasion, which were unreasonable to affirme, Rev. 2. 13. 5. Because such a distinction of Nations is now dissolved; so that in every Nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnesse shall be accepted of him, Rome is a part of a Nation, and therefore this were not so if none may dwell there. 6. Christ commends his Servants for keeping the Faith where Satans seate is, Rev. 2. 13. and that is in Roome as well as other Countries, and therefore they sinned not in dwelling there. 7. If they were to leave the Country because of those plagues, they neede not to be marked in their foreheads to escape the Judge∣ments they being out of the Country, &c- Reu. 7. 3. Ezek. 9. 4. God saves his in the midst of Judgements, as Zph. 3. 12. 8. If they were to leave the Land, because of their sinnes, th by the same reason if the same sinns be found in other places, we m
leave them also, and seeing all Nations have drunke deeply of th Cupp of her fornication as appeares Rev. 18. 3. and so we must go out of the world, therefore Babylon is not confined within her walles, but it comprehends all her Merchants that trade for her and vende her Commodities, and all that symbolize with her. So we are commanded to come with me from Lebanon my Spouse: looke from the top of Amana, from the top of Shiner, and Hermon, from the Lyons Denns, from the mountaines of the Leopards, Song 4. 8. compared with Judge 3. 3. Esa. 2. 29. 17. Song 3. 9. 2 Kings 14. 9. & 4. 12. Deut. 3. 9. 11, 12, 13. it was a type of the Cage, Rev. 18. 2. 3. 2. The Saints are commanded to separate from strangers Judge 19. 12. Nehe. 9. 2. by a stranger is ment one of another Nation, Mat. 17. 25. So by a strange woman is ment, one that is not a mans own wife, Prov. 5. 3. 20. and 7. 5. so other Officers and Ministery that is not Christs, and so not our own, 2 Cor. 11. 14. 15. are strangers to us and such as are under a strange Government, Office, and entrance, and meanes of worship, and unheard of in Gods word, and contrary un∣to it; and therefore we may not heare them when they execute their strange Offices, and Christ commends his, that they will not heare nor follow a stranger, Iohn 10. 5. and how hearing is to be un∣derstood, see Iohn 10. 5. with Mat. 17. 25. and 5. 10. heare and un∣derstand, and how following is to be understood, compare Iohn 10. 5. with Mat. 4. 22. 25. Iohn 1. 37. 38. 40. drinke water out of thine own Sesterne, and not a strangers, with the Prov. 5. 15. 17. the contrary God doth sharply reprove, Jer. 2. 18. 19. 36. Lev. 22. 25. Ezek. 44. 7. 9. Therefore to heare an unlawfull Minister in the execution of their Office, is to imbrace the bosome of a stranger, and to commit Idola∣try with it, is spirituall adultery and contrary to 2 Cor. 11. 2. Ephes. 4. 11. to 15. 3. We are commanded to separate and save our selves from a fre∣ward Generation, as Acts 2. 40. we esteeme those to be froward that cannot be spoken unto without perill, and when men are used to heale them that are so farre from being healed, that they are more hardened in their sinne, Jer. 51. 9. yea, and that are so froward that they cannot be satisfied untill they have persecuted those that would heale her, and also persecute them that walke in the truth, although they meddle not with her, we do not reade in the word of God, that the Sheepe of Christ did ever persecute the wolves, nor that the
persecuting Church, was the Church of Christ, but they were the Church of Christ who were persecuted, Mat. 5. 10. 11. 12. 2 Tim. 2. 12. and 3. 12. Gods Command compells us to leave them, so that we have not separated our selves as they accuse us, but God hath se∣parated us. 4. We are commanded to avoide such as cause divisions and of∣fences contrary to the Doctrine we have heard and learnt, Rom. 16. 17. and seeing we are to withdraw from a brother that walkes disor∣derly and not according to the rule of Christ, then much more must we withdraw from those who are no brethren; for if we may  with any, then with our Brethren. 5. We are commanded that those that refuse to heare the Church should be unto us as Heathens, and Publicans, Mat. 18. 17. they are so farre from hearing the Church of Christ, that they despise her, ye denye her to be the Church of Christ, and their practice declares they will not have Christ in his government to rule over them, and such Christ calles his enemies, Luke 19. 14. Psal. 2. and for any to affirme that the people of God, the Saints and Church of Christ should go to Heathens, Publicans, and the enemies of Christ to be taught, it strange Doctrine, and to as good purpose as for the Sheepe of Christ to go to wolves for instruction, which were like to be their distru∣ction, also they reject the Councell of God themselves, as Act 7. 30. 6. We are commanded not to heare such Teachers; Cease my onne to heare the instruction that causeth to err from the words of know∣ledge, Prov. 9. 27. they teach Doctrines contrary to the practice of the Saints, recorded and commended to us in Gods word, they teach that beleevers are not to be separated from the world, but ought to continue together in fellowship with them, contrary to 2 Cor. 6. and they teach Infants are to be baptised: concerning which the Scrip∣ture is silent, and many such Doctrins they teach, with which our mindes and conscience might be defiled if we did heare them, and although they teach many truthes, yet seeing they teach heresies, al∣so we must avoide them, Titus. 3. 10. Zach. 13. 3. 2 Epist. . 9. 10. Consider 1 Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5. Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9. 2 Epis. Iohn 10. 11. 7. We are commanded to heare what the spirit saith unto the Churches, Rev. 2. 13. and this we cannot do, unlesse we be there to heare it.
8. God hath commanded his people to go to Sion, compare Deut. 12. 5. 6. 11. and with Jer. 50. 5. and 51. 9. and 2. God hath said gather my Saints together to me, Psal. 50. 1. 5. then it is not his will that they be scattered in false Churches. The Lord hath chosen Sion, so must I, he hath desired it for his habitation, so do I, this is my rest for ever here will I dwell, so say I, Psal. 132. 13. 14. The Lord is there, Ezek. 48. 35. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Christ is there, and it is his will that his be with him, Father I will that they which thou hast given me be with mee where I am, &c. Iohn 17. 24. here, and hereafter Christ tells his, that he is gone downe into his Garden, . 5. 1. with 6. 1. 2. 11. and 4. 16. and that there he will stay and dwell, Song. 8. 13. consider 2 Sam. 15. 21. there was a day when the Sonnes of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Iob. 2. 1. Also the Saints love to Sion causeth them to go thither, I was glad when they said unto me, come let us go to the House of the Lord, Psal. 122. 1, 2. 3. Mica. 4. 1. 2. Esa. 22. 3. then not glad to goe to Babylon. 9. We are commanded to let them returne to us, but we may not returne to them. Jer. 15. 19. we must owne them, and walke with them that are the Lords, and owne the truth, else how do we profe the Gospel, Mat. 10. 11. &c. 10. We are cōmanded to stand fast in the Liberty with which Christ hath made us free, Gal. 5. 1. Christ purchased our deliverance out of Egypt spirituall, Rev. 11. 8. therefore we may not returne thither a∣gaine, no not so much as looke back, Gen. 19. 17. 26. with Rev. 11. 8. what Christ hath purchased for his people it is their priviledge to injoy, and knew we the worth of it, we would prize the lest part of it, and be thankfull for it, and dye before we would with part any part of it. 11. We are commanded to let them alone who have joyned them∣selves to Idolls, and mixed themselves among the people Hs. 7. 8. and 4. 17. they have joyned themselves to an osis of ministery to a Church, and Ordinances that are not Christs, but onely Images and similitudes of his, but not his, and therefore their ministery, Church, and ordinances are all Idolls, and we are commanded to keepe our selves from Idolls, 1 Iohn 5. 21. God calles such Idoll
Sheapards that go for true and supply their place, but are not such Iodlls, Zack. 11. 17. 12. We are commanded not to be like Idolaters, Lev. 18. 3. 4. Deut. 12. 30. 31. the Lord complaines saying, you have made your Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Landes, 2 Chron. 13. 9. 10. The Lord hates all the monuments of Idolatry, but Antichrists Priesthood and Temples are principle parts of the Idolaters wor∣ship, and are some of the Divells Antichrist worships; that they should not worship Divells and Idolls. Rev 9. 20. We dare not heare these Priests, because their Priesthood is from the Pope and his Bishops (made by him and this themselves con∣fesse) we denye not that we are Ministers by Rome, and that they may as truly be instruments of our ministery as of our baptisme, see Yates Moddel of Divinity pag. 25. and so they are the Image of the Beast. Now an Image is nothing else but a certaine figure, having relati∣on to the example; so this Priesthood is a figure, and hath relation to the Popish Priesthood, if it were not the very same, and as the nature of an Image is to represent and to put us in minde, so this Priesthood represents to us the Popish Priesthood, and so puts us in minde of the beast, Antichrist which is not a particular person, but is mistically the whole body, viz. from the Pope to the pariter, and all that belongs to her, and as a beast consists in all the parts of her body, so here the Dragon is the head, the rest of this beast consists of the Priests and layity, and this Priesthood is a great part of the Beast, as 1. this is the mouth of the Beast, and this is the mouth that is given to the Beast, by which she prophisieth and is called the false Prophet, under which is included all the false Prophets of Antichrists Kingdome, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, full Priests, halfe Priests, and this Priesthood is scattered almost in all places, and so is ever at hand to speake for the Beast, viz. the false Church; by this mouth God is blaspheemed and his temple, and them that worship in it, Rev. 11. 1. this mouth calles customers to Antichrists warehouse, and shewes her Commodities, extolls her Marchantdise, and vends her wares at two deare a rate. Also this Priesthood is the leggs of the Beast, which beares  and carries the Beast, neither can the Beast go without them, and where this Priesthood leaves her, she can go no further, but falles to
the ground, and all that passe by may trample upon her, also this Priesthood is the taile of the Beast, the taile you know is, that which covereth the filthy part, so doth this Priesthood cover the filthy part of Antichrist, who is called a Beast, because of her filthinesse and uncleanenesse, she being a most abominable whore, and is defiled with Idolatry, which is the greatest whordome and uncleannesse that is, so that every thing that belongs to this beast is uncleane, unsanctified, unholy, and prophane order of Priesthood, and this taile covereth all the filthinesse and abominations of the whore, with cleane and pure ends, holy and pure names, and forsooth, she calles the Divells and Popes prophane Priesthood, Gods Ministers consecrated, a holy order of ministery, Divines, &c. and thus she covers all over with specious titles, all her Idolatry and whordomes must be no lesse then Gods Ordinances, and the pure worship of God; by no meanes she will not indure they should be called Idolls, Idolatry, their right name, and thus all is covered by the taile of the Beast, and they are the head of the Beast; for they must rule and master all, and what is left more of the Beast, but the body which is the multitude: the place where you may see this Beast is the Cage, Rev. 18. 2. and the mouth of the Beast is her Commands, license, and authority; shut the mouth of this Beast and she will decay, and take away the leggs of this Beast, and she falles, and can rise no more; let them cease to do the Offices of a taile to her, and her filthinesse will soone be discovered, and she shall be abhorred by all that see the Mystery of her iniquity, yea she shall deceive the Nations no more. These Offices of Priesthood keepes out Christ and a speciall bles∣sing with him, and in part, shuts out the Kingdome of God, these Priests have power and authority originally from the Dragon, fun∣tioned and associated with him and his, and is from hell Rev. 9. 2. 3. yet they are neither afrayd nor ashamed to say they are Christs Mi∣nisters, and yet are sworne Servants to Antichrist, and him they have and do obay, whose Servants they are, they serve not Christ, for no man can serve 2. Masters, they say they are Christs Servants, and yet obay Antichrists Commandes; weare his livery, count his marke a priviledge and seeing it is not fit to alow, no not in the least degree, him that assumes a lawfull Office without a lawfull calling as Heb. 4. 5. 4. what detestation is sufficient then thinke ye for him, who dare enter and take an Office of Antichrist which is
on purpose set in opposition against Jesus Christ, and sweare allegi∣ance to Christs greatest enemy: oh that they would do as Moses did, refus to be called that which the Bishops made them, and fling of his Livery, burne the black box, and cease to do any thing by that power, and come in now at last, (though the day be farre spent and worke in Gods vinyeard) and kisse the Sonne and sweare allegiance to him, this would be for Gods glory, their honour and comfort;  this were a sweet thing indeed, and much to be desired. If it belong to the Lord-Bishops, &c. to make Ministers as some affirme, then there is no lawfull Minister, unlsse he be so made by them, and so they are driven to make that essentiall to a true Mini∣ster which yet was never appointed by Christ, and seeing the Pop Priesthood is not any of those Offices Christ hath appointed, as ap∣peares Ephes. 4 11. 12. we ought to reject it, and therefore we ought not to be edefied by them in those Offices; for nothing can be pro∣fitable in Religion but what God justifieth, and to receive or use any other meanes of teaching, besides Christ would imply some imper∣fection in Christs meanes, and so in Christ; also it were to receive another Teacher besides Christ which were in effect to reject Christ; for he will be our onely Teacher (by himselfe and his meanes) or not at all, and because Christs meanes is sufficient, we neede no other, so we dre not use any other; for that were to change Christ with want either of power that he could not, or want of will that he would not, or want of wisdome that he knew not what meanes were best, or want of love that he would not afford us meanes e∣nough, or not good enough; this is no lesse then to change God to be worser then an Infidell, in not providing for his Family, what they neede, and if God affords meanes sufficient for his, to what end should we use more, also I desire to know. 1. whether any thing can be profitable in Religion that is not appointed by God, seeing we have but one Lawgiver as Jam. 4. Jesus Christ; whether to receive a new Ministery be not to receive a new Teacher. 3. how the execu∣tion of the Popes Priesthood can be truly accounted ministeriall teaching under Christ. 4. how we can use or acknowledge any re∣ligious teaching with Faith, except it appeare to be appointed by Christ. 5. The administrations and ministeriall teaching of Antichrists Priesthood be such good meanes of teaching whether we are not bound in Conscience to submit to those Offices and Officers, and to those that made them such, because he is greater that sends, then he
that is sent Heb. 7. 7. for the originall of any good is much more good, and seeing this Priesthood is from Satan, whether we are not inga∣ged to him for all the good we receive by it, this may serve him that invented it, but as for God he will not be served by it, see Ezk. 44. 13. and seeing the borrower is servant to the lender, we by borrow∣ing any thing of the Divell or Antichrist, or the whore of Rome, in so doing become their Servants, Prov. 22. 7. 7. seeing these Ministers are reputed by themselves and others to be the Ministers of Christ, and none but such are permitted by Law to preach, and they preach as such, whether my hearing then is not (a seeming at least) an aprobation that they are such as they are reputed, and see∣ing they preach as Officers as they are together in hearing them, I serve not at least to acknowledg that office to be appointed by Christ to teach his people, also my action of hearing them cast some shew of honor (at least) upon such Officers which is to worship; for Reverence, honour, and worship is the same, and so I secretly confes the originall of i, is to be worship∣ped much more; for the cause is greater then the effect, also in saying they are Ministers of Christ in so doing I call the Divell Christ, whose Ministers they are. 2. set Christ in the place of Satan, and Satan in Christs. 3. that Christs spirituall or misticall body is imperfect without them; for if they be Christs Ministers they are a part of his Body, & is not this grosse Idolatry to a dore Satan insted of Christ; for they are called Ministers of Christ, when they are the Divells, Rev. 9. 20. so their Idoll, Temples, are called the houses of God, the Popes Priesthood, the Ministers of God, the Divells they are, and if it be intollerable to take a Member of Christ, and joyne it to a harlot, is it not as bad or worse to take a Member of a harlot in a false Office to joyne it to Christs Body. 7. I desire to know by what Rule, and principle of Religion, we may admit of the Popes Priesthood, (or Ministery that is not Christ) if we must hate all that belong to a false Religion, yea even the gar∣ment spotted with the flesh Iude 23. Harding answers in the a∣pologie in Preface Belar∣min up Supra. Our retaining any thing of Romes trash hinders our confession a∣gainst it, and they judge our retaining of any thing of theirs an apro∣bation of what they do; and confirmes them in their Religion which is a hard thing to confirme them in their Idolatry by the use of any thing of theirs, and is it also a disparagement to our Religion as it is a gracing of Popery, the Papists cry out and beast that we are not a∣ble
to serve God without their Priesthood, Temples, and Ceremo∣nies, Bellarmin saith, God takes such delight in their Temples, that he takes the charge bestowed on them in better sort, then if it were bestowed in mony upon the poore, and if we may receive their Priesthood and Temples, and sprinkling of Infants, will it not follow the rest of the same kinde may be received also? Zeale cannot indure the coupling of any thing of Christs with the things of Antichrist, because God will have them divided, God will not have any thing come neere him, but what he hath sanctified, wit∣nesse Nadabs and Abihus strange fire, Lev. 10. 1. what agreement hath light with darknesse, Christ with Beliall, &c. 2 Cor. 6. Tell me, can Zeale indure that any thing that is the Divells should come neere them, much lesse the Lord, we should flye from all  is the Divells, as we would flye from the Divell himselfe, what zeale, expresse they against what is his when they use it, in use religious  most honourablest use, and the use he appointed for them, how do such avoid them who go to them; did we hate Idolatry, we could not by no meanes be brought to digest one dram of it; for all  belongs to it is alike uncleane, and so alike to be hated, it doth vex their Soules who have Zeale to see the markes and signes of Idolatry and Idolls of Antichrist, therefore we protest all that hath  shew of Popery, we abhorre, and to the Popes Priesthood, we  depart from us, get ye hence we know you not, Esa. 30. 22. Oh consi∣der this Priesthood is invented in opposition to Christ, and that by his greatest enemy, such as can beare this, are they not luke-warme, and as a cake halfe baked, Rev. 3. 16. Hos. 7. 8. beare this and  any thing, and bid Zeale farewell for ever. Consider what names God gives to Antichrists Priesthood, as lo∣custs Rev. 8 3. like horses, their faces like men, teeth like Lyons, tailes like Scorpions; and like Serpents, Froggs, Rev. 16, 13. S∣serers, Rev. 19. 23. if they have the names of men, then the  of men, and as we would fly from such kind of Creatures, both in body and minde, so should we from Antichrists Priesthood, they have been the professed and sworne slaves of Antichrist, wore his Livery and counted his marke a priviledge. So it hath been their practise to slight some, contemn vilify dis∣grace and reproach us, calling us simple, ignorant, and illiterate and seduced people; because we refused to assent to those things they said without proofe, and when we have gone to them to be infor∣med,
and to informe, they would oft say they, are not at leisure, and that it was our pride to offer to contradict them, to dispute with them, and that they were willing, yet because we were ignorant, and so could not understand, nor distinguish, and so conceited and wilfull, that it is to no purpose, and when this would not availe then they would make the thing in question, the ground of an accusation taking it for granted before it were proved, that it is a grievous error when it was the truth, and when they did admit of a discourse, they would so continue their speech, so that we could not have time to answer, or else they would fill their discourse with Greek or Latin, Logick, So∣fistry, and vaine distinctions, and save fetcht consequences, by which meanes they darkened the truth, and hindred their consci∣ences, and others from receiving the truth, one while they would put  to prove the negative, and being put to it, they would aske our meaning, and wonder at our ignorance, and in the meane time they would study a shift, and that which made most against them, they would say it made most for them, or tell us it was not worth the an∣swering; also they would draw us from the word of God, to their wisdome and descretion, and carnall reason which they knew would prevaile with the others. Also we have found it their practice to frequent their Companies who were rich and honourable in the world, and serve themselves in∣to their affections for their own ends. So it is common among them not much to care for the Sheepe, but suffered the wolfe to take them; so when they have professed their be∣ing cleerly called by God to a people, yet they would leave them for a greater living and professe, they were called thither, and after leave them for a greater, when the first was enough, yea we have heard of, that one of them who was not of the worst amongst them, said unles he might be sure of 3. or 4. hundred a yeare, he would not be their Minister, whereby they plainly declare they serve not the Lord Jesus, but their owne bellies, and sell their Sermons, and make a trade of Religion, esteeming gaine godlinesse. Also how do they seeke to hinder the publishing of any thing but what come from themselves, as if the word of God came onely to them. Also they are so proud that they thinke themselves wronged, and complaine because we will not heare them preach. 14. We have separated from them, because we found those places the
houses of Bondage, because whatsoever corrupt Doctrine or blasphe∣mies were taught, we were enjoyned under a great penalty to be silent: so that we must either sin or suffer, and to suffer for witnessing against what they teach, when we are forbidden to be there to heare them is not safe. To be present and silent when they taught lies, and spake against the truth, were to partake of their sins, breake Gods Command, de∣file our soules, hazard our peace, incourage and harden them in their sinns. For 1. Because it is Gods Command that those who sin rebuke be∣fore all, 1 Tim. 5. 20. 2. Because it was the practice of the Saints to do so, and that with great zeale as you may see Acts 13. 16. 10. Ezra 9 2, 3, 4. Psal. 119. 136. 139. Numb. 25. 11, 12, 13. and have not they more cause to be re∣proved, who alleige the word of God to justifie errors and lies, and to condemn the way of God, and people of God for walking in it: as we have heard them do. 3. God commends it for a vertue in the Church of Ephesus, that they could beare with them that are evill, Rev. 2. 2. to see or heare sin committed with silence is to beare it, and if Ely was guilty al∣though he did reprove sin, because he did not do it zealously, as ap∣peares 1 Sam. 2. 22, 23, 24, 25. 27 29. and 3. 13. how shall they e∣scape or be excused, who reprove not sin at all, their saying it is not my place, it belongs to the Magistrate or the Minister or the Officers of the Church, or he is not my brother, I am no Member, these shifts are too short, so that neither love to God, his truth and people, the good of the soules of men, nor their own peace, nothing moves them; surely such love not the Lord as they should, nor so much as the Saints have done; doth a friend love as he ought who heares him wronged and is silent, and shewes no dislike; oh offer not this to God. 4. We ought to reprove sin (if we be present where sin is com∣mitted in case none else reprove it) because God hath appointed it to be a meanes of preventing sin, sin being very contagious, 1 Cor. 5. 6. therefore he saith, them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may feare, 1 Tim. 5. 20. and that ye do so to all men, great or small friends or enemies, spare none, so much is implyed in these words, I charge thee before God and the Lord esus Christ, and the elect An∣gels that thou observe these things without prefering one before an∣other
doing nothing by partiality, verse 21. must we take care for the Oxe or Asse of an enemy as appeares Exod 23. 4. 5. then much more for the good of the soule of an enemy. 5. This was Iobes comfort, that nothing could cause him to keepe silence Jobe 31. 34. now if he might have been silent when sin had been committed, and yet not have sinned, his not being silent could not be any comfort to him at all. 6. Because presence and silence, God esteeme a doing of the action as 1 Cor. 11. 4. 5. with 14. 24 every man prophesiing: yet all spake not, every woman that prophisieth &c. that is by consent, for women are not allowed to speake in the Church. So God chargeth Ahab with murder when Jezebel did it, and he onely by consent 1 Kings 18 19. compared with 7, 8 9, 10. Silence is conformation, as appeares Numb. 30. 14. he confirmeth them because he held his peace when he heard them: so it was not enough that they shed not blood, but that they did not see it Deut. 21. 7. therefore God deales with those who were present and silent, where sin was committed as if they had done it themselves, see Lev. 5. 1. and 20. 4. 5. 7. If we reprove not sin we have fellowship with it, Ephes. 5. 11. Hag. 2. 13. Rev. 2. 20. see Iosua 22. 18, 9, 20. therefore the Saints are to come out from them, that they might not be partakers of their sins Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. I was almost in all evill in the midst of the Con∣gregation and Assembly, Prov. 5. 14. 8. God in describing a good man saith of him, he stoppeth his cares from hearing of blood, and his eyes from seeing of evill, Esa. 33. 15. 16, that is, he cannot by no meanes endure it. Consider impartially these things, and resolve whether you may heare Gods truth, and people preached against, and be silent, and not sin; for my part my conscience was so overpowred with the evill thereof, that if there were no other reason against hearing the Bishops Priests, then this, I was not able no longer to heare them having often found the most eminent amongst them often condemning the truth and people of God. 15. We have separated from them, because God hath made them no promise of his presence and blessing, and we are not to expect a∣ny blessing where God hath not promised it, and seeing all the pro∣mises of Gods presence blessings, and exceptation are made only and peculiarly unto the Church of Christs, as in the Law the promises were
made to the Tabernacle, Temple, Ark, Exod. 29 42. 43. Lev. 25. 2. Exod. 25. 21. 22. which are to be applyed to the Church of Christ under the Gospel, Mount Sion figured the Church of Christ, Heb. 12. 21. 22. there will I meete with thee, Numb. 17. 4. there I will command my blessing upon thee, the Lord will blesse thee  of Sion, and abundantly blesse her provision, Psal. 134. in all place where I record my name there, will I come unto thee, and blesse thee Exod. 20. 24. thou shalt put the blessing upon Mount Gazerim,  Mount Sinai, Deut. 11. 29 and 33. 16. the glory of the Lord abode there, Exod. 24. 16. my beloved came into his garden to eat his plea∣sant fruits, I have gathered my mirrh with my spices which is Christs acceptation of his Churches services by his graces, and it is called his, because he commanded it, Song. 4. 16. and 5. 1. But Mount Eball was a type of the false Church, and the curse was there, Deut. 11. 9. & 27. 15. 18. 25. Josua 8. 33. 34. what portion have we in false Churches or inheritance in the Sonnes of it, to thy tents  Israel, viz. the Church of Christ. The Church of Christ is a resemblance of heaven; therefore it is called heaven, Rev. 6. 14. and by the rule of Contraries the false Church must be hell, and as hell is the habitation of Divells, so is the Cage the false Church, Rev. 18. 2. and as those who are in hell have plagues and torments continually, so they have no rest day nor night who worship the Beast, Rev. 14, 9, 10, 11. thou didst debase thy selfe even unto Hell, Esa. 57 9. thou knewest not that the dead are there, & that her guess are in the depth of Hell, Prov. 9. 18 by the gates of Hll, in Mat. 16. 18, is  the power of the false Church, and we desire you would not be angry in that we have no minde to go to Hell. 16. We have departed from them because Gods word do not command us to go to false Churches to heare unlawfull Ministers, and God forbids what his word commands not; therefore God much complaineth, that they did that which he commandeth not, see Jer. . 5. & 7. 31. & 32. 32. 35. Lev. 10. 5. Deut. 17. 1. & 18. 20. Mat. 28. 0. Marke 7. 8 9. If we suffer our selves to be beaten from this hold, we shall be taken captive by our enemies the papist, tell me, did God ever com∣mend or accept of the doing of that he never commanded,  whe∣ther any thing can be well done that is not commanded to be  say the former, and bring in traditions, grant the latter and bring  workes of supererogation, monkes, merits, &c. hould we then to
principle, Mr. Rob: saith, in a treatise for hearing in false Churches, it is confessed that hearing in false Churches is not commanded by Christ. 17. Because to heare them in the execution of their unlawfull Offices & Church is to uphold them, because if none did heare them, they would not administer, and so their Church, State, would be dissolved: So then the people establish them, because persons to administer unto, is es∣sentiall to administration, and it is much to be desired that their Church were dissolved, because then the Saints would come to Sion, and then Christ should have more glory; for the glory of a King con∣sists in the multitude of Subjects; therefore I thus reason, if the whole ought not to go, then no part of the whole; for the whole con∣sists of the parts, for every Generall includes all the particulars and although it be granted, that if one part go, the rest in not going do not dissolve the Church; yet that part that goeth not doth well, be∣cause it hath done its part; also it is a meanes to cause the other part to do so also, seeing actions speake also there not going dishonoureth & weaken the rest that go, & so much as we uphold the false Church, we dissolve the true, & so far are enemies to Christ, as we are enemies to his Church; oh consider this you who are for hearing in false Church∣es: I being convinced of the falsenesse of the ministery and Church of England, left hearing them yet conceiving as some do, that they might be heard as gifted men, and that hearing was no Communi∣on, &c. I returned to heare them, beleeving, and professing their ministery to be false and Antichristian: yet at my hear∣ing them, the weake were stumbled, the strong offended, and some of the parish gatherings were confirmed in their practice, and pro∣fessed they liked their Church and Ministery the better, because I heard them, and hoped I began to see my errour, (as they called it) in denying their Church and Ministery, &c, so my practice encou∣raged them, and so upheld their Church by participation, but when I saw my errour and the fruit of it, I was filled with much bitter∣nesse, griefe & sorrow, I knew not how to be revenged on my selfe, and had not God preserved me, I had made my selfe a terrible ex∣ample to revolters, I wish this may be a warning to others to take , let him that thinketh he standeth take heede least he fll from his steadfastnesse, as 2. Pet. 3. 17. oh consider, is it a small mat∣ter
to sin against God to loose peace of conscience, to incourage and harden others in their sin, to say no more. It seemes the Church of England & the Popes Priesthood are so mar∣ried together, that they cannot be divoursed, this strange marriage, was figured out, Neh. 9. and as Paul calles marriage a secret Myste∣ry, & that Marriage was a signe or figure of joyning together Christ and his Church, Ephes. 5. 32. so Song 6. 8. Rev. 21. 9. so strange mar∣riage figure, the joyning the Pope and his Church, we are to waight for wisdome at wisdomes gate, and not in an Idolls temple, nor in  Idolatrous assembly, nor for Christs voice at the mouth of a harlot,  is objected Christ hath been found there. Answ. true, to call his a∣way, Ier. 51. 6. 45. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. after which call  warning, let such take heede how they stay and meddle there, and consider, Rev. 14 6. to 11. and be sure ye attend where Christ had promised his presence, as Mat. 18. 20. Esa. 33. 21. Psal. 87. 7. and if it seeme small, so as ye finde not that plenty ye desire, see that ye dspise no the day of small things, Zack. 4 11. consider Psal. 132. 15. 18. Because it is a dishonour to Jesus Christ for his people to go to Antichrist, Priesthood to be fed; it is a dishonour for the Kings Sonne to go to the house of his greatest enemy for bread: if Christ pro∣vides not for his Family, he is worser then an infidell, in my Fathers house is bread enough, Christ hath provided choyce dainties, and e∣nough; Christ is in the midst of his Church, his eye is upon his to know their wants, and supply them, Mat. 18. 20. Christ will worke a miracle before they shall want; Abraham would not receive so much as a shooe latchet from the Heathen, least they should say they made him rich, see 1 King. 17. 12. to 18. and 19 4. 6. 8. and shall  from Christs enemy? Abrahams case is ours: wherefore we abho to be provided for by them; Gods love, care, and bounty, call us from you to stand by and waite to see a full end of Antichrist, and his Priesthood, &c. and so to sing halalugia, and for you who are fed by them, so as you cannot live without them, tell me how shall you rejoyce in her ruin; what shall you get by her fall, whose ruin is your losse, you cannot spare her now, what will ye do here after? her destruction hasteneth, stand still a little, and ye shall see the Lords Salvation of Sion, and the utter downfall of Babilon, Rev. 18. 19. 20. 21. and 19. 1. 2. 3.
19. Because the Scriptures declare to follow them, it is an un∣reasonable practice to heare such as are not the Ministers of Christ,  so much is implyed in Song. 1. 7. 8. tell me o thou whom my soule , where thou seest, where thou makest thy flocks to rest at noone;  why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy Compa∣: there can no reason be given for such a practice. Therefore Christ answers it; if thou know not o thou fayrest a∣mong women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock and feede  kids besides the Sheaperds tents: Song. 1. 8. follow the foot-steps of the Saints gone before you recorded in Scripture: what hast  to do in the way of Egipt, nothing at all, except onely to drinke  water of Sihor, 2. er. 18. which God condemns. 20. Because those which I may heare I may maintaine as 1 Tim. 5. 18. but Satans Priesthood nor any other false ministery I may not maintaine for that were to uphold them in their evell way: there∣fore I may not hearethem. 21. That ministery that is not from God, we may not pray to God to inable them in the execution of it; for he that biddeth them Godspeede, is partakers of all their evill, 2. Epis. Iohn 10. 11. and if we may pray to God to blesse the Priesthood, why not the Prelacie the Pope and Dragon, Rev. 9. 11. for it is unreasonable to blesse the branches and not the roote, and if I may pray to God for a good successe of actions done by a false power, and Office, then I may thanke God for the meanes of that good and then I may pray for the continuance of it, and of that Church, and for any so to pray, were to pray against the fulfilling of the promise of the down∣fall of Babylons power and Priesthood, we pray for the fall of Baby∣lon, and for the rising of Sion, and to pray otherwise, were to build  that God distroyes and to take his name in vaine, yea to make our selves transgressors and to mock God. 22. Because we cannot approve of such a preaching as tends to the dishonour of Christ in slighting the rest of the Ordinances of Christ, for so doth their preaching not onely. 1. honour the cage,  2. hinder the Saints going to Sion, by which they hinder their joying the rest of the Ordinances of Christ. 3. Christ is deprived of his Kingly glory in the want of the presence of his Saints. 4. their preaching hinders them, and blinds them that they cannot see the mystery of iniquity, its their preaching that is the strong cord that
bindes Gods people to Babilon, the Cup of gold which she holds forth to intice the people to admire her and to follow her, is the word of God which she hath stolen, and I may not be partaker with her in her theft, Psal. 50. 17. 18. It were better for them and others that they taught no  at all the should they not by it keepe so many in errour as they do, the harlots smooth mouth and hony drops, hath be witched many, and drawn them aside from the way of God, as Prov. 5. 3. . 7. 21. Neh. 3. 4. with Gal. 3. 1. God of old tryed his peoples love to him, by suffering false Pro∣phets to arise, and give them a signe, and although it came to  yet when he went about to draw the people from the worship God, they were not to heare that prophet but reject him, Deut. . 1. to 7. with Deut. 18. 20, 21, 22. God is still the same, and layeth  like charge upon his people as he did then, as Gal. 1. 8. 9. The Lord may say to them, ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountaine that prepare a Table for the , and that furnish the drinke-offering for that number, Esa. 65. 11.  they are guilty of usurpation in taking upon them to  the people, and whereas the lesse is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7. viz. greater in power and Authority, whereas they have neither the Office of Christ nor the power of Christ. 23. Because the way they walke, is not the way that God  appointed his people to walke in, they may not go to them for ∣fit, for great guifts and parts are not to be countenanced out of Gods way, some thinke they are safe, so long as they say they  them as guifted men, but seeing they stand there as Ministers,  intention alters not their standing, nor lessens their sinne, if  have guifts, let them bring them to the Church of Christ for  glory, and his peoples comfort, see Deut. 1. 12. Ephes. 4. 16. as  Mica 4. 1. 2. so now the Law is to go forth of Sion, see Ephes. 3.  the greater their gifts are the greater is their sin, and your  in that they lay them not out for Christs advantage, see Luke 2. Are their guifts from God that are layd out so contrary to  and the good of his people? see Ephes. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 12. 13, 1  14. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. the arts of men are oft taken for the  of God. 24. The Church State make all the publike actions
done by vertue of it to be formally good or evill according to the Law and false power, and so accordingly become lawfull or unlawfull to pertake of them, Mat. 23. 17. 19. the true Church hath the true power, true worship, true Offi∣cers, true administration, the power being true, all actions done which naturally flow from it, are good and lawfull, and so unlawfull, if done i and by a false Church and pow∣er, for power puts into Offices, office into administration, which is the execution of it, so that if the Office be unlaw∣full, the administration of it is unlawfull also, because its a part, yea the chiefest part of the Office; for the end is ever greater then the meanes, because the meanes is for the end, the Office is for the administration, which is the power of it, so to partake of the administration, is to pertake of the power of it, Rev. 9. 11. it followes that an evell power and Office cannot have a lawfull administration, and thus it is in divine and civill States, when the State is not allowed, the power of that state is not allowed, nor any administration done by it, and though the action for the matter of it be good, and he good that doth it, yet it is not allowed, apply it: so then. So farre as I allow of any administration done by a false Office and power, so farre I vilifie the true in that (I seeme at lest to) equall them, and so it is to be interpreted, when the outward action is the same with his, that approves of the Office and power of the State; for presents and silence is to be interpreted aprobation, what men are inwardly, it be∣longs not to us to determine. Also that place and calling that hath tyed unto it the breach of any Command of God, so as the calling cannot be separated from the sin, that place and calling is unlawfull; but the Ministery of England hath tyed to it the sprinkling of Infants, and giving holy things to dogs, &c. ergo. And seeing teaching and hearing are relations that go to∣gether: therefore where he may not lawfully preach, I may not heare.
Wherein it appeares that hearing the Popes Priesthood, is a breach of the ten Commandements. The first Command Requires. 1. That we hate, that which he hates, and to testifie it  we love him, 2 Kings 10. 15. Iude 23. God hates all the monuments of Idolatry, and all belongs to it, the Popes Priesthood is a principall part of their worship, so that I am to fly from him, and all that is Antichrist, as from the Divill, and therefore not to go to heare them, see Esa. 30. 22. And as nothing but what God hath sanctified may not come neere God, witnesse Nodab and Abihu, strange . Lev. 10. nor I here it in use Religions, and if we may ad of the Popes Priesthood, and consecreated Temples, (with∣out which the Papists thinke not the worship holy) why may we not as well admit of all the Popish trumpery upon the same ground, yea the Divill himselfe: Let not men say they hate Popery, so long as they retaine in use religious, the principle bags of it, but he that truly hates Antichrists, cannot by no meanes digest, or dreame of any thing that is his, 1 Kings 18. 40. 2. The first Command is broken when we tempt God; and this is done when I doubt of Gods blessing in his own meanes and way. 2. when I expect not at all from God in his meanes and way, 3. use, meanes that he hath not ap∣pointed and expect his blessing where he hath not promised, if therefore this Command is broken when I heare an unlaw∣full Minister, or send an Idoll to God. 3. This Command is broken when I deny that which God affirmeth to be true, viz. that his word is perfit, and this I do, when I do an action, his word ivinues not, for if there be any action that is good, not commanded in the word: the word commandes not all good, and so is not
perfit which is to put the lye upon God, so when the word saith, such a practice is not lawfull, and my practice say it is, this is to put the lye upon God, and this is Idolatry to do so, if it be not blasphemy. 4. This Command forbids the doing of any thing which seemes to lessen his love, care and bounty to his; for this is not for his glory, and this is done when we go to Christs enemies to be fed, as if God did not take care for the soules and bodies of his; therefore davids prayer (shall be mine) let me not eat of their dainties, Psal. 141. 4. surely then he would not eat of their Sacrifice. 5. The first Command, Commandes me to be on Gods side, against the enemies, and not in the least to encourage them against him, this Command is broken when I heare a false Minister side with him, and incourage him and others in their sin against Christ. This 1. Command requires us not to receive one, or set up, &c. any thing that doth oppose him as we are loy∣all to Christ, no nor seeme to do it, and as God likes nothing but what himselfe appoints, no more should we, but if we receive Antichrists Priesthood, we do homage to a traytor, if we receive Satans Ministers, we receive him, Mat. 10. 14. 40. 41. 42. see Iohn 105. with Mat. 17. 25. a stranger for to honour a false Minister, is to worship the institutes, what difference between the Popes Priesthood and the Divills, and is it not horrible Idolatry to worship the Divill. 7. This Command requires me to follow God fully, and zealously, and avoide all meanes that may hinder me herein; for he is a zealous God, Exod. 20. 5. but to go to the Popes Priesthood, is to halt downe right, 1 Revel. 18. 21. Antichrist  not cleansed; we cannot follow Christ, and Beliall, how is it that thou being a Christian, keepes company with Anti∣christ, and frequents his house, I am perswaded that the
hearing of a false Minister is the greatest barre and stum∣bling block that lyeth in the way of Gods people, and hin∣dreth them most from following God fully. Oh who is like our God, and what Ministery is like his: therefore his Ministery I receive and imbrace, but if other∣wise, vehemently I abhorr, refuse, and scorne it. The 2. Command requires that God be worshiped pure∣ly according to his word; therefore that worship that is not according to his word, either for matter or manner is un∣lawfull, but to worship God with, or before an Idoll in state Religions breakes this Commandement, but a false Minister is an Idoll and a meanes not appointed by God: therefore to heare a false Minister in the execution of his Ministery, is grosse superstition and Idolatry, yea a coun∣tenansing of false worship, and a breach of this 2. Comman∣dement; yea this is to sacrifice to Divells, and to have fel∣lowship with Divells, see Exod. 20. 5. Psal. 106. 37. 1 Cor. 10. 20. The 2. Command condemns the use of any Idoll: an I∣doll is any thing or similitude that is set a part for a re∣ligious use, and not appointed by God, 1 Iohn 5. 21. 2 Cor. 6. 16. therefore we commit Idolatry in affording our pre∣sence where an Idoll is in state Religions we worship an Idoll when we honour it, we honour it when we use it, in use Religions we grace the temple and Priest, when by our presence we cause them to be the better thought of: therefore to cast the least glance of honour, credit, or coun∣tenance, to an Idoll we worship him; yea to looke towards an Idoll is to cast a glance of honour to it, see Rev. 13. Da∣niel forboore the Kings meate, it being offered to an Idoll which was otherwise cleane, least he should serve to ho∣nour the Idoll, for if he might have eat it, and yet not have honoured the Idoll, he did ill to refuse it as he did, Deut. 1. 8.
The 3. Command condemns the taking Gods name in vaine; Gods worship is his name now to professe to wor∣ship God when I do not, I cause his name to be evill spo∣ken of, and this is to take his name in vaine, but to heare a false Minister, is to mock God, and to take his name in vaine; so he that biddeth him Goeede, is partaker of all his evill deedes, 2 Epis. Iohn 11. 11. 4. Command requires us to sanctifie the Lords day, Heb. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 16. 1. Rev. 1. But hearing a false Minister in a false state, hinders per∣sons from sanctifying the Lords day, and therefore is a breach of this Commandement. 2. This 4. Command requires us to cease from our own workes, viz. sin, but he that heares such preach of whom we speake sins, and so hath not ceased from his own works and so is guilty of the breach of this Command, Heb. 4. 4. 10. 5. Command requires that we honour our Superiours, as 1. himselfe, 2. those he hath set up. But hearing them in those places is to disobay Gods Command, Rev. 18. 4. &c. which is to dishonour him. 2. by hearing them I honour them, and so farre I ho∣nour them, my practice vilifieth, and despise and disgrace such as God would have honoured in levying them to fol∣low and heare them; also in hearing Antichrist, I dishonour Christ, and those whom he sends to preach, and in hearing the Popes Priesthood, I honour those that sent them; for greater is he that sends, then he that is sent. 6. Command condemns murder naturall and spirituall. But to heare Antichrists Ministers is to teach and cause o∣thers to sin and to incourage and harden them in their sin, which is to destroy their soules, 1 Cor. 8. 10. 11. Also this
practice doth murder the Saints, Communion and love each to other, &c. The 7. Command condemns all uncleanesse both natu∣rall and spirituall with all meanes and occasions that tends to defile us, and that we use all meanes of chastity, spirituall chastity, Solomon teacheth in parable, Prov. 5 15. 18. with Song. 4 12. 15. Rev. 22. Ezek. 47 6. 10. drinke water out of thyne own Sesterne, viz, go not to heare in false Churches, to hear Antichrists Ministers is to sin, & so a breach of spirituall chastity, and that which defiles and polutes my Soule and others in tempting them by my practice to defe themselves also, as 1 Cor. 8. 10. false worship is whordom because faith towards God is broken, Lev. 17. 7. the false Church is a harlot, and to have Communion with her in any thing that is hers, is spirituall uncleannesse: therefore we are commanded not to come neere the doore of her house, Prov. 5. 8. Also this Command forbids touching of any uncleane thing, consider well these Scriptures, Esa. 30. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 1 Kings 22. 43. Deut. 12. 1, 2, 3. &c. and 7. 5. 2 Kings 10. 26, 27, 28. and if the brasen Serpent was destroyed be∣cause abused, 2 Kings 18 4. 3. what can we say for an Idolls temple, dedicated to a Saint and a monument of Idolatry, a principle Instrument of Idolatry abused to Idolatry, and Idoll, in use religious and commonly judged more holy, then any other places; yet not appointed by the Lord, but an inticement to Idolatry, its called a temple, and to have temples now of stone, is to deny Christ to be come, the Temples of old being a Tipe of Christ, which being come, was to be done away; I desire to be satisfied of them that thinke otherwise in these questions. 1. Whether those under the Gospel have any more li∣berty to use an Idoll in use Religions then the Jewes had. 2. whether God doth not hate all Idolatry, and all the Instru∣ments of it, now as much as he did in the Jewes time be∣fore Christ. 3. whether we are not to hate and shew as much dislike against all the monuments of Idolatry as the
Jewes were to do. 4. whether our natures now be not as prove to Idolatry, as the Jewes were. 5. whether we are not to immitate those, good Jewes in zeale who hated and abhorred them most. The Temples (and Priests) are Jewells of the harlot, and so long as we retaine them in such a use, we have not tru∣ly repented of former Idolatry. It is a Troope of Antichrists Conquest, and while it standeth Christ is dishonoured, and put to shame, it is a signe of their complying with Gods enemies, and while we use them in such a use at least we for beare to do as we are commanded, Deut. 5. 6. Its a stumbling block to Popish mindes, and while it continueth, there is some regard seemes to be had of their service, is it a small thing thinke ye to retaine their conse∣created Priests and temples, &c. and I in going to them, to heare the Priests tempt my selfe, and tempt the Lord to give me up to Satan, and Antichrist, to be blinded and har∣dened. Rom. 1. The 8. Command condemns all thefe to heare Antichrists Priests is theft in a high degree, because by it I rob God of his glory, and give it to Antichrist in worshiping him. 2. To partake with all these is theft, and they are theeves if they have guifts and graces in not carrying them to the Church, for all is theirs, and if it be sacriledge to steale a M-booke or a Sirples which are detestable; what sacra∣ledge call you this, to rob the Church of Christ of her oode, and to adorne Antichrist with it, also my hearing them robs the truth of its due, and robs me of peace and comfort, and part of my Crowne of sufferings, and bring a woe upon me, Esa. 39. 1. yea Plagues, Rev. 14 9. 10. 11. and curses Josun 6. 26. its theft in that it steales from our brethren the comfort they might injoy in us, and fills them with griefe, because of our sin. The 9. Command forbids all kinde of bearing false wit∣nesse, but to heare them is to go to them for foode, I by my practice say there is not meate enough in my Fathers
house this is to beare false witnesse against God, and to lye against the truth for my practice in hearing them say they may be heard, which is to lye and beare false witnesse a∣gainst God. The 10. Command forbids covetuousnesse which is for a man not to be contented with Gods allowance, Heb. 13. 5. Now if we be contented with what God hath given us in his house, &c. why go we to the house of a stranger  Antichrist, surely our going to heare them plainly declare our not being contented without them which is covet∣ousnesse. FINIS. Faults escaped in the Printing. Page line word Reade 5. 21. proofe proofes 5. 34. osis Office 6. 2. Jodlls Jdoles 21. 24. institutes instituter 21. 29. zealous Jealous 25. 23. all a 10. 4. mony mercy 10. 36. some scorne 9. 13. serve some 8. 16. justifieth instituteth 8. 23. change charge 8. 26. change charge Epist.   delivered derived. The other faults, correct or passe by in love.
