R765A R36708 15987838 104688
THE REIGN OF GUSTAVUS KING OF SUEDEN, Son of ERICUS. Collected out of the Histories of those times and offered to the service of these. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxey, and are to be sold by J. Rothwel at the Fountain in Cheapside, 1658.
To the READER. IF you will cast in my way that of the Poet, Quis leget haec? and why must the name of Gustavus Ericson, now dead one hundred years be raked out of the dust? To the first of these your selves will give the clearest answer. But as to the second, I shall give this account, The works of God recovered out of Oblivion are as new; and every man is bound to keep them in everlasting remembrance. Much more those that are most signal, such as these in this Kings Reign, which for number, variety and ex∣cellency, in so little room are not to be Parallelled in Story. Secondly, though the goods of outward E∣states of men may be trusted to such Executors as the Testator shall appoint, yet of their good Names every man is by God made Executor to imploy the same in Pious uses: And though in the Reign of this King, the acts of Charles the Emperor, Francis the French King, and Henry the 8th King of England, are the general subject of all Story, yet were my Pen as good as others, I should not doubt to leave this Gustavus equal with them if not above them all. He was the first King that rejected the Romish Religion, though Henry the 8th was the first that rejected the Popes pow∣er.
He was a King not only above, but against Tyranny; ever under difficulty, yet ever successe∣ful: The root of the Royal stem of Sueden fa∣mous for Kings of renown in these later dayes. Lastly, the Course of Providence like the Cir∣cular motion hath its returnes; and the hearts of men fashioned alike, do correspond as face to face by reflection; and that observation of the Wise man, That which hath been is, and that which is to come hath already been,Dion. Hal. l. 10 hath occasioned such as would carry themselves prudently in presens af∣fairs, to study the former, and thereby they become wise at other mens cost. An observing eye easily sees the posture of the present times, and an observ∣ing Reader may as easily conceive the posture of the former; and by comparing the Causes and Ef∣fects of mens counsils, and the condition of their persons and actions, may as easily conceive the pro∣bable posture of the future. How far the affairs of Sueden in this Kings time may match with those of our times, will in some measure herein ap∣pear, and what conclusions will be made thereupon for the future, I must leave to Gods direction and your prudence. I submit what is mine own herein wholly to your censure, for I neither fear evil, nor desire other good, then that these times may be bettered hereby.
GƲSTAVƲS ERICSON KING OF SUEDEN. IN the Government of Nations these two principles of Lust and natural Reason strive even for supremacy, yet can never get higher then to be, as Deputies unto an other power that giveth a Law to them, both conducing to the good of the world, much more then Reason could project, or Lust would permit. A plentiful proof hereof we have in the Election of Governors of the people, wherein if private interest pre∣vail, no good issue is expected; but if publick interest sway, that peoples condition is accounted happy immediately, and yet how miserably the expectations of men are generally deluded herein, no Story of any nation but gives testimo∣ny herein. Vespasian the Emperor was Mutatus in meli∣us, made more good by being great; and on the contrary, Galba the Emperor while he was a private person,Tacit. Hist. lib. 1. was pri∣vato major accounted worthy of Government, and in all
mens opinion capable of an Empire nisi imperasset, if he had not been Emperor. The excellency of a private per∣son for a supreme jurisdiction is not known till he hath had trial by the temptations belonging to such high preferments. And the observation hereof hath disputed many States and States-men out of their Ideas of Election, and the peo∣ple into an inclination unto a Rule for Successionary govern∣ment, by degrees sliding from Association to a government by States; from thence to a government by Designation to one family; and lastly, arising to an Hereditary govern∣ment, and there resting as in their Center; for the exam∣ples of relapse in that kind are very rare, and those nations that are not yet arrived at this pitch, though they, being of the Northen Climate, may have long nights, yet take little rest themselves, and a low their Kings less. Denmark Sueden and other of those Eastern nations, though (as it was long agoe noted of the Germans) they love change; yet having formerly gloried in their liberty to elect their Kings out of the wide world, are now come to a confinement of themselves to one particular Family, and most of them to a particular constitution with limitations leading their Elections according to a certain Rule. Only Poland remaineth a monument of an Elective government, to be a Caveat to all nations to beware of their condition; who, to avoid faction, that otherwise might arise by ele∣ction from amongst themselves, have by a Law quite ex∣cluded themselves from government, and given up their Crown unto Foreigners, and yet they account themselves well appayed if they can derive their Kings from the Jagel∣lonian stem, though at never so remote a distance. Amongst the rest, if not above them all, Sueden may be looked upon as a generous and ingenious people, not soon sensible of oppression, yet impatient under it when they feel it, much resembling the English in their Laws, and the English them in their changes; and each other in special Providence appearing in all; upon which account only. I have desired to point at a parcel of Affairs befalling that
Nation in the time of Gustavus the first, in relation to the change of their government, which also hath been the con∣dition of this Nation in these latter daies. It is very difficult to discover what was the original go∣vernment of Sueden, as of those other Northern Nations, they being in elder times more used to the Sword then the Pen. Only the Historians generally agree, That these North-Eastern Nations elected their Kings: And more particu∣larly from the time of the government of St. Ericus King of Sueden, until the the time of Magnus Smeek, which was above two hundred years, the people of Sueden conti∣nually inclined to fasten the government in one family. But Magnus Smeek King of Sueden having a Son called Haquin made King of Norway, growing thereby more secure in the way of his own pleasure, mounted up into a height of oppression and licenciousness, until he became unsuppor∣table, and so was deposed by the people, and Albertus his sisters son Elected into the Throne; who also after some few years grew no lesse distastful to his people then his pre∣decessor had done: Haquin was then King also of Den∣mark by Marriage with Margaret the Queen, and having a Son by her, died. Margaret surviving, now Queen of Sueden and Norway, observing that Albertus King of Sue∣den, sate loose in the throne, in right of her son Olaus by Haquin (which Son also soon after died) invaded Al∣bertus and took him prisoner, and after seven years impri∣sonment set him at liberty, providing that Stockholm should be surrendred to her, which being performed, she now be∣comes Queen of the three Northern Kingdoms; and thus the royal Stem of Sueden was laid aside. Nor was this difficult in the working; the Lords of Sue∣den being interested some in Denmark, some in Norway, some having favour with the Queen, some expecting it, and all weary of the disturbances between those bordering Kingdoms, they were easily perswaded to hearken to the proposals made by the Queen, which not only correspond∣ed
with all their private concernments but promised a settle∣ment of the liberties and lawes of each nation, a probability of an eternal rest amongst themselves, and to be rendred formidable to other nations: Nor need the Suedes take prejudice at the point of succession; the Queen agreed that the Supreme over all these nations should be by election be∣tween the two nations of Sueden and Denmark by turns, and that Sueden should have the first election after the Queens death, only the Queen should have liberty to de∣clare her next successor. These seemed equal unto the Lords of Sueden, especi∣ally because the proposed of this Conjunction was not new, but had often times been in discourse with them in the former troublesome times, and this present opportu∣nity they looked upon but as the paleness of time for the accomplishing thereof. An union of two neigh∣bouring nations rightly made upon principles of peace and mutual agreements, is blessed of all, but if imposed by supre∣macy of power may seem goodly, but is seldome durable: If there be a mixture or alteration of lawes, making one go∣vernment out of the ruines of two; the Prince may thereby make it as his own creature more absolutely depend, and he may thereby drive two flocks in one with more ease to him∣self, but he must expect from God the brand of the little Horn in Daniel; and from man the catching of the first op∣portunity forcibly to break their bonds, which many times like a clap of thunder overthrows High Towers. If neither Lawes nor Customes be changed, both nations onely be∣ing under one head, by justice and prudence that Govern∣ment may continue longer; yet neither one nor other can pro∣mise continuance beyond the life of one man: Especially where the government is elective and both nations put to their own choice upon every removal, as it was the condition of both these nations of Sueden and Denmark to be at this time in outward appearance, therefore this agreement was a fair medium to compose the long broils between these two nations. Nevertheless it was otherwayes decreed by Him,
whose wayes are not, as mans wayes. By whose over-ru∣ling order, also all this great building becomes a Babel in the conclusion to all these projects: For this annexation (I cannot call it Union) being thus agreed, the Queen be∣thinks her self of a successor; which to avoid faction she fetches from without doors, and left it (as may be suppo∣sed) as a rule for the future; for it was so observed du∣ring three succeeding kings. But in this the whole con∣trivement failed, that in these elections the Dane still led the way, and the Suede could never fasten upon any ele∣ction at all, according to the agreement; for agreements between them that waite for place of authority, and these that watch for their liberty last no longer then neces∣sity will bind.Dionys. Hal. lib. 6. The first king after the Queens death was by adoption from her, who was Ericus Duke of Pomerane he, reigned fourteen years, and was deposed. The second was Chri∣stopher Duke of Bavaria, who came in upon the Danish interest and yet the Suede submitted, he reigned seven years, and died. The third king was Christian the first who was son to the Earl of Oldenburgh, and was pro∣moted by the Danes also, and submitted unto by the Suede. But the Danes beginning to invade the liberties of Sueden, and by degrees growing upon them, the Suedes began their defection so far, as to elect governours of theit own, who should see to the maintenance of the Laws and liber∣ties of their country; yet the first of these they crowned king and thereby disclaimed the whole agreement, but his successors had onely the title of governours, as if they in∣tended not an absolute breach, but only with a moderation for safeguard of their own lawes and liberties. Now if any man shall be of opinion, that a people and their posterity may for ever lie bound under the will of any Prince and his successors, and so be in worse condition then any slave, who in all Christia Governments ought to have the protection of the Law (For histories tell us that these elected kings brought their Law with them)
such a man may call this course of Sueden, a Rebellion: But the Suedes are not of that mind; they mean not to dispute the point they had begun to appear for their free∣dome, and hold on they must, unless they will for ever lie at the discretion of the Danes for justice and mercie, of which they have had already two much experience to trust thereto: They therefore held on in their course of ele∣ction of governours of their own nation for the space of sixty years yet could never settle them: The Danes (like the spider upon some burly Bee) touching upon them with par∣ties, plots, and contrivances, whereof they had store, having many bosome friends even of the Suedes themselves, who more respected their own private interests, then the liberty of their own Country. A hard task it was for Sue∣den thus to fight against foreign enemies abroad and to watch against foreign friends at home, and speaks much of their courage, industry and faithfulness to their Country, and the good providence of God towards them therein. For they lay under this condition during the government of fewer governours, successively; amongst all whom, not one of them would promise further submission to the Da∣nish kings then might consist with the articles of annexation of the three kingdomes, nor would perform more. And had not the Dane been intoxicated, they might have learned by experience during all that time to have been contented to be ordered according to the articles of Annexation, but be∣ing sick of ambition & covetousness, they vomited nothing but oppression till they had fully purged themselves of all their interst and claim to the government of Sueden; all which came to pass in the reign of Christian the second, king of Denmark, above one hundred years after the articles of Annexation agreed. In manner following. After the death of Swanto who had been the third gover∣nour of Sueden, the Lords of Sueden elected Steno Stur to be their governour; wherein Gustavus arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal stood in opposition as one that loved the place more then his country; for missing of his expectation he be∣takes
himself to aid the interest of Christierne the second of that name king of Denmark. And to set forward his claim to the Crown of Sueden, who spent one year in pur∣suite thereof by force of arms, but effected little: Nor did the arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal get ought thereby in Denmark because they saw he played his own game; nor could he escape seisure of his temporalties in Sueden for his treache∣ry against his Country. The next year the arch-Bishop obtained the Popes sentence of excommunication against the governour of Sueden and all his partakers, for their in∣vading the rights of the Church and Bishop of Ʋpsal, and hereupon the king of Denmark takes courage to invade Sueden once more with an army under his general, who in a battel gained the day against the Suedes, wherein Steno the governour was wounded and retired to Stockholm, un∣to whom also repaired all such as intended the defence of their Country: The rest of the Suedes yielded to the Ge∣neral upon conditions, who marched to Stockholm, but meet∣ing with difficulties in the march and coming nigh the Ci∣ty finding no hope of treaty, and considering his army much wasted, he sends into Denmark for recruite. To whom the king comes in person, and so Stockholm is beleagured and there the most of this army being wasted and the re∣mainder being wind-bound almost famished; a peace is p opounded and accepted on both parts: but the King meaning nothing less pretends he may not come into Stock∣holm to finish the treaty till first pledges be given for the safeguard of his person; thereupon pledges are sent on board his ship, but his mind changing with the wind, he sailes away to Denmark with the pledges, whom he com∣mitteth to safe custody. And after four years returns into Sueden with a great army, and gives a second overthrow to the Suedes in the field, wherein the Governour Steno is slain, then marching towards Stockholm finds the City standing upon its defence under the government of Christi∣na the wife of Steno. There must I have him in a long and tedious imploy∣ment
till I can bring in an accompt of affairs intervening elsewhere, conducing to the close of this discourse. For although the Governour of Sueden was slain, yet the speech of Vespasian proves true;Sutton in vit. Vespasion. no man can destroy his suc∣cessor. Amongst the pledges imprisoned in Denmark by the King, one was Gustavus the son of Ericus, who was a noble Lord in Sueden, and now in Stockholm thus belea∣guered by the King. This Gustavus, though but of a noble Family, yet (his Grandfather having married the Si∣ster of Steno Stur, the Governour) became incorporated into the stem of the antient Kings of Sueden. And in his young years was trained up in the Court under his Uncle Steno the First, who was no less valiant and wise for Com∣mand in the field, then for Government in peace. Under him did Gustavus learn the Principles of war, which afte∣ward he began to practise after the Command of Swant the next Governour. For after the Death of Steno the First, the difference between the Danes and Suedes, con∣cerning the Government growing so high as to come to battel, wherein the Suedes gain two victories, Gustavus carried the Royal standard of Sueden, although, as then, he was but eighteen years old; and being now about Six and twenty years old is committed by the King to the Castle of Callo in Jutland prisoner under the Custody of Sir Ericus Banner a Knight of Denmark, where he was watchfully kept, that he might suffer no wrong; but by the King him∣self; in which imprisonment he now had indured four years with patience; but having daily news brought him of the sad examples of the Danes cruelty to the Suedes his Country Men, he concludes his condition to be like that of Ʋlysses in the Den to be reserved, as a chiefdish for the Tyrants palate, when all the rest were devoured. Upon a day therefore having obtained liberty to ride a hunting and being eager in the chase, but minding ano∣ther game, he rode away, and having thus changed his course he changed his apparel and guise and passing through many unknown wayes and dangers after three hundred miles chase
he arrived at Lubeck, one of the Hanse Towns, and holding there correspondency with Sueden against Denmark, upon one and the same quarrel of oppression and wrong done to them by the Danes. Other friend or foe find I not in this Juncture that the Nation of Sueden had, which was an ad∣vantage to them, considering that as it were but yesterday they were so much in danger of the Muscovite, that they would have accounted it a mercy to have been joined with the Danes and Normans, though with disadvantage to themselves. No sooner was Gustavus arrived at Lubeck, but earnest pursuit is made after him by Sir Ericus Banner, his former Keeper, who was come to Lubeck and demanded of the Magistrates the delivery of his Prisoner: Gustavus con∣trariwise insisted, That he was no lawful prisoner to the King of Denmark, but was delivered by his Country amongst o∣thers in pledge for the safety of the Kings person during the Treaty between the King and his own Countrymen, and that the King, contrary to all Right and Faith, detained him and the other Pledges and carried them Captive into Denmark: that now he was under the protection of the publick Faith of the state of Lubeck, to whom he was fled for refuge against oppressi∣on, and desired to have the benefit of the Law, and to have the matter tried. Divers of the Senate of Lubeck were of o∣pinion that Gustavus ought to be returned to the King of Denmark as his prisoner; and that it concerned not them to try the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the imprisonment: But the Consul over-ruled the point, affirming, That though originally they had not power to determine the point, yet Gustavus being before them de facto a free-man, and as such had put himself into the protection of the City of Lubeck, and had appealed unto them for right, it becomes them to do herein according to Law, and that by the Law of God, the Law Civil and the Law of Nations, they ought to inquire into the true condition of Gustavus his Captivity, and deter∣mine the same upon grounds of Justice; otherwise they might make themselves parties to the King of Denmarks
oppression (if the case so prove) before they understand what they do. The authority of the Consul and the weight of his reasons prevailed with the Senate, who passed their de∣finitive sentence, That Gustavus shall be protected by the State of Lubeck till the cause be tried. This served Gustavus his turne for the present, but he knew not how long it would continue, he knew that inte∣rests of Nations are soon changed, and those of petty States sooner; besides Gustavus had too much work to do to con∣tinue long in one place, and thereupon secretly, and with∣out notice to any but the good Consul, whose counsel he had in this case, he got aboard a Merchant ship and sailed into the Bay of Calmar, where landing at Stenso he foot∣ed it to Calmar, into which secretly entring, and finding the same standing upon their Guard against the Dane, he discovered himself to the La. Magnus that held the Castle, and acquainted her of the manner of his Captivity and escape; and taking advantage of the reports then coming of the sad examples of the Danish cruelty and oppression, indeavoured to perswade and incourage the Citizens to stand out in defence of the liberties of themselves, their wives and children, and not to trust to the fair words and promises of the Danes, but to indure rather a little hard∣ship for at me, assuring them things would change their course very shortly. The Citizens hearkned to him, but mer∣cinary souldiers mutined amongst themselvs & sought to put Gustavus to death, but their plot discovered the mutiny was suppressed, and Gustavus advised for his safety to withdraw himself into his own country, and obscure himself until a more convenient time should appear for the work that he had in design. This journey he knew would be full of difficulty and dan∣ger, for his way must be through Smalland, where the Danish Emissaries were very busie to gain the Suedes to moderation and submission to the Danish yoke, yet he a∣bides the adventure with grief of heart, to see the poor Country people deluded, insomuch that he could not for∣bear,
but told them, That they should consider the cases of many of their Country men, who had promises from the Danes, yet nothing performed but miserable bondage, that there is much lesse danger in standing the push of the Danish pike, then in committing themselves and all that is dear un∣to them, to such a broken reed as their fair words, which had not only failed but mortally wounded also the liberties of such of their fellow Country-men as had given credit unto them. Nevertheless divers of the Suedes of the greater rank in those parts being pre-ingaged, perswaded the people other∣wise; affirming, That the Danes aimed only at the suppres∣sing of such of the Lords of Sueden that combined themselves against the Kings government; but as touching the people the King was resolved to win their good opinion; and they should not need ever to fear want so long as salt and Herrings lasted: Contrarily, If they would not be perswaded, they are all but dead men if they do not speedily forsake their Coun∣try. Gustavus perceiving the people under a scare, and desi∣ring rather to be quiet then put themselves to hazard, he finds it not convenient for him to stay any longer there, but forthwith secretly departs to Terno, amongst his own Te∣nants, whence also (having provided himself of necessa∣ries) he departs to Refnass his fathers house, where he concealed himself for the most part of that summer, and at length adventured to discover himself to one that had been a faithful friend unto him, and once was Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsall, but laid aside by the gusts of time, and now was retired to a Monastry at Gripsholm. This man now aged, and fearful, and willing to be quiet, (though upon hard conditions) diswaded Gustavus from stirring; alledging, The advantage that the King had, having an army in the Field, and the Towns generally under his command, and that the King desired nothing more then to consiliate the good opinion of the people; and for assurance had granted Letters of Grace, and general pardon particularly, therein mentioning
Gustavus himself, and therefore he should do well to give cre∣dit to the King, and submit to his Government: and for my part (said the old man) I dare ingage to procure from the King a special free and full pardon for your selfe Gustavus, if you shall desire it. Gustavus heard all with silence, but liked not his undertaking, for ought he knew this old man might be, or desire to be the Kings Favourite; nor did Gustavus like to adventure himself upon the Kings promi∣ses, and thereupon resolves to wave this old mans counsel and betake himself back again to Refsnass. All this while was the King at the Siege before Stockholm, indeavouring partly by force, partly by messuages of grace to get possession of the City, and to that end, first con∣firms the agreement made by his General with the Lords in the field, and then grants a general pardon and instrument of oblivion of all by-gons; then he sends his Commenda∣tions, and speaks fair to the people in the country by the Suedish Lords that were of his party, which in many places met with little or no respect at all. Nevertheless in conti∣nuance of time, by often droppings of good words, serious promises, protestations, execrations and Letters Patents, and declarations under the Kings hand and Seal, a hole is made into the hearts of the men at Stockholm, the Gates at length are opened, and the King admitted entrance, and acknowledged of all to be their lawful King, and is Crowned, and solemn feastings holder for all sorts of peo∣ple both Suedes, Danes and Germans. A fair morning no doubt, but who knows what a day may bring forth? The King all this while retaineth a re∣serve for the ruine of the Nobility of Sueden; and now he hath them in one place within Wals and under a sufficient Guard, but it must be done in the most comly manner that can be, because the thing it self was ugly and ill favoured. Therefore its first propounded that a Treason must be suppo∣sed to be plotted by the Suedes to raise the people to Mas∣sacre the Danes, and that the Danes, as in their own defence, should assassinate the Sueds; but this was thought dangerous
& might possibly indeed turn to the destruction of the Dane; for who knows what men in despair may bring to pas? Then another way is propounded, That the King must look upon the Suedish Lords as under the Popes Curse and sentence of Excommunication; and to Usher forth the Kings Justice with more colourable zeal, the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal (by whose means the Popes thunderbolt was fallen upon Sueden) must openly accuse the Suedish Lords as Ex∣communicate persons, for Treason against their King, and robbery of the Church, and spoilers of the dignity and estate of the Arch-Bishop, and thereupon must demand judgment against them. And for the Juggling of these Suedish Lords together, a Feast is appointed upon the third day after the Coronati∣on, whereat also the Germans and Danish party were as∣sembled, and then in the presence of them all, the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsall (though unwillingly when he perceived the issue) steps forth before the King, and accuses the Sue∣dsh Lords of injurie done by them to the Arch Bishop his person and estate and demanded recompence for his da∣mages sustained. The King liked not this charge, telling the Arch Bishop, That he forgate the Popes sentence, the Crime of Treason, and his own place, who ought in zeal to the Church to have demanded also punishment of the persons of the ffendrs. And forthwith commands the Guards to seize upon the Suedish Lords, and as some Writers say, Shew∣ed so much mercy as to let them live till the next day, and in the interim set Guards upon all the avenues to the City, that none might be allowed to depart the City: And up∣on the next day, being the eighth day of Novem. 1520. not by Legal execution, but in a way of Butchery, put to death nigh an hundred of the Nobles and chief men of Sue∣den, and Citizens of Stockholm, and then let loose the Souldiers upon others of the City and Country, wherein al sorts of people Ecclesiastical, Civil Great, Mean, Man, wo∣man and Child suffered all manner of violences and deaths that cruelty could devise, not only to the living, but oppro∣bries to the dead. The lively Character whereof, may bet∣ter
be described by some Dane or some other party in the Scicilian Vespers, Parisian Nuptials, then by any other at so great a distance. Then begins Covetousness to ascend the Stage, seizing upon all the Estates of the dead and living, and to make all sure, after the liberty of Sueden was thus brought into the condition of a dead man, they would bury it so as it might never rise more; and to that end set Guards upon all places, publish Edicts, and do not only deprive the Suedes of their Armor, but also of their Arms and Legs; turning it into a proverb, That a Suede could plough his ground well e∣nough though with one arm and one woden leg. The last and worst of all evils is Hypocrisie: This Chri∣stian Kings conscience when all is done, is touched with so much compassion, as he said, He would not have done it, but his conscience tied him thereto in zeal to the Church, and obedience to the Roman sentence of Excommunication: So as Religion is made the Patron of all these evils. And yet the King is not so satisfied, he hastes out of Sueden, possibly fearing least the ground should swallow him up, or if the fame of his victory over Sueden should arrive in Den∣mark before him, that nation might be moved to vomit him out. Now were some persons of these daies then alive in Sueden, they would have concluded nothing but vengeance and Gods wrath against Sueden for their rebellion, witnes∣sed by so notable example of Bloodshed. Such may re∣member the Tower of Syloam; but I must note that the im∣mediate fruit hereof fell heavy upon the head of the King himself, who now is gone home King of the three King∣doms of the Baltick; and secured that of Sueden under Guards in every place, but cruelty never conquers the Spi∣rits of men; he may be feared of all, but is hated of all, so his conscience tells him, and he is given up to a fearing heart, and a fainting mind, so as within three years he los∣eth all the three Kingdoms without adventuring one drop of blood, or striking one blow. The manner may be glan∣ced upon hereafter; but how Sueden now under water
gets above the Waves, I shall now proceed to shew briey. This sad news of Stockholm coming to the notice of Gu∣stavus now at Refsnass, and in particular the murther of his own father Ericus, amongst the rest of the Nobles, he was no whit discouraged, but rather inraged with desire of revenge and rescue of his Country from under such Tyran∣ny: yet what with grief and detestation of the exe∣crable cruelty, and doubt that many would be scared there∣by from appearing in their Countries Cause, his Spirit was troubled, and rendred lesse able at the present to determine upon any resolution of the manner of his proceeding, and therefore he gets him away in all haste to the mountain people with this newes; but they scarce civilized are the less sensible of their Countries Cause: Gustavus therefore maketh no stay there, but gets him away to a Castle in those parts commanded by Aaron Peter a noble person, whom once he knew to be well affected to the Liberties of his Country, and to him he declared his condition and intenti∣ons, and desired his Counsel, but found the man and others in those parts so amazed at the news of Stockholm, as they forgate the publick and themselves, and were willing to stoop under any burden then to stir against it; and so fear∣ful of being suspected by the Danes, as desiring rather to be reputed resolvedly at their service. And more especial∣ly Aaron Peter, who (though pretending pity and compas∣sion of Gustavus his condition) promised not only security to his person if he would abide with him, but his best aid and assistance in compassing the ends propounded by him: Yet having gained full knowledg of Gustavus his mind, af∣ter a few daies (for the immediate actions of persons in∣trusted, after trust undertaken, are more subject to obser∣vation) he gets himself aboard and went to the Danish Lieutenant Bruno, and discovers to him the whole mat∣ter, as well touching the intentions of Gustavus, as his own counsel given to him. But Aaron forgot one point of policy in dissimulation which is to let none know his in∣tention
but his own heart. For either Aaron was so uxori∣ous that there was but one heart between him and his wife; or otherwise so underneath (as some wise men are) that he cannot go out of doors but must give positive an∣swers to the ordinary questions, Whether do you go? What is your business? When will you return? &c. And his wife being more true to her Country, or regardful of the laws of common honesty and hospitality then her Lord was, when he was gone, told Gustavus, whither her Lord was gone, and to what purpose, and therefore advised him forthwith to shift for himself, and furnished him with her own horse and steed to carry him to Suertso, to one that had been Gustavus his Colleague at the University. The day fol∣lowing came Bruno the Dane with twenty souldiers to appre∣hend Gustavus at Aaron Peters house, but his Lady told him that Gustavus was departed secretly the day foregoig; so the prey being lost, Bruno returns without sport. Thus God makes a woman a great instrument in the saving of the nation of Sueden from miserable ruine. Gustavus being arrived at Suertso had courteous enter∣tainment; but consideration being had of the restless pur∣suit of the Danes after such a person of note as Gustavus was (for now his name was upon the Stage) all men obser∣ving his motion, some with desire, others with fear, it was thought convenient that he should not stay longer there (for now the enemy hunted upon the hot sent) and there∣fore he departs privately beyond the Valley of the Dalle∣arles unto Rotwick. These Dallearles are a people of Sue∣den, strong and hardy, and men of resolution, and being bred in the hard labour of the mines, are for action, and in which regards (as some Writers note) they have their name Dallearles, or Carles, or Robustous men of the Dales, having also by reason of their priviledges, this advantage, That they are numerous and rich. To these Gustavus ap∣plies himself, and relates to them the particulars of the Mas∣sacre at Stockholm, whereby the Nation of Sueden had lost much of their best blood, and told them also what
further danger the nation was in, which he did to the life set forth in good Language (for Gustavus could no lesse skilfully manage his tongue then his armes) The Dallearles moved with compassion of their Country, and regard of themselves and friends, told Gustavus, That they would adventure all that was dear to them to be revenged upon the Danes, and to vindicate their nation from bondage. Only they desired that Gustavus would endeavour to ingage their brethren of the Eastern Dales with them; and Gustavus undertakes the work accordingly, forthwith departed to Mora, the chief City of those Dales, where arriving about the latter end of December obtained audience from them the next day after his arrival. He told them, He should not need to make any Prooem to gain their attention, the matter of his discourse he was per∣swaded would ease him of that trouble; he therefore prayed them to take into consideration the perplexed condition of this Nation of Sueden, for these later years; That through their own distractions and civil, or rather uncivil discontentments, they have given up the flourishing estate of the Crown of Sueden into the hands of strangers, who in stead of seeking the welfare of the people, have wrought altogether for advancement of their own interest, whiles in the mean time the people have been glutted with misery, and drunk with tears; themselves, wives, children, estates prostituted to Murthers, Torments, Rapin, and all manner of contempt. I appeale, saith he, to the old men, they know it, they cannot forget it; and the young men may know it if they will ask their elders: And shall there never be an end of these miseries? Are the Suedes be∣come a people alwayes to be trampled upon, and devoured, and made food for foreigners? Call to mind the government of the Tirant Ericus of Pomerland, his Cruelty, Oppression and Extortion; and remember that you, even you I say of the Dales, rose unanimously in defence of your Country against him, and therein hazarded all that was dear to you, even unto
your own lives, and compelled him with shame to return to his own Country. And now look about you, and consi∣der, are you in better condition under the inraged power of the Danes? a people of immortal hatred to our Nation, and themselves hated of all Nations but themselves. Can you expect better measure now from them then you have found hitherto after an hundred years experience? Hear the cries of the living at Stockholm, the fatherless and widows, the dying grones of so many brave men of this Nation, under the cruel torments, and unsatiable butcheries, the abhorred Mas∣sacre of all sorts, degrees, sexes and ages, contrary to all Faith of Promises, Oathes, Execrations and ingagements under Hand and Seal; And now they will promise you peace, and right, and what not? Did they not give all assurance here∣of to our dead friends at Stockholm, that could be devised to bind rational men? and yet they brake all bonds and ingage∣ments: and will you now believe their words? No, no, the Danes are the same men, or rather inhumane monsters that ever they were, their hatred is now broken into a flame, that will never go out so long as the riches, or any blood of the No∣bility of Sueden lasteth, nor will ever rest till it hath run over all the Country. Do not you every day hear sad news of the approaching of this evil? Is it not almost come to your doors? and will you sit still till it hath seized upon your necks? Is it not better to die like Souldiers, if die we must, then to die like slaves? Are the Danes more then men, and you lesse then women? I am here before you this day, com∣mand my Estate and Fortune, my Person and Life, I will lay down all in this service if you will join with me in any way, though I be no other then a private Souldier; for I had rather die a Free Noble man of Sueden, in the defence of my Coun∣try, then live to see my Country under perpetual vassal∣lage.
The Moreans much affected herewith, professed them∣selves obliged to appear for the defence and relief of their dear friends and Country-men; in whose liberties and lives their own are wrapped up: yet they prayed him to retire himself to some place of privacy for his own safety, till their neighbours of the Weste n Dale might be in posture to join with them, assuring him they would not slack their preparations. Gustavus took this answer courteously, and de∣parted to the Western Dllearles bordering on the mountaines, to gain them into a posture; and there also meeting with fresh newes of blood and cruelty of the Da∣nish party, he passeth once more amongst the Mountai∣ners, where having to do with sharp weather, rough and unknown waies, more used by wild beasts then men; yet indignation against the enemies, and zeal for his Country, adds continual courage and resolution against all difficulties and dangers he makes trial of the peoples minds again, but they scarce sensible of any thing but what was under ground, and knowing no happinesse above mining, nor any misery worse; all is spoken to a deaf ear, till at length Gu∣stavus comes to the house of Laurentius Ol, in those parts a Knight active and brave, who formerly had served Steno Stur the Governour with much valour and faithful∣nesse; he joining with Gustavus told the Mountainers that Gustavus had given them right intelligence concerning the miseries of Sueden under the Danish cruelty at Stock∣holm and other places, and further told them, That he had received late information that the Danish King had de∣termined a Royal Progress throughout the whole Country of Sueden to receive homage in all places of the people, and had by Proclamations commanded Gibbets to be ere∣cted in all places, and that Letters were coming down into the Country to provide quarter for the Danish Souldiers that were to be as a Guard to the King in his Pro∣gress.
This news makes the people bestir themselves, and conside∣ring with themselves what to do, Messengers come from the Country of the Dallearles round about to seek after Gustavus, who was gone further out of reach, to Lima. The Mountain people likewise joine therein to invite Gu∣stavus his speedy return, assuring him of their joining with him, and that they would make him their Captain. Ac∣cordingly Gustavus returnes with the messengers, and find∣ing the people gathered, he is received with universal accla∣mations of the people great and small, and made Gover∣nour and Captain of the Dallearles, and unto him they swear Fealty and Obedience, and assign him a Life-guard of chief young men for the honour and safety of hiis person Thus one great work is over: Gustavus had all this while to do with a people whose Principles were fixed in their manufactures, and though they had many eyes, and could discern well enough things nigh at hand, yet could they never discern the Times, nor make conclusions to themselves what they ought to do; nor is it their case alone if that be true that the Orator said of the people of Rome in his dayes. In the Common people (saith he) is nei∣ther Counsel,Cic. in Orat pro Pane. nor Reason, nor Discerning, nor Judgment. For God never made all men for all things: Miners are no good States-men, so good States-men are no good Miners: and therefore it's the lesse marvel if Gustavus spent above a whole year in this painful Pilgramage, with con∣tinual labour and danger, and all to make his Country men sensible of their condition, and to appear in defence of their liberties before it was too late, and yet could prevail nothing till the Danish feast at Stockholm (not above two months past) roused them out of their dream: But now Gustavus is in posture for the field as a Cap∣tain for the Liberty of Sueden against a known enemy, or rather Tyrant, whose government was thought to be set∣led in Sueden both by Law and Power.
Nor can this be looked upon otherwise then as an espe∣cial work of That invisible Power from that Suprme Com∣passion of, and Justice to an oppressed and (in common reason) undone people, that such a principle of Magna∣nimity, Zeal, Constancy and (as an Historian cals it) that strong Impulse or Enthusiasm should lead one man thus in this Service through all opposition and danger. But these are but parts of his waies, there remaineth greater works behind. Gustavus thus ingaged goes on to gather his army, and to him Laurentius Olai joines, and the servants and friends of the murthered Nobles of Sueden, and others dis-interested, and in danger of the Danish interdict, or who durst not otherwise appeare, and with these he begins his first March on Candlemass day, 1520. first leading his men to the Copper Mountains and surprising the Governour and other Officers of the Mines, seized all the Danish goods, the Kings Revenue, besides the Tenths, and returned back into the valley. And having thus in some measure gained a stock for in∣couragement to his Souldiers, his army swels daily, and faces about to the other mountains, where he is made by general consent their Lord and Governour. Afterward di∣viding his army into two parts, he leaves one part in the Mountains under the command of Peter Sueno, a famous Commander; expecting them (if occasion required) as a reserve, with a considerable number of the inhabitants joined with him. And with the residue of his Army he marches into the Country of Helsing, bordering upon the Sea on the one side, and the Valley of the Dallearles on the other, as well to gain a passage by Sea, if occasion should serve, as to secure his party the more by good Neighbour-hood. Du∣ring
ths march into Helsing, Letters are sent unto the Mountains from the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsall, the old ene∣my of the liberty of Sueden, the same being sighned by him and his father Ericus Trolle, and Bennet Canutus, stiling themselves, The Council of the Kingdom of Sue∣den the purport whereof was to beseech the Mountainers to be mindful of their duty to their Sovereign King, and of the peace of the Kingdom of Sueden; with large pro∣mises of the Kings grace and favour towards them, and of safe conduct to Gustavus, if he would lay down Arms, and that so doing, affairs for the peoples good might be composed and setled; but these Letters met with no better entertainment then indignation and scorn. The Helsingers gave Gustavus no scornful entertain∣ment, yet not very acceptable, they beseech him, That they might be spared from present ingagement in Arms, in regard they were an exhausted Country, and much impove∣rished by the late troubles. This temper of theirs was not for Gustavus his turn, he must have men of resolution, he is therefore contented with their submissive answer, and leaves them to better consideration, and thence marches into Gestrict, who readily submit unto him, and then he returns unto the Dales again, having gained by his March a considerable increase unto his Army, now made 5000. men, old Souldiers, formerly hidden in several pla∣ces, and no gathered to him. The Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal finding the little respect shewn to his Letters by the Mountainers, he now resolves to do that with his teeth, which his tongue by fair Lan∣guage could not; and commands Hen. de Milen with a party to march into the Dales and reduce them by force of armes, and crush those motions in the Egg.
Gustavus hears of his coming and marches towards him; De Milen hearing of his approach retires from him, pro∣fessing that Gustavus is not to be dealt with by parties. But a fainting spirit had possessed the Danes, or else being possessed of the field, as they were, they would never have suffered an enemy thus to gather under their noses, nor dallyed with Gustavu, with inconsiderable parties, when as they had a full army in readiness. Yet Gustavus is not so minded, he had begun and now he must go on, and let all men know that he so little fears the Danes, though bloody men they be, that he will ad∣venture upon a long March to find them out and fight them within their Walls; and accordingly marches to Westerass, a City having a Castle, and being rich in trade by a continual market of Copper and Iron brought daily from the Mountains thither, and there the Danes had laid a Garison. Gustavus in his march having increased his Army by confluence of the Country to him, divided his army in∣to three battels; the Van commanded by Laurentius Olai, the middle by Laurentius Ericus, whom he commanded to march through the Valley of Balingsass, and incamp neer St. Olaies Chappel, but not to attempt any thing till further order. But the enemy not minding to stay their leisure, and ob∣serving Laurentius his manner of approach, gave him a full Charge, especially with their Horse: Laurentius stood his ground, and gave the Dane such a rebound, that in disorder they turned head; their foot also giving ground, Laurentius pursues them: Gustavus hearing hereof, and fearing his mens forwardness in their heat might carry them beyond their Guard, hasted into Van, though with some danger to his person, and loss of some that were nigh unto him; And finding Laurentius ingaged even unto the streets of
the City in eager pursuit of the flying enemy; and that it was both difficult and dangerous to bring them to a stand, he gave them their liberty, and with them pursued the enemy through the streets. The Danes Rallying themselves in the Market place, made there a stand behind their Ord∣nance, ready planted to give the Suedes a salutation upon their first approach. But Laurentius Ericus with the mid∣dle battel found out a speedier way, and was already got∣ten into the City, and charged the Danes in the Market place in their Rear, and makng them quit the place gained their Ordnance and thereby saved much blood that might have been shed. The souldiers in the Castle seeing their fellows beaten and gone shot firy bullets into the City, and fired the same in divers places, but the Suedish Souldiers quenched the fire and saved the City. The Danes now fled to their intrenchment, defended themselves for some time till they had setled a sufficient guard in the Castle, and then by boats get to Stockholm. This victory as it discouraged the publick enemy, so it incouraged such as were secret friends to their Country, to forsake the Danish tents and take part with Gustavus. For the common sort are credulous and easie to be perswaded in prosperous events to expect still good successe,Tacit. Hist. 2 & 4. and in ill successes to call that fate, or Gods anger, which ordinarily they formerly call fortune or ill hap, and so they will own, or disown the cause, because they have no other principles to lead their judgment in matters of publick consideration. Now amongst those that thus changed their way, though they changed not their mind, was Arvidus a West Goth whom Gustavus knew so well, that he was forthwith sent with part of the army to besiege the Castle of Steckburrow, and to watch the motion of the people in those parts. O∣ther Castles were also besieged; But Laurentius Ericus was sent to Ʋpsal with his Brigade, and Laurentius Olui to second him with the Country people now gathered to him from all parts. In their march the Governours scouts of
Ʋpsal are intercepted; the next day Letters are sent from the Governour and Magistrates of Ʋpsall to the Com∣mander in chief of the Suedes, to desire that they may have liberty according to their wonted manner every year upon St. Ericus day, to hold their Procession with the Shrine of St. Ericus, unto the Church of Old Ʋpsall be∣ing half a mile without their City; but answer was return∣ed, That the Solemnity was for Suedes to observe and not for Danes. The Governor, though missing the Processi∣on, would not lose his Feast, he would therefore let the Suedes know, he can Feast though the Suedish army waite upon his Trenches; and accordingly held the Feast in the Arch-Bishops Garden. But the next morning before break of day the Suedish army came to the Walls, seized upon the Guards, entred the City: And the Danes half asleep, and as yet scarce sober, in amaze fled out of the City, fiering the same as they went; but the Suedes appointing a party to see to the quenching of the fire, pursued the affrighted Danes till they passed the River, in the passing whereof the Governour was shot with an arrow, whereof he died at Stockholm. About eight daies after comes Gustavus from Westerass, to Ʋpsal, and calling the Canons of the College together, he askes them whether they are Suedes or Danes, charges them with the bood, spoil and misery of Sueden, and that they with their Arch-Bishop have nursed all the Rebelli∣ons in Sueden against their lawful Governours, and were betrayers of the Liberties of ther Country into the hands of Foreigners: That the time will come when they must account for their actions, and in the mean time he requi∣reth Fealty from them, and security in their station to maintain the liberty and peace of the Country. They humbly answer with Petition, That he would take into consideration their ingagement to the Arch-Bishop, who was now at Stockholm, and that they might be permitted to carry their Archbishop along with them in this matter, if they could prevail with him, and to that end they would
write letters of advice to him to invite him thereunto. Gustavus was contented herewith, and wrote a Letter himself by the same messenger, but what other message the Canons sent privately, the issue renders somewhat doubtful; for the Letters were received with contempt, and the messenger deteined: the Arch-Bishop saying, He would carry an answer in his own person, and immediate∣ly caused a Body of horse and foot to be drawn forth, and with them marched with that speed and secrecy, that they were within two miles of Ʋpsal before Gustavus had notice of his coming. Gustavus now too late considers his own army now di∣vided into several imployments, the enemies (if espials say true) surmounting him in strength, that the truth can not be known, but he must put all to the hazard by his stay; That he is in a City unassured to him, if not assured against him; That he must either be said to flee from his enemies, or adventure all: He furthermore considers, that though his honour may suffer in a retreat, yet it may be repaired, but the losse of his party is irrepairable, as well touching his own honour, as the liberty of Sueden, and ruine to his party. Hereupon with speed he withdraws his party out of the City, into a Wood not far off: The Arch-Bishop com∣ing to the City, is soon informed hereof, and makes out after him into the wood, where the Suedes had made a stand, and stood their ground against the utmost shoot that the Danes could make: And Gustavus bestirring himself from place to place, fell with his horse into a Quagmire, where being espied by the Danes, he was knocked off his horse, and had been at their mercy had not a party of twen∣ty of Suedes horse rescued him and horsed him anew, after which, returning to charge the enemy, they re∣tired, and Gustavus perceiving their orderly retreat forsook not his ground, but let them go quietly to Ʋpsal.
Gustavus had now leisure to consider what to do, and finding by experience a double error in his March; one that he had divided his army into so many parts, that every one was by it self insufficient to subsist, in case the enemy should gater head; the other, that in the way of his March he had not reduced the enemies Castles, but left them as birds of prey to fall upon any of his parties when they shall be weak,Caes. Com, 1 Gal. which was contrary to Caesars Rule: and now if Gustavus would forsake the Wood, he sees the enemies Castles on every side, and the armie of the enemies entire; what should he do? Men bring them∣selves into plunges, but God brings them out: Gusta∣vus had a party that was before the Castle of Westerass, they hearing some news of the fight between the Arch-Bishop and Gustavus, do rise and join with him and being united, they turn to the left hand leaving Ʋpsal on the right hand, and bend their March towards Stock∣holm, supposing they might meet with the Arch-Bishop before he could reach Stockholm; and herein their ex∣pectation was not altogether vain, for if Gustavus fell into two errors, the Arch-Bishop recompensed them with one which was worse then the other two; and that was, that being returned to Ʋpsal, he considered not that he left Gustavus in a posture of defence, and might possi∣bly recruit his Army, and meet with him in his return to Stockhelm, if he made not hast. And accordingly Gustavus injoying his expectation and the Arch-Bishop frusterated of his, Gustavus meets with him before he could reach Stockholm with his army, and after an houres dispute Gustavus his Arguments were of that force, that the Arch-Bishop hardly escaped into the City with the sixth part of his army Gustavus follows him and intrencheth his Army ngh the City; but considering the state thereof, now full of Danes (the Suedes after the Massacre generally forsak∣ing their dwelling houses) and that it was like to hold
out long, he bethinks himself of augmenting his Ay, but was soon esed o that care; the Helsingers that hither∣to had concealed themselves, now come unanimously and offer him their service, and many old Souldiers of Germany likewise, so as he is now more troubled to find quarter then men. But is not the King of Denmark ready all this while to march with a complete army to save a Kingdom that thus is giving him the adieu? No, his posture is such as he may not stir from home, for as he went out of Sueden without one God-speed, so he comes into Denmark without a welcome: he is so died in blood that all are afraid of him, his Victo∣ry is Abominated, his Person odious, his Government grows unsupportable, he finds he can gather no army. If he should depart out of Denmark he might lose all at home, and peradventure get nothing abroad but knocks; he commands his Governor of the Isle of Gothland to re∣lieve the Danes in Sueden as occasion will offer, and ac∣cordingly he after one repulse suffered, relieved the Castle of Steckburg besieged by Arvidus, and changing the gari∣son, committed the same to the Government of Barnard de Milen. Gustavus considering that the siege of that place would prove dangerous to Arvidus if the countrey and neigh∣borhood were not assured to them: he sends to the Bishop of Hincopen, and having gained him to joyn with him, by his advice he summons a meeting of all the States of East and West Gothland, Smalland, Vermeland, and the Dales, and praies them to take into consideration the condition of their Countrey, that the misery thereof hath been occasioned onely through division and variety of interests: and the government, having of later daies been onely by foreigners, the Countreys cause hath been troden under foot; the parti∣cular burthens he shall not need to enlarge upon, they feel them, and groan under them. The great difficulty which he propounds to their consideration is, To advise and conclude upon particular means of redress; and as for himself, he will
deliver his opinion freely and cleerly, that no means on earth can cure these evils, but a speedy and effectual unanimity and joint endevour, to restore the old principles of government by a supreme Governor, and a free Parliament of the States, as formerly hath been used. If they have any further ad∣vice therein, he earnestly desireth to be informed by them, assuring them that whatsoever they shall conclude meet to be done, in order to a settlement, he will endevour to accomplish the same to the sacrificing of his life, and all that is dear unto him. Hereunto an acclamation is made, and joint assurance manifested that they all freely and fully consent to his opi∣nion, and are ready to assist him therein to their utmost and give great thanks to Gustavus for his enterprize and under∣taking their rescue out of the Tirants hands, and earnestly request him to proceed to perfect the work, whereunto they will constantly contribute their prayers to God for his gracious help, and protection of his person: and for his further assu∣rance, they do not onely acknowledge and promise submission to him as their lawful Governour, but they pray that it may not seem grievous unto him to take upon him the place and title of their lawful Lord and King. Gustavus answered, That he took up armes against the common enemy of his countrey, he aimed not at nule, but at the liberty of his countrey, from the iron yoke of the Danish tyrannie; under which the people, their wives, children and estates lay bound, day and night: that he called not himself to the work, though he offered his assistance thereunto. That he was invited to command by the Transilvanian Suedes of the Dales: that his detestation of that abhorred butchery at Stockholm (wherein not onely many personages fit to do their countrey service, but many of his own blood and friends lost their lives and estates) did enrage his spirit so, as he thought nothing dangerous for him, to adventure to be revenged; and therefore did yield to the invitation of the men of the Dales; and if you also (said he) will join your aid in this work and do like the cause, and can confide in my command,
I shall not refuse to be your Captain and Governor, untill the enemy be fully vanquished, and the nation cleered from them: But as touching the making of a king, take you that into consideration when the war shall be fully finished, for then whosoever the States of Sueden shall elect to be King or Governour, his will I be to serve in any condi∣tion. His speech was concluded with an unanimous vote and great joy of the whole assembly, with acknowledgment of Gustavus to be their Lord and Governor, and all sware fealty and faithful obedience unto him next under God. This was a small Parliament, of a part of the nation, and intended for little other ends, then to assure those pla∣ces that were under the war, and unite them to a more vi∣gorous prosecution thereof, the success was great, for many Towns and Castles of the Countreys of West-Gothland and Smalland readily surrender unto Gustavus; their Deputies sent to the Council, being convinced of the justness of the cause, and they obliged in their judgments to agree to what their Deputies had concluded; so as these Counties there assembled by their Deputies, are now firm to their Countreys cause, and Gustavus finding less need of im∣ploiment of so many soldiers in these neighbouring parts, sends a party further off into Finnland, to whom many of the people joined: Amongst whom, one Grabb a valiant man, and expert at sea, who having armed a few ships, assailed such places upon the coast as held for the Dane sometimes in one part, sometimes in another; surprising Townes, slaying multitudes, all done by night and he gone before the next morrow, no man knew whither, nor wh ch way: This divided the enemies power to watch the several coasts, and in the mean time the Suedes greatest power sate down before Abbo although they were there hardly matched by the Danes and sometimes overmatched; for as yet that part of the Countrey had not felt the cruelty, yet the Danish Councils although they were de∣termined
for that place as well as for other parts of Sue∣den. The Castle of Stockburgh at length after more then half a years siege is taken by Arvidus, the Governour committed to prison, but after two moneths submitted to Gustavus and sware fealty to him: The Governour of the Isle of Gothland ignorant hereof, came with a fleet well provided to relieve the Castle, but arriving at the Promontary was suddainly assailed by the Suedish ships that lay behind the same: and after the loss of six hundred of his men betook him to his wings. Arvi∣dus afterward is sent to block up Calmar with part of his army, te residue being sent to the camp at Stock∣holme. for the Danish Admiral after his defeat be∣fore Stockburgh having repaired his loss with new sup∣plies of men and shipping came to relieve the Danes in Stockholm; and by his aid the Danes issued out of the City, and beat up one of the Suedes quarters, so as for a moneths space, the City remained disen∣gaged. Gustavus finding by experience that Stockholme was a morsel too bigge for him to swallow, till he had further supply, he bends his principal industry for recovering of other places Garisoned by the Danes; and amongst others, the City of Nico∣pen, which is at length yielded to him by the Gover∣nour Henry Kanzow, with whom the Danish Tyrants Letters were found enjoining him to put to death all the Suedes coming within his power, especially not to spare the Nobility: and as this man was more a man then himself to become a butcher of men at the Tyrants command; he liked it not in others, and therfore he told Gustavus that Letters of the same sence were sent into other places; and he believed they would be put in execution; which fell out accordingly in Fin∣land; for the Governor of Abbo (now visited by the
Suedish forces that lay before the City, though not for∣mally besieging the same) caused divers of the chief men of Finnland to be assassinated. But Ericus Fleming being warned beforehand, and now in the Governors power; offered his service with so many Suedes as adhered to the Danes, to adventure their lives to beat the Suedes before the City out of their quarters the night following: which the Governor liking well assigned unto him such men as he desired. And the same night they entred the Suedish quarters but liked their entertainment so well, that they returned not again, but held ever after true to their own Countreys cause; so escaped Ericus Fleming by the fa∣vour of the Danish letters, which divers of the Countrey found to their smart soon after. Gustavus having gained Nicopen, soon after the Castles of Tineslor and Westerass are also delivered up to him, the latter having indured nine moneths Siege. But finding all his labour at Stockholm lost unlesse he be stronger at Sea, he sends to Lubeck for men of War and Munition, they readily condescend thereto, in requital of the Danish op∣pression of them in their course of Trade: Nine ships with∣in a few moneths are sent to Gustavus with Munition and Souldiers who had a great desire to see Gustavus before they would ingage, and upon sight of him they all sware to be faithful to him. Part of these Gustavus appointed to the siege at Calmar, the other part he carried along with him to the Siege at Stockholm (as it was the policy of war amongst the Romans to divide their subsidiaries) and discharged the Countrymen to their several dwellings. Within a few dayes after eight ships of war more from Lubeck arrive at Stockholm: and thus being more secured at sea, Gustavus reinforces the siege in a more regular way then formerly. The Suedes before Abbo finding the work too heavy for them, withdrew their forces, and the Governour now at liberty by order from the Danish Admiral, prepared a ship of war with munition and souldiers, for the relief
of Stockholm, and upon a day early in the morning Com∣ing to the foreland, sent out a Skiffe for discovery, which was intercepted by Ericus Fleming, now the Admiral of the Suedish; and he having cleared the men out of the Skiffe, and manned the same with Suedes in the same fashion; sent the same back, into which when the Gover∣nour of Abbo entred to inquire news, he was apprehen∣ded before he was aware; and carried away, and being hardly chased by the Danish Ships, they suddenly fall a∣mongst the Suedish Ships; and were charged by them, and some were taken, others escaped. But the Gover∣nour of Abbo was brought prisoner to Gustavus; who hanged him on a tree for his cruel assassination of the no∣bility of Finland. Within a few weeks after, the Danish Admiral came with five Ships for the relief of Stockholm, but being within view, and not likeing the Coast he returned. And Gustavus now finding the Sea safely guarded, he more earnestly proceeds in the siege, making his approaches to the Suburbs, and by bridges closing his quarters. The City begins to feel distress and many escaping out of the same submit to Gustavus: And amongst the rest a Spie is sent out under colour of submission, to make discovery, and according as occasion served either to return to the City or to speed over into Denmark to inform the King of the State of affairs; but this discoverer was discovered and searched and letters being found about him sown up in his apparel, was convicted and executed, this being supposed to be through information from some in Stock∣holm; holding correspondency with the Suedes; all are or∣dered to depart the City, but such as will take up arms for the defence thereof. On the other side, Gustavus upon in∣telligence of preparations, intended for relief of the Danish parties in Sueden; sends a party into Norway to begin a War there, which without any considerable opposition possessed themselves of the Province of Wicken and the Ca∣stle of Charlsburgh; the Dane being in no posture of mak∣ing
war or defence, as his condition then stood. For Christierne the Second, then King of Denmark by Title of his unjustice and oppressions of his own people, invading the lives, liberties and estates of all sorts, his execrable murthers, and spoiles, committed upon all sorts of the people in Sueden; his Contumelious courage to∣wards strangers; and his uncivil behaviour towards his own Queen sister to Charles the Fifth; having pro∣voked all men, but more especially the Duke of Holst: He proclaimed war against the King. And the nobility of Denmark perceiving themselves distrusted by the King: And that he relied upon strangers intending to bring them into Government in Denmark; and rule the nation by force or rigor: Joyn with the Duke and invite him into Jut∣land where all men joyn with him also, Christierne now to have, though too soon concluding the Duke to be King, leaves his place and the throne and provides himself elsewhere, shipping himself, his Queen and chil∣dren and all his goods and treasure that he could scrape together, he failes into Germany; first going to the Duke of Randenburgh, then to the Elector of Saxony: After some time he found means of raising an army for the reco∣vering of his Kingdome, but by not keeping touch with them, he lost both the army and Kingdome the second time, and dispairing of good issue goes into Flanders where he lost his Queen the greatest comfort that he had left in the world; not only in regard of her relation to the Emperour but in regard of her vertues, whereby she became so be∣loved of the Danes; that they offered to submit to her as their lawful Queen and Governour if she would stay in Denmark; but she like her self chose rather to be exiled with her husband then without him to reign This condition of affaires soon was known in Sueden and coming to the siege of Calmar and to them in the Ca∣stle, they were ordered to hold out as long as they could, and then to fire the City, and Ship themselves for the Ile of Gothland, but the Citizens informed hereof in the night
time, opened their gates to the Suedes, who in a short time possessed the Castle, and soon after the Isle of O∣land, and tidings hereof coming to Stockholm they offer∣ed conditions of surrender, but they were such as Gustavus would not hearken to them. Now did the affairs in Sueden begin to promise a calm night at hand: and Gustavus thinks it convenient to en∣tertain the occasion with a setled form of Government; and to this end summons a general meeting of all the States at Strgness: To them he propounds the consideration of the present condition of Sueden now enclining to a quiet con∣sistence, and how necessary it will be for the publick peace and justice of the nation, that the ancient form of government should be revived. That for the present they see the Nation without a supreme Magistrate and without a Senate; That the former hath murthered the later, and the people ejected the former: That he hopeth in a short time to render an accompt of the Nation re-united in a peaceable condition, which is the end of war; but some person must be elected to govern them in a peaceable condition, and a Senate must be constituted, that may according, to the ancient custome of Sueden, elect the supreme Governor. That they the States of Sueden, are the onely first movers in this work, and have power to constitute this Senate anew and therefore he prayeth them to proceed according to their discretions for the settle∣ment of the government, and such instruments as are ne∣cessary and conducing thereto. The States seeing their way cleer before them, without any demur proceed in the election of a Senate of some of those of the former Senate which had escaped the ene∣mies fury, and continued faithful; unto these they added others of the great men: and having constituted the Senate, they grant them the same powers and priviledges, that the Senate in former times had; and particularly to elect one such person as they should think meet to be their lawful King or Governor. Against all this might the Archbishop of Ʋpsal and
other Suedes of the Danish party except, as illegal in many particulars; What authority hath Gustavus to summon a Convention of States? or if he hath authority, yet it ought to be a Convention of all the Estates of the whole Na∣tion: But as yet the whole Countrey of Finland, the Nor∣thern people, the Dukedom of Bleking, and Stockholm the chief City of the Nation, none of these are summoned nor subdued: and for a Convention of Estates of part of the Nation to undertake such works as the instituting of a Se∣nate, and giving them such powers which must intrench upon the whole nation, and setling a form of Government upon all, is wholly against the laws and liberty of Sueden. If all the premisses be granted, yet is the conclusion, that they are against the laws and liberty of Sueden pre∣carious: for a Council may be called by an extraordinary power, it may be imperfect in the members; and they may determine matters in manner disaccording to the ancient custome and law, and yet in matter not contrary to any law or custome, but tending to the settlement and restoring thereof. For an Historian saith well, that sometimes the Magistracy and power are disjoyned, and it is harder to govern a Citizen, then conquer an enemy, and then is the Common-wealth in that condition that it neither ought, nor can be governed by ordinary councils, but more especially in the case of Sueden, where not onely power is disjoyned from the Magistracy, but the Magistracy of Sueden quite taken away; there being de facto neither lawful Supreme, nor Senate, nor Convention of States, that can be cal∣led by any lawful power according to the ancient ordinary rule (so as the government of Sueden is to be born anew) it cannot be the birth of any legal power; because legal power is the fruit of a legal government, and not the cause: and a legal government must be first setled by a power above, or without law, though not against law; be∣cause no legal Government can be before that, which is first setled. The Senate being chosen and thus impowered by the
convention of the States of Sueden, and having understood their opinions, they do unanimously elect Gustavus their Governor, to be King of Sueden, and sent a message there∣of to him, with their humble request that he would not refuse to take care of the entire Government of the King∣dom, and to perfect the work of restoring the liberty to the Nation, and vindicating the same from all ty∣rannie. Gustavus having heard the message, answered, That the burthen of Government of a Kingdom, was too heavy for him to bear; That it is one thing to be a Governour in war, wherein he was trained, and another thing to be a King wherein he had no skill; That he was well wearied with the dangers, cares, and labours of the war; That having brought the Nation into a posture of subsistence in peace, he hath his ends, and prayed them to rest contented therewith: and that they would bethink themselves on some other person of the Nobility of Sueden, and elect him to be their King; assuring them that himself would gladly serve in any po∣sture under him whom they should chuse, and so thanking the Convention of States and the Senate, for their good opinion, he dismissed the Messengers. The States and Senate having heard the answer to their message, are in no wise satisfied therewith, they therefore renew their requests, the Popes Legate also joining with them, and they tell Gustavus plainly, they will not receive any negative nor can he so evade if he regard the Senate or Convention of the States, or the good of the people. Gustavus is at length overswaied to accept of the place; and yet abhorring all unworthy ends of self-seeking, he pro∣fesseth his acceptance onely upon the same grounds and ends that moved them in their election; yet he is convinced that the work is of that nature, that he is not able to go through therewith, but he must cast himself, and rest upon the God
of Sabbath for his assistance and protection, and next under him upon the assistance of the Lords of Sueden, the aid of whose wisdome, care and industry, and especially of the dai∣ly prayers of all the people, he earnestly beseecheth, and up∣on this account he submitteth to their desires. And so accor∣ding to the ancient Custome with mutual obligements upon Oath, Gustavus is solemnly declared, and proclaimed King of Sueden, yet refused to be Crowned by the space of five years following. The demur of Gustavus was not without cause, he was a single person and had no Family to raise, there were Pre∣sidents before him of Governours that refused the title and were commended for it, and commonly where that Title goes, it carries more envy at it then there is cause; and besides, wisely foresaw, that it was harder to govern as a King in Peace, then as a Governour in War; for its observed by the Civilians. That a King hath a double work, and must have a double skill, one in the feats of Armes, another in the feats of Judicature. A Governour in Sueden might have the power to defend the Laws and Liberties, but not to Regulate unlesse specially Authorized. Like as a Protector in England,Rot. Parliam. 31 H. 6. tit. 46 in the time of Hen. 6. by the Parliaments Declaration had a power to defend the Laws and Liberties, but not to meddle with authority in Ju∣risdiction, but the Parliament lately granted the whole. Lastly, it is one thing for Gustavus to serve his Country as a General at a dead lift, and another thing to ingage himself in a harder work during his life. In all which re∣gards it may be conjectured, that Gustavus had cause to give a stop to their earnest desires. Nevertheless the con∣vention of States, and the Senate had more cause to in∣sist on what they had begun. There was a King already above board: Christiern called in Sueden, the Tyrant, is called King amongst forreign Nations, and as a Governor formerly did consist with a King, and so might it now; and so forreign nations had been concluded to treat with Gu∣stavus (being but Governor) as supreme Magistrate, so
long as Christiern was King. But more particularly for the peoples sake; for though Gustavus might have cause to refuse that honourable title, and yet accept of the burthen of the service under another title; yet it must be acknow∣ledged that the people have a right in the Title of their Supreme Magistrate, because the more noble the Head is, the more is the body honoured; and therefore in Justice Gustavus could not deny the people their right to continue a Kingdom as anciently they had done, if he would govern according to Justice: And if he would govern as a Gover∣nour of Sueden, he must follow the advice of the Conven∣tion of States, and the Senate; or else prefer his own wis∣dom beyond all theirs. And thus although the people for many years took touch at the name and Title of a King, as if it evermore carried Magnetical power to draw on Ty∣ranny along therewith, and therefore gave their Supreme the Title of Governour: yet did they not hold that Title of Governour so sacred, as not to alter it when they saw cause; nor the Title of King so destructive, as for ever to abominate the same, especially when they are well perswa∣ded of the wisdome and moderation of the person that is Crowned therewith. But I cannot let passe one thing in the summoning of this Convention of States; that it was promiscuously in∣to all the Counties and places lately conquered without ex∣ception of persons, and not inquiring whether well affe∣cted r disaffected; certainly, either Gustavus was of a candd disposition and not given to surmises; or if other∣wise he advisedly laid them aside (as well he might, having an Army that commanded the field) knowing that Jelousies are mutual, and are repaied in the same coin that they bring and so like to maintain perpetual distance between him and the people; according to the opinion of Claudius the Em∣peror unto the Senate of Rome upon the like occasion of admitting the Gauls to be Senators of Rome; the people of Rome, saith he, in the daies of Romulus,Tacit. Annal.  consist of di∣vers peoples that in one and the same day were enemies and
Citizens: and nothing was more destructive to the Lace∣demonian and Athenian Government, then this, They ever held such as they Conquered under the condition of Aliens. Now whether it was out of principles of good nature, or council that Gustavus took this care, all is one, the successe was happy, all are unanimous for making of him King. The first thing that was done after the election of the King, was the requital of the Lubeckers for the adventure of their men, ships, and estates, jointly with, and for the Suedes in this dangerons work against the King of Den∣mark; and in recompence thereof, the Suedes granted that they would never make peace with the Danes without the consent of the Lubeckers. That upon the surrender of Stockholm, such wares, goods and debts therein, as the Lubeckers and Dant sickers should own upon Oath, shall be secured and returned to them; That the Lubeckers shall be paied for their service. That the Sea should be free for them, and that they should have a Free-trade in the Coun∣try of Sueden. That only they amongst Forreign nations should have Free trade in the Ports of Stockholm, Calmar, Surcopen, and Abbo. That the King shall do them right. That the King shall never set prizes of any of their Mer∣chandise, or compel them to sell, or leave their goods against their wills. That the goods and estates wracked, shal be restored to their owners without loss. That their goods sold in Sueden by mariners or servants without or∣der, shall be restored to their owners, and the offendors punished. That the King of Sueden shall not harbour any of the enemies of Lubeck. That if any difference shall a∣rise between the Suedes and Lubeckers, the same shall be ordered by four Lords of Sueden, sent to Lubeck, and so many Citizens of Lubeck joining with them. These a∣mongst other agreements were registred and made instru∣mental under the hands and Seals of the King, and Lords of Sueden, and Commissiones of Lubeck. A full recompence to the City of Lubeck in matter of Trade, although no o∣ther
paiment had been agreed, had the Citizens of Lubeck been so happy as to have been as careful to keep touch with the Suedes as they did with them. Soon after this agreement is Stockholm surrendred into the Kings hands, who entred the same in the month of June; after well nigh three years siege, time enough for the Danes to have releeved it, if they had been convinced of any right, that they had to the Kingdom of Sueden. Up∣on the Kings entry he is proclaimed therein King of Sue∣den and Gothland; with great applause and joy of all sorts. This brings forth divers surrendrs of Townes and Castles; and in the rere of the Dukedome of Bleking and the Town and Castle of Elsburgh, the only Commodious port that the Suedes have into the Western Sea. Yet the great Dukedome of Finland, and the adjacent Countries are out of the Kings possession: And therefore beginning now to study good Husbandry in the warre for the pro∣fit of his people whom now he must own; he dismisseth the forrein forces; and the residue of his Army he sends into Finland under the Command of Ivar and Ericus Fleming, who reduced all that Country into obedience within the space of one year, but the Northern people submitted upon the credit of their neighbours; and thus the whole Kingdom is imbodied under the Kings Com∣mand: now nothing remaineth for him, but to study peace and justice; and first he makes peace with the Mus∣covites, for other Nation he need not fear having none to border upon him, but the Muscovite on the East, and the Dane of the West, and as touching the Dane, their condition was this. Frederick Duke of Holst as hath been mentioned com∣ing to Denmark, by the Lords of Denmark is elected King and Crowned divers years before Gustavus was Crowned King of Sueden; although Gustavus was in armes divers years before him. Both these in the conclusion coming to the throne upon one title of the peoples liberty and well knowing how necessary peace with one another
would be: A mutual treaty is propounded by the King of Denmark, and in order thereunto, an interview is propounded by the King of Sueden; wherein he stood not upon punctilioes, but offered to come unto the King of Denmark, in some convenient place upon security of safe conduct: and the King of Denmark is not more nice in tendring such security as shall be demanded: The place of meeting is at Ancona in the confines of Scania, where in the presence of the Lords of both Nations, an in∣terview is had between both Kings, and after mutual salu∣tations and observances: The King of Denmark begins with a Commemoration of the miseries and calamities be∣fallen both Nations for divers years last past; and mention of the present dngers, incumbent upon them by the continu∣all contrivances of Christierne the late King, and that the same will be much more hightned by continuing the discord of the two neighbouring Nations, therefore he was for his part desirous of peace and concord with the King of Sueden upon just and honorable terms: Gustavus answered that to the pro∣posal of peace between the Nations; he held it not only con∣veniet but commendable, and he was very willing to hear∣ken thereunto upon equal conditions. The King of Denmark begins with a proposal of the con∣tinuing of the union of the three Northern Kingdomes, according to the Articles of Calmar; which he said was e∣stablished by oath of the deputies of all the said Nations, yet he said he desired not any change in the present Go∣vernment of Sueden; only he would that Gustavus should acknowledg him superiour: Gustavus secretly disliking the beginning, Modestly answered, that for his part he was unwillingly drawn to enter into the Suedish Throne: That he could wish the flourishing condition of both Nations could be under one head; but the agreement of Calmar was desolved by the misgovernment of the former Kings and Go∣vernours of Denmark: And if the Danes could not all this while gain their expectations by force of armes, much less can they think it rational for the Suedes to yeeld up
by intreaty the liberties of their Country, which are dearer to them (as these late warrs can testifie) then their own lives. Neither can himself who is sworn to maintain the liberties of his Country of Sueden allow of such terms, much less advise his people to consent thereto. Yet for this part though he would not be a subject, yet desired to be a friend faithful and true to the King of Denmark; and to be ready to gratifie him in all things agreeable to equity. The King of Denmark perceiving that himself was not in the right way, falls flat upon another point, and in plain termes tells the King of Sueden, That himself was desirous of a firm league and peace with him, if Sueden would be contented with its antient limits, and would yeild up what they in these wars had incroached upon, and gained from the Danes, especially the Dukedom of Bleking. The King of Sueden answered, That himself valued the peace of both Nations beyond that petty Dutchie, and there∣fore would consult with his Lords touching it. And accord∣ingly afterward it was accorded. But as to the proposal concerning the Ile of Gothland, the matter proved full of difficulty; it was i the possessi∣on of the Danes, but claimed as belonging to the Crowne of Sueden: yet after many words they come to agree∣ment by consent to lay that debate aside till a more con∣venient time. And thus the Peace was concluded between both these Kingdomes, as well for themselves as the Hanse Townes against Christiern the deposed: and all the Sue∣dish Captives in Denmark are now set at libertie, and such of the Suedes as formerly had any particular interest in Denmark are restored to their right. This questionlesse was wisely done of these two Kings thus to seek for mutual peace each with other, and for the particular peace of their several Nations within them∣selves. But if the wisdome of God consent not to all, the wisdomes of men are vain. A spiritual disease was then newly breeding in Germany, that soon grew to be almost epidemical in those eastern parts. Gospel light was new∣ly
sprung out of Popish darkness, discovering the very bowels of the Romish Religion to be a meer garbage of pride and covetousness. The divel espying the danger, raises up another light, or a thing as like to light, as himself is, when he is transformed into an Angel of Light; He saw the people inclining much to seek their Civil liber∣ty, as well as their Christian liberty from the slavery un∣der the Romish yoke of spiritual tyrranny: This he co∣lourably helps on by a company of Professors pretending a light of a more perfect way of holinesse by a second Bap∣tisme, abolishing Idolatrous worship, much tendernesse of conscience, and making conclusions thereupon, That men of light must walk according to their light, and there∣fore not bound by other Law, and so no need of Magistracie or Ministry; nay, those Ordinances savor of Antichristi∣an Tyranny. Those outsides are lovely in the eyes of the multitude, they also can profess such things, and be of that gang, why may they also then not injoy their liberty? Then they rise and run up and down Germany, and like the sea waves, swallow up, or bear all down before them till they dash against some Rock, and thereon break them∣selves. But before this storm, two drops fall upon Sueden by the coming over of two men with the Holland Merchants during the interview of these two Kings, these two were Melchior Rincus and Knopper Dolling, who arriving at Stockholm instil new Principles into the people; after∣ward they enter into the Church and down with Images and Organs, and all such as they will call tokens of Idola∣try; and make invectives against publick Worship and the Clergy as Antichristian, and that it were much better to have none at all. Gustavus the King returning to Stockholm from conclu∣ding a foreign peace, finds now more need to look home∣ward, and finding the tumultuous Reformation, and the sad principles taken up, he commits the two Evangelists to prison, and afterwards banished them; but yet the waves are not so quieted.
The news of this reformation at Stockholm spreads far and wide over the Nation, and liberty i so welcome to all, being newly come from under a Tyrannie, that even good Government is brought into question, and the King sees no way to pacification, but to cast over-board to the people somewhat to keep the Whale from overturning the ship: and finding that he must adventure a breach with the Pope, who had lately sent a special Legate, the Cardinal De Po∣tentia, with authority to enquire of the bloody massacre made by Christiern at Stockholm, thereby to vindicate him from all imputation of so horrible a crime,Cypr. An. Eust. Selwic. fol. 408. and that the Legate upon examination had judicially pronounced sentence, that nothing was done therein by Christiern but what was just and right. He tells the people he will visite all the Churches in his own person and will see to a reformation by advice of learned men, and accordingly a visitation of the Churches throughout the nation is made by the King in person, to in∣form himself in the state of them, and coming to Ʋpsal he findes opposition from the Archbishop and the Canons there; hereupon a disputation is ordered wherein the King himself is President. And after he summons all the States of Sueden to meet: to whom he relates what he found in his visitation, and propounds to their consideration to di∣ect in some moderation in the point of reformation, in the doctrine and worship of God, and in calming the vio∣lence of the Catholick Clergy, which drive so strong against the work of Reformation: as also in regulating their abuse of the Church-maintenance, spent in pride and luxury, that ought to be imploid for the saving of the peoples souls. If the matter be made to appear upon enquiry, the Lords are of opinion that the temporalties belonging to the Clergy may and ought to be seised, and the Church maintenance also secu∣red for the right uses and ends that they were appointed for. The Ecclesiasticks declaim against this, affirming, That the Church-priviledges and revenues, were granted and con∣firmed
to the Church Kings and Emperors, and ought not to be invaded under peril of damnation: Whereunto was replied, That the true Elders are worthy of double honour, both of Reverence and maintenance: But such as are slow∣bellies, neither serving God nor man, ought not to have the Church-maintenance, and if some Kings have against all equity permitted the same, other succeeding Kings may, and ought, reform the same. That there is not one period in all the Scriptures, that warranteth such power in Church∣men, or countenanceth such mens manner of living, especial∣ly in an unlawful way of opposing the civil Magistrate as hath been used in Sueden by the space of these hundred years last past. The States hereupon determine, That the Church Reve∣nues are in the power of the King according to the condition of times to encrease, maintain, or diminish, as may best conduce to the safety of true Religion in doctrine, and esta∣blishment of the pure worship of God, and holiness of life. Now comes a storm of imputations, and execrations, and what not? foreign Nations are made to believe that the King is an Atheist, and the common people in Sueden, that they obey a Divel in the shape of a man. The King slights these Scare crowes as all Princes that fix their Coun∣cils upon good foundations must resolve to do;Dion Hist. lib. 38. & 53. Caesar him∣self was convitiated by Cicero (no mean person) and yet he endured it patiently: And the advice of Mecenas and Livia to Augustus was not to pardon offences against the Common-wealth, but to pass by railing imputations against his person in regard they cannot hurt a Prince crowned with honorable deserts, and guarded by an army of soldiers. Nevertheless the common people in Sueden are enraged hereby, and amongst these the Dallcarles that were the first in vindicating the peoples liberty, are now the first that appear to maintain themselves and the people in bondage: The common people for want of understanding, are many times like froward children, pleased with nothing, they can
neither be contented with perfect liberty,Tacit. Hist. l. 1. nor endure perfect bondage; they know not what to desire, and yet like not to be as they are. Nevertheless the Dallcarles being now in their motion, hold on, but who shall be their leader, they know not, at length one is discovered that is called Nicholas Stur, and called the son of Steno Stur the late Governor of Sueden. This Nicholas Stur, whether so easily, or onely in fancy intimated by the vogue of the people, the issue must cleer forth; but the rumor once raised, though but of yesterdaies birth, takes with the people who are ready to believe new and strange things; and thereupon he ascends the stage in West-Gothland, to act for the old Church-government; where also the people, led by the greatness of the name (as was was said concerning Drusus,Tacit. Annal. 5. voiced to be alive) joined with him and so the war is now become the Bishops war. The King hears and sees all, the hatred and practices of these men move him not; Plutarchs observation fits this occasion: He that falls into a Throne by hap, is as one that falls suddenly into a pit, and is surprised with fear, and repentance; but he that descends thereinto by de∣grees, is prepared to endure with moderation what befalls, and resolved against all opposition that shall occur. This was the King of Suedens case, he shewed magnanimity in the field, but never more then in this case; he is but newly a King, and contrary to all principles of policy he is put upon a hard task (to change Ecclesiastical government, and to trench upon the formerly received Religion) for he that will contend about Religion, according as the cause is, must resolve to sail against wind and tide, either from hea∣ven or hell, or else must not that man launch into the deep: and therefore although the King was very couragious, yet this daring adventure I must attribute to his faith, rather then his valour. And he met with success accordingly; for the Dallcarles not finding that bravery of spirit in their new Governour, that might become a son of that famous
Steno, begin to suspect themselves to be in danger of a cheat (for the common people do fancy that a spirit for Government goes along in the blood, and that the son of an honourable or Princely person hath somewhat born in him, that qualifies him for command above other men) and therefore they secretly send to Steno Sturres widow for enquiry, who tells the messengers plainly that they were deceived, and that her son Nicholas was long since dead. This message returned, caused the Dallcarles to withdraw their assistance, fearing that the cause of Religion will not bear them out, unless patronized by one of the Royal bloo of Sueden. The Dallcarles now gone, the spright va∣nishes, and is to be found no where, untill he makes an apparition at Rostock and there at the instance of the King of Sueden is put to death, and also some others of his party in Sueden served in like manner, and so the storm is ap∣peased. Yet the people are like the sea still; a famine comes upon the land, and the Churchmen tell the people that this is the fruit of their innovation in matters of Religion (that is now Gods anger which at other times is attributed to second causes) the people are again angry, & refuse to pay the Kings tribute. The King tells them, that few of them under∣stand Gods word, and fewer of them can rightly determine of his works. That their stop of his tribute shall not stop him, he soon gathers an army and marches to Westerass, and sends a message to them of the Dales forewarning them of his coming, requiring them to meet with him at Terna, ready either to fight for their cause, or otherwise to sub∣mit themselves and begge his pardon for their enter∣prize. The Dallcarles like not the choice, yet must do some∣what; fain they would hold their old way of the Church∣mens interest, yet chuse rather to submit and hazard their opinion then their lives. The issue is, some of them are corporally punished, others rebuked and sent home giv∣ing security for their good behaviour, and in like manner
others in other places are served. Only the Arch-Bi∣shop of Ʋpsal, being one of the Popes sons in Sueden is permitted as a male content to banish himself from his native Country. The King returned to Westerass, and considering with himself the danger of the Nation, by the bad lives of the Church-men, and their neglect of the peoples Souls, and their unweariable indeavour to bring his Government into dislike with the people, and his person into contempt by imputations of scandal, of Heresie and Blasphemy; and that some issue must be speedily brought hereof, or all would come to confusion; he calls a Convention of the States of Sueden, and propounds to them, To take into consideration the state of the Nation, that they all knew That he neither sought, nor willingly undertook the Government of the same; That they all promised to be assistant unto him therein, without which it is impossible for him to go through therewith; That he now, contrary to expectation, findeth the people much dissatisfied through the instigation of the Church-men, whose Lordship and power amongst them, you all know to be such as is now put into the Balance with the Kings, and their luxury, pride and idleness, all the world knows to be such as is inconsistent with the duty of their places, the good of the people, and righteous Government; That their Castles and temporal revenues are obstructed from the ser∣vice and safeguard of the Nation, to maintain dissentions, mutinies and rebellions; That for his part, he must rather cease to be a King, then to see all things in confusion under his Government; and therefore I require, saith he, some order to be taken by the Convention of States for regulating hereof, or else I am resolved to lay down my Government and leave it to them that can manage it to better purpose; and hereof I desire a positive, speedy answer from you the Bishops and other States of this Nation. But the Bishops ears are deaf as to those things, their Authority and Revenues were dearer to them then to part
with them for words; They thought they had the King at an advantage, and they would hold it; and the major part of the other States overswayed by the Bishops, did not so readily and resolvedly appear for the King as they ought to have done, fearing the Popes thunderbolt more then the Kings displeasure. The King hereat displeased, said, He would never adven∣ture one drop of Suedish blood more to maintain his Go∣vernment by a Civil War, wherein the vanquished must be miserable, the vanquisher unjust, and friends must de∣stroy one another:Dion. Hall. lib. 6 and forthwith entring into the Con∣vention of States resigned up his Kingdom and Govern∣ment, asking nothing but a recompence for his service, and that they would take his inheritance at a moderate value, and so he departed into the Castle.Dion. Hist. l. 51 Sucton. in vit. octav. Octavius only debated with the Senate about laying down his Government, but did it not; Gustavus did it, and debated not. They that make Government their work, will be glad of Rest; but they that make it their sport, the people will be sooner weary of them, then they of it. It was it seems Gustavus his lot to misse of those encouragements of assistance from the Conven∣tion of States which was promised when he undertook the Government, and for him to persist in Governing with∣out them, in order to the maintaining of the peoples liber∣ties, was vain, and therefore if herein he imitated some examples of his Ancestors he may be the rather excused, al∣though thereby the Nation be now under a condition of confusion. The next day the States met again, and in cool blood told the Bishops That the Kingdome must not ruine to sa∣tisfie their Lusts; that if the Bishops will not be equal judges between themselves and the people, others must: Nevertheless they shall once more be heard what they can say in their own behalf, and thereupon a Conference is appointed, wherein Dr. Olaus appeared for the King, and Dr. Gallen for the Bishops, and the point concerning Ec∣clesiastical power and priviledges is debated at large;
which Conference the longer it lasted, the more it touched the quick, and many of the hearers altered their opinions as touching the Prelacy; so as upon the third day the voters for the people undertake the cause, and urge it positively upon the Bishops to submit to the King, but if they meaned otherwise to expose the Country to extre∣mity, and harme come thereby, they vowed to be revenged upon the authors thereof, and thereunto the greatest part of the Nobles accord. At length the majority of Votes prevailed, and a message is sent into the Castle to Gustavus by a person of quality, to beseech him to return to the Convention of Estates, but it prevailed not, and a second message prevailed as little; but the third message by per∣sons of nigh relation to him, was so effectually presented, that he yielded to come to the Convention, and was recei∣ved by all the States with the greatest observancy that could be. All saying in one humble request, That he would not reject the Government in such doubtful condition of af∣fairs, promising him also their utmost faithful assistance. The King considered with himself; that though it was an ill condition for him to be alwayes working and never do the work; yet it was much worse to forbear, and be weary before he attained the shore, for that is the next door to drowning; and therefore he takes up re∣solution not to passe for mens opinions or censure, but to go on and to see what issue he can br ng to the Councils of the Convention of Estates. At last the conclusion is, That the Bishops shall sur∣render up their Castles and Temporalties unto the Kings disposal, and submit to live upon such pensions, as shall be allowed them by the States, saving evermore the ti∣tles, interests and rights of the Nobility and others, to any part of the said Temporalties, as by the distemper of the times had been incroached upon. But in the execut∣ing hereof some time was spent, many being loath to dis∣robe themselves before they went to bed. Those that were worst affected were soonest at the is∣sue,
as desperate persons through conscience of their guilt conclude no mercy to be had, as good pass the Pike at the first, as at last. Only the Bishop of Hincopen was loath to part with his Castle of Monkbed, and held some debate, but in con∣clusion was ordered to give possession at a day prefixed, and in the mean time security to perform the same, and maintain the publick peace. The King would not discharge his Army, till all was done, and therewith marched at the day appointed to the Castle at Monkhed, and was sumptu∣ously feasted by the Bishop, who gave that content to the King, that he discharged the Bishops sureties, and at his request allowed him to visit the Churches in Gothland, wherein having gained much treasure without taking leave of the King he took shipping, sailed to Dantzick, where af∣ter some years he dyed. And thus did Sueden lead an ex∣ample to the Eastern nations for regulating the Church Revenues to the right ends for which they were in∣tended. Gustavus having now been King above five years since his Election, and having thus far prevailed to pare the narils and clip the wings of the Lordly Clergy, thinks he may more safely give himself up to the importunate advice of the States, and give them more assurance of his setling upon Government by becoming a Crowned King, and thereupon he appoints a day of Solemnization of his Co∣ronation at Ʋpsal, which was accomplished accordingly, af∣ter the King had served at the helm of Government seven years. Tiberius the Emperour (speaking for the advantage of Silanus who had not gained any great esteem for his carri∣in a private life) said that some mens spirits by great im∣ployments, are innobled to greater undertakings, others are dulled: Gustavus his spirit alwayes daring grew more brave by occasion he is not now contented with redu∣cing the Prelacy, his aimes are yet higher at reformation in Doctrine, in Worship, and holiness of life. And here∣in
he first places in all the Cathedrals, men eminent for holiness, learning, and eloquence to preach the word of God, and enjoyned the Bishops to provide out of the Church-maintenance pensions, such as might encourage them in their work: The King observed likewise set times weekly to hear in his own person the gifts of those men, before he sent them forth as well to satisfie his own con∣science in sending them, as to give encouragement to others to attend upon publick Ordinances. Love of emulation herein by imitation, being more prevalent with people, then penaltie of Law and fear. But now comes the pinch,Tac. An. 3. The States had agreed and the Prelates in shew submitted as touching their temporalities; but as to reformation in Doctrine, Worship and Conversation; the Divel is not so easily ejected out of the whole Nation of Sueden at once: The Minister that was sent to Scaren to preach, had such a scare by the Bishop and his party, that he was inforced to get away to Ʋpland to save his life; and the Rector of the Colledg undertaking to expound Saint Mathews Gos∣pel, was in danger of being stoned by the scholars, incou∣raged thereto by the Lords and great men, who became joint-partners with the Bishops in this adventure. Some of the great men and common people also of West-Gothland hearing hereof bestir themselves, not for the Bishops sake say they, but for this religion now invaded by the new Ger∣man Doctrine of Luther; and upon this account they send letters to Smalland to stir them up to arms, who are rea∣dily induced thereto, and seize upon the persons of such as will not joyn with them; and amongst the rest upon the Countess of Hoy the Kings own Sister; they also send letters to the Dales & other neighbouring provinces to send their deputies to a meeting by them appointed at Larva, so short and unhappy is the love of the people: Thus the scene of the war is changed; and though tyranny was in the ann and Prelacy in the main battel, yet Popery brought up the reare, all tending in the conclusion to reduce the Na∣tion into its old condition, rather then indure such change. So unsensible are men of their present happiness:
For peace and concord to the conquered brings profit, to the conqueror onely pleasure. This storme the King might rationally have expected by him what he found in the case of Prelacy; yet his courage leads on even to wonderment having nothing to back him herein, but Gods cause and a good conscience. That advantage hath the change of Religion above a Toleration, that the one may be more safely undertaken, and may be according to Gods will revealed: The other supposing Toleration of error can never be safe, because it can not be according to Gods revealed will which is but one,Cic. de Leg. as the truth is but one: There is somewhat also in natural reason that crosseth it, else had not the Lawes of the twelve Tables provided against it; nor the old Romans insi∣sted,Liv. Lib. 20. that none but the Roman Gods should be worshiped in Rome; and that only after their own Country manner. And the Emperors in after-ages decried it, as an inlet to profanness, as they call it. Nevertheless how ever the censure of politicians might pass upon the Kings wisdom in this matter; yet the issue justifies him: for the inhabitants of West-Gothland observing that the generally of the people, who had sworn allegeance to the King made demur upon the matter, and reflected up∣on their engagements; the Kings merits, their present peace and enjoyment of their liberties, and Laws, and that as to the point of Heresy objected against the King, it was without the compass of their knowledg and (considering the Kings piety it was more then they would believe to be true, but rather to be looked upon, as a false scandal raised by his enemies: Hereupon the Lords of the confederacy grew into difference amongst themselves; and the Bishop and one other of them fled into Denmark, where being sometime entertained, the Kings letters pursued them, alledging that it was contrary to their agreement, that neither King should harbour the ene∣mies of other, and so they fled to Mecklerburgh, but the o∣ther Lords of the confederacy (forgetting what they had done) stood upon their justification without any conditions, alledging that they were enforced to do what they had done by the heads that were absent in forrein parts. And that they
never promoted nor encouraged the defection of any by advice, letters or instructions; but only for sometime intended connivence for the Kings service, and upon this accompt would stand to their trial at law. The King and Council wondred at their confidence, and advised them to submit to the Kings mercy and crave pardon: but they refused favour, other then what the law would allow. The King at length produced to them their own letters to stir up the Provinces to armes; and so being self-condemned two of them suffered death, one was ransomed, and the rest begging pardon, were received to mercy.Tacit. Ann. l. 5. Hist. 4. An excel∣lent temperature in execution of Justice commends the King in his new begun Kingdom, making the people both to fear and love him; Not as Pompey, of whom it was said that his punishments were too great for the crime: Nor as Civilis carried away with an opinion of courting the people by clemency. The one works in the people fear with hatred, the other presumtion and boldness to offend. And thus was this stir, for) war I cannot call it) about Popish religion laid asleep and mastered, not with sweat or labour of the King, but by God alone whose cause it was. The King saw somewhat in the King of Denmark's carriage in this matter, that suited not with the former a∣greement made between them, and not liking that the same should remain blurred in the least point (as it is the wisdom of men that will preserve friendship, to stop the breach whiles it is small) he prevailed for another interview to understand the mindes of each other more fully, and by this last interview the former agreement is explained, enlarg∣ed, and confirmed and parting in love they return with joy. The King of Sueden, now after so many stormes, hopes for peace, and a setled Government, and after three years crowned King, bethinks himself of building up his own family by marriage, and thereof solemnizeth the ac∣complishment with the Lady Katharine the Duke of Sa∣xony's daughter at Stockholm: so as the King that hereto∣fore was a souldier of fortune, hath now given pledges to fortune: he now must abide the issues and events of the
affairs of the Nation to be theirs for the better or worse; and what he was formerly bound to do meerly for the Nations sake, he must now do for the sake of his own family and relations: and having thus laid the foundation of his own house, he further proceeds in the building up of the house of God, for although he had seised the tempo∣ralties of the Prelates, yet their places, so far as conduced to the Church-government, he took not away, nor that maintenance which was appointed for the Ministery: and besides, the States did setle pensions upon such as should be appointed to be Over-seers or Bishops, to have care of the Churches: and unto these places the King had, as for∣merly was mentioned, sent choice men for gravity, learn∣ing, and holy life: and now he advanced two brethren, Dr. Laurentius and Dr. Olaus; the one to be Archbishop of Ʋpsal, the other to be Bishop of Stockholm. Through whose vigilancy and industry, especially amongst other re∣formed Bishops, the reformation of Religion proceeded successefully in the Nation during their lives, which was for the space of about thirty years, and through their care and study principally, the Translation of the Bible into the Suedish language, was published and dispersed into every Town in the Nation. But the time of rest is not yet come, a strange apparition from the Belgick shore ascendeth upon the coast of Nor∣wey: Christierne the former King I mean, now long since reputed as buried in Brabant, in privacy had now at the charge of the Emperor and some adventurers in Holland and other places of that neighborhood, hoping for large immunities from Denmark or Norwey (in case it could be regained) gathered soldiers and munition, and with five and twenty ships, sailed from Encusen to the coast of Norwey, but through stormes having lost ten of their ships, onely with the rest arriveth there; where not being aware they are surprised and imprisoned by the Ice all that winter. Yet Christiern was at liberty all that while to work his de∣signes upon that Countrey of Norwey, the season being
such as the Danes despaired of any possibility to march for their relief: So many therefore of the great men of Norwey, as pleased; came and corresponded with Chri∣stierne, without control, Only the Governour of Agger-house Castle dealt subtilly declining to surrender to Chri∣stierne otherwise then might he be in the most honorable way. Saying that he acknowledged Christierne to be King of the three Northern Nations; yet for the Honour of the Governours Family, he desired of Christierne that he might have liberty to write to Frederick the now King of Dn∣mark for present relief (which in comon considerat on could not be had during winter) otherwise he must surrender the Castle to King Christiern, & by this means said the Gover∣nour your majesty can be no loser, and my honour is saved. Christierne was contented therewith and the Governour dis∣patched a messenger into Denmark; and notwithstanding Ice and cold, had such supply, as he thereby is fortified, and stands upon his own defence. And Christierne prepares for a siege: During this time as the besieged had been relieved by the Danes; so the besiegers were relieved not only by the Normans but by many runnegadoes out of Sueden; such was their old love to Christierne & hatred to Gustavus, & these flocked to Christierne from all parts, and solicited the Dall∣carles (who were in displeasure of the King upon an occa∣sion then emergent) to revolt with them to their old King: Who, they were assured through afflictions was become quite another man changed into a meek and compassionate nature and gracious carriage, & would doubtless embrace them kind∣ly and give them all assurance, they told the Dalcarles also that forreign Princes would assist him, for that they like not such examples of subjects deposing their Kings: And above all the rest they might rest assured, they should be received again into th bosom of the Church and favor of the Pope: They and many other such good things the Dallcarles heard, but as old birds not so easily catched few of them give any credit at all, & many deride them, they know wel that nature is no chang∣ling unless by supernatural grounds overpowered, that the man¦ner of Christierns oming shewed little repentance other then for his departure with the Crown upon so easy terms, that a King
rejected by his people, it as a wound in the head, for which a plaister is hard to be found; That in such cases a good re∣port is easily made, but the truth must appear upon trial; That before trial there is no trusting, that after trial there is no remedy; That the differences between them and Gustavus their King are but in the inception, and may soon be composed, but between them & Christierne, are beyond all ending. The revolt∣ing Suedes hereupon disappear, and the winter now wa∣sted, and Christierne finding his party discouraged, and the stream still after six years expectation so strong against him, and weary of living upon the German courtesie, chuseth now rather to cast himself upon a treaty with his Uncle the King of Denmark, and receives conditions from the Danish ad∣miral of his safe conduct to him upon tearmes of treaty with his Uncle, or otherwise to have liberty to go at large. Thus Christierne overcome, either by necessity or want of advice, not enquiring whether the admiral was impower∣ed to grant such conditions or not, committed himself to the Admiral, sails into Denmark, and before he is aware becomes in state of a prisoner during life, gaining only this advantage, that he was now maintained honourably up∣on the publick faith of the nation, as one that formerly had been King thereof, which otherwise being at large, must have been upon the courtesie of such as meaned to be courteous. And yet it is observable that the Danish Admiral had no thanks for this piece of service; And ma∣ny thought that it would have been more advantageous for Denmark if the Prisoner had been at large in any Foreign Nation. For though it be true that deposing of Kings by their subjects is sadly reflected upon by Princes; yet it is only where the sore is green, and the flesh tender, and then it may occasion some anger from abroad for the present, but after tryal once made, and no gain thereby gotten: Foreign Princes love their own interest by a quiet and peaceable Government, so wel, as by continuance the wound breeds stupefaction, and they will engage no more.
Now as touching Sueden who was not meanly concerned in this affair at Norwey, it is observable how the wound between the King and the Dallcarles was first made, for though the occasion was small, the mischief might have been exceeding great. The matter was briefly thus, The Kings debts to the Lubeckers, for their service in the wars, were not yet fully paied, and now paiment is required with some earnestness; but how the same should be satisfied, or how to be levied, is the question that endured much debate: some were of opi∣nion for a tax, but this was thought would go hardly down with a people exhausted with a ten years war; others are of opinion, that the profits of the Mines might be assigned to the Lubeckers for certain years, but they cannot find a way to maintain the Government in the mean time without them. At length a project is propounded, to give the King the biggest Bell save one out of all the Churches of his Dominion: this was alleadged would do the work, and be no particular prejudice to any man, nor loss to the pub∣lick. A great mistake this was, as things then stood, for the Merchants had engrossed much copper, and if this proceeded, they are undone, they can get no market: but this was no good reason, being of a too private natures to ballance against the publick good. Then the quarrel is at the condition of these Bells, it is said they are anointed and consecrated to a holy use, and ought not to be wasted for profane uses: but this also is of little force, the opinion being grounded on superstitious principles, as was then conceived: and be it granted that the manner of appoint∣ment of them to their uses there, was superstition, by an∣ointing and consecrating, and that the first uses intended, might be superstiuious, yet if any property at all be in such devoted things in any that properly remaineth, untill it be legally destroied, and untill then the seising of such things into any other hands will fall under the notion of sacriledge in the common opinion, which alwaies hath been abomi∣nable, even to the heathens, though done in the wild
warres, and therefore when Caesar would make Pompey odious, and advance his own merit, he charges against Pompey, that he had pillaged Hercules his Temple, and carried many of the spoils to Gades,Caes: Com. l. 1. de bello civil. which Caesar caused to be restored to the Temple again, and the Town-Clark of Ephesus intimates no less, when in staying the uprore, he tells them, the Apostles had not been robbers of their Churches: or if it comes not under that notion, then it must be in nature of a gift to the people of the Parish, either for their pleasure, or other conveniency of calling them to the publick duties; in both which cases the unlawful seisure of them is looked upon, as a common plunder and invasion of the goods of the whole body of the people at once; and as a sad presage that no mans particular estate is his own any longer under such a Go∣vernment. And it seems the people in Sueden had such apprehensions of this President, for after it was concluded and begun to be put in execution, an insurrection is made and the people stand up in defence of their Bells, so as some cannot be removed, others that are removed, and carrying away, are pursued and rescued, and the officers employed, are beaten for their pains. Hereupon the Kng calls a convention of Estates which might have been more seasonable to have determined the gift of the Bells, before they had jangled such an unruly peal. The conven∣tion of Estates meet at Ʋpsal, the Dallcarles the chief in defence of their Bells summon another convention of the people at Arbogg, so as here is also one Parliament a∣gainst another. The people (saith the Historian) are commonly of that temper, that they will either serve humbly, or govern proudly. True liberty which is the golden mean they neither know how to want, nor how to use, especially a people (such as the Suedes) trained up in war, now (like the Romanes ex brevi otio multiplex bellum) grown wan∣ton, chuse rather to lose their peace then their bells. But the Parliament at Arbog thrives not, few hearken to their summons, yet they set a good face upon the matter: they send messengers to the King protesting their fidelity, yet
they desire his answer to two requests, one that the King will not send more forces within the borders of the Dall∣carles, then they shall deem convenient for them to quar∣ter: the other, not to set any governor over them then such a one as is of their own country or neigborhood. The kings spirit was too great to like conditions from his subjects, yet his wisdom prevailed to take into consideration the condi∣tion of his affairs at the present. That Christiern was now in Norwey, the winter newly entred, the Normans enlining to advance, his designes if the Dallcarles should be driven into a further distance, the issue might be doubtful. He therefore dissembles his displeasure, and sends them a Governor ac∣cording to their desire, but after three years gathers an ar∣my and seises the chief authors of this rebellion and puts them to death, and brought down the pride of the Dall∣carles into a lower Orb, by seisure of their liberties, and so made them more level with the rest of the people. This was the first design resting barely upon the point of malignancy against this government of Gustav. in favor of the cause of the deposed King, but like a granado fiering in the air, spent it self before it fell, yet it was not the last. For the K. of Denmark dies soon after, leaving Christiern a pri∣soner to the Lords of Denmark; who differing in their opi∣nions as to the election of a King, spent two years in an in∣terregnum, during which time some acted for the son of the deceased King, being a child and more capable of counsel, and herein the Bishops joined: others acted for the Duke of Holst, and some were for restoring Christiern (then a priso∣ner) to the throne again. This was one summons to the King of Sueden to look about him, and kept him off from requiting to the Dallcarles their courtesie in the matter of the Bells. But there was another that appeared no less dangerous, though not so sudden in effect: and this was the change in the government of Lubeck from the Popish to the Lutheran way, wch although, in it self, suited well wth the K. of Suedens mind, yet, in such alterations there is commonly one man more-active then the rest & he becomes an instru∣ment in altering the government upon such alterations in religion; even so the Lubeckers had one for the purpose
called Woolweaver; a man by education as his name, whom they make Consul of the City; and he being gotten up, is blown up higher with affection of popularity, and undertaking to be a patron to the poor, now much increased in the City, principally as he saith by the neglect of their priviledges by the King of Sueden; who contrary to agree∣ment made with the Lubeckers for their service in assisting the King of Sueden, hath countenanced trade from and with the Hollanders, and other Nations: And for  remedy hereof, Woolweavers counsel is to indeavour to draw the Dane to joyn with the Lubeckers; against all trading with Sueden from without the Baltick Sea. But the Dane told them that they thought not meet for them to come to conclusion in things of that nature, till they were better setled in their Government, & were agreed concerning the party that should be their King. And finding it more necessary to maintain correspondency with Sueden (in regard of the endeavours of a party amongst them to advance Christierne to the Throne again) they acquainted the King of Sueden with the designes of the Lubeckers. Woolweaver is angry hereat, and without blushing face about and propoundeth to the King of Sueden to joyn with them against the Hollanders. But Gustavus his counsel was rather to manage well the matter concerning Den∣mark, then to enter upon new engagements; they see the Da∣nish affairs is as a Sea of many currents, wherein if they steere not an even course, and keep not constant watch, themselves may be in danger of Shipwrack, and therefore as embarked in one and the same Ship with Denmark, they bend their whole counsel in the speedy settlement of the Govern∣ment thereof; as may best conduce to the concurrent inter∣est of both Nations. Woolweaver finding his labour lost, growes angry, and like one lifted up from below, lifts up his thoughts higher then his wit served him, and in his Careere vanteth, that as he had advanced Gustavus into the throne, so he would turn him out again, and thereupon entertains correspon∣dency
with the Runnagadoes of Sueden. Gustavus espying this, seiseth upon the persons, goods and privi∣ledges of the Lubeckers in Sueden; the Lubeckers also dealing in like manner with the Suedes at Lubeck. And Woolweaver aiming at nothing less then the crown of Sueden, by entertaining private intelligence in Sueden, gains designes of civil broiles to be set on foot to busie the King at his own home. And first prevaileth with the Earl of Hoy, who married the Kings own sister, and being a person of great interest, by his means pre∣vailed with the people, especially of Smalland, to bring them also into disaffection. And that done, the Earl withdrawes himself, his wife and children, unto Lubeck, under pretence for his healths sake; but being arrived, is made Commander in chief of all the disaffected Suedes who repair to him. It is a fate of great men, seldom to be contented with, or continue long in their greatness: either their own merits are not rewarded enough, or their inferiors too much, and so being malecontented, striving to be higher, they fall lower. It was not enough for the Earl of Hoy to be the Kings brother by marriage of his sister, nor to be Lord Lieute∣nant for Gustavus in his own Countrey of Sueden, but he must become General of a party of Malecontents un∣der Woolweaver, against his Brother, his King, his Kin∣dred and Countrey, and what was gained hereby, will ap∣pear afterward. In the mean time time, many retire to him out of Sue∣den by reason principally of the disturbances of Smalland which begun by the Earles instigation before his depar∣ture out of Sueden, but are fomented by a company of lawless persons in the countrey, which combined them∣selves against the Kings Justices; and that with so high a hand, as it came to blood, even to the slaughter of the Kings Lieutenant in that Countrey; and they being suppressed by the King with force of armes, they never∣theless maintained a kind of theevish war till they wasted
by flight to the Earl of Hoy, whose party thus encreased, waited upon all advantages, and occasioned the King of Sueden to stand rather upon his watch then his defence; for they did him no harm, God having provided other means to pare their nailes without the King of Suedens help. For Woolweaver having gained this accesse of aid for his designes, soon imployed it upon his principal work, which was to settle his neighbours the Danes in a posture fitting to his purpose; for the condition of Denmark being now, as touching the Election of a King (as formerly I mentio∣ned) divers of the Lords of Denmark joined with John, the son of the former King (though he were a minor) principally upon the account of Religion, which was chang∣ed by his father into the Lutheran way, and they hoped the son would therefore the rather uphold it. This the Bishops espied, and wheeled about for the interest of the Roman way, and therefore would have the Government managed by Administratorship, and published injunctions in their own name for the departure of all the Lutheran Preachers out of the Country by a day prefixed. This be∣ing like to fall heavy upon the Cities of Hafnia, and Mal∣mogia, and they being loath to make a breach, they pre∣vail for concurrence in the Government by administrator∣ship, and invite Christian Duke of Holst, to be administra∣tor in the name of John the former Kings son; but he dis∣claimed that work. Then they prevailed with the Duke of Aldenburgh (who professed the Doctrine of Lu∣ther) to accept thereof, and thereupon he came to Hafnia with a party, but finding many whisperings in be∣half of Christierne the deposed King; the Duke to gain the greatest party, declared his willingness for the resettle∣ment of him, and thereby indeed gained a strong party amongst the people; for Christierne had practised the sam trade in Denmark that he had done in Sueden, flattering th common people into a party from the Lords, which an Hi¦storian notes,Dion. Hal. l. 6 is the ready way to a Tyranny. Woolweav
though he was more fierce then wise, takes this opportuni∣ty, sides also with the Duke of Aldenburgh, and prevails with him to ingage against the Duke of Holst, who stood in his way, having divers of the Lords of Denmark join∣ing with him to make him King; but in this the Duke of Aldenburghs expectation was deceived, for he lost the day, and was beaten out of the Field by the Duke of Holst. And now is the Duke of Holst brought upon the Stage to act his part for the Crown of Denmak, to purchase his own rest and safety; and observing that the King of Sueden was left out of the Play, he invites the King to bear a part in the Game for Woolweavers sake; and the King of Sueden well knowing wherein he was most concerned, made lesse difficulty in the matter, and therefore although Wool∣weaver endeavoured to stop that muse by fair words, yet the King would not so be perswaded, but minding the mes∣sengers of the entertainment of the Suedish runnegadoes by their Master, he dismissed them. And having intelli∣gence that the people in Denmark sided with the Duke of Aldenburgh, for their deposed Kings sake, he saw it was no time to dally any longer, but forthwith falleth with an army into the Danish Territories, and possesseth several pla∣ces to the use of the Duke of Holst. The Danish Lords espying which way the Current passed, and seeing them∣selves deserted by the people, joined also with the Duke of Holst, and engaged him for the Crown in good ear∣nest. The Duke of Aldenburgh finding his interest amongst the common people of Denmark according to his deire thinks all safe, takes his ease, and injoies his pleasure. But the Duke of Holst not so, he sends the Danish Lords into Jutland with an army, who soon brought the people into order, and thence march into Fionia, where in one battel all the hopes of the Duke of Aldenburgh are lost, and a sacrifice made to the King of Sueden of the Earl of Hoy, the Arch-Bishop of Ʋpsal (who it seems had not his desire
to die at Rome) and others of the disaffected Suedes slain in the battel. The news hereof coming to Lubeck, makes Woolweaver tack about for another adventure, and observing that Suanto, son of Steno Stur, formerly Governour of Sueden, was now in the Duke of Saxonies Court, he subornes a mes∣sage unto Suanto as from his mother to meet her at Malla, where its said she waited with conveniences for him, who thereupon repairs to Malla, but in stead of meeting with his mother, he is met with by a Troop of horse from Lu∣beck, who offer him in the name of the City great honours if he will be advised by them, and so by surprisal they con∣vey him to Lubeck, where he is saluted by Woolweaver the Consul, with expressions of joy at his coming, and mind∣ing him of the unsetled condition of the Northern King∣doms, the private dissatisfactions in Sueden, he tells him that now a fair opportunity is offered him to recover the Go∣vernment of Sueden, a place so famously managed by his Ancestors; That the City had an army in readiness, want∣ing only his assent to be their leader; That it will be expected that he should now shew himself worthy of such a Linage. And so he did: The false son of Steno would gain a Kingdom, and could not: the true son will not, though proffered with exhortations and large promises; for he had sworn Fealty to Gustavus, and he would observe it, and therefore demanded to be at liberty to depart, or that Woolweaver would shew cause why he was deteined prisoner. Wool∣weaver seeing no good to be done, told him he was no prisoner, and that it was free for him to go, when, and whither he pleased, but where ever he should be his favourable opinion of the City was earnestly de∣sired. The King of Sueden was informed hereof, and is there∣by sharpened in the pursuit of the Duke of Holsts interests upon the main land of Scania, and in a short time brought all the Country to submit to him; Only the City of Mal∣mogia, and some other neighbouring Castles hold out for
the Duke of Aldenburgh whom they had invited, and they hoped for rescue from him. The Duke accordingly with the Duke of Aldenburgh and the Duke of Mecklenburgh join their strength together, and resolve to adventure all upon one cast of a Die, as it were; and in one battel with the King of Sueden (whether by strength or policy of War, called by some treachery, the History speaks not out) but the Dukes army is utterly and irrecoverably over∣thrown. And within a few dayes all the Country is fully for the Duke of Holst, that within one week before was of a quite contrary temper. Haffnia had now been besieged above half a year by the Duke of Holst, that City only being left as the gleaning of the War, and in which the last strength of the Dukes of Aldenburgh, Oldenburgh, and Mecklenburgh, and Lubeck was now Contracted. This was time enough for Christi∣erne the deposed King to trie the courtesie of the house of Burgundy; but none of that house will stir in his be∣half; and (which was more unhappy for the besieged) the affairs at Lubeck do face about to the rear. The Hanse Towns in their general meeting, perceiving that the affairs at Luceck had for these five years last past been under the sway of Woolweaver carried on by design under colour of Religion, and that the City was by that means brought under such difficulties that they knew not how to come off either with repute or safety; They thereupon conclude (according to the Emperors Council sent to the City) that the former government at Lubeck should be resto∣red, not intermedling with the change of Religion at all; and because they would salve the credit of Woolwea∣ver, they commend him to the Government of Bergeri∣dorffe. Woolweaver is not herewith satisfied, but at his departure vowed to be revenged; and the Senate at Lu∣beck now changed, considering his restlesse Spirit, are no lesse satisfied then he, and thereupon sending messengers af∣ter him found him in his journey in the territories of a Prince that owed him no good, and there they procured him to be
imprisoned and charged with treason against the state of Lubeck, and so he was put to death and quartered. And thus Lubeck setled upon its old basis, and flourished again leaving this lesson to such as would be States-men: That miscarriages in Government are not reformed by altering the Government, but by establishing it. Haffnia, now after a years siege wearied with the miseries of war is surrendred upon terms, not altogether so hono∣rable for the Duke of Holst as might expected. The King of Sueden telling the Duke that being privy to his own engage∣ments in the Dukes behalf, he did perswade himself that no such agreement should ever have been made by the Duke without the Kings knowledg; and in one thing, not without his consent: for why should the King be excluded out of this agreement, and the Duke engage himself thereby not to aid the King of Sueden in case he would not agree with the Lubeckers upon just terms. The Duke pleaded his own necessity of the present surrender of the City, and the im∣portunity of the Lords and his neighbour-princes led him thereto; nevertheless he assured the King, if he would send his embassadors, they should find that the King should not receive dammage in any thing thereby. And the King did accordingly send Embassadors; but the Lubeckers could never prevail to have a re-settlement of their former privi∣ledges of trade and traffick in Sueden as they desired, and so the conclusion was upon a bare truce between the Lubeck∣ers and the King for five years. Thus are the three Northern Kingdoms brought into a condition of quiet consistence once more, and Turbulent Lubeck into a calme; and the captived King in a manner twice captived, now if not hopeless, yet less hopeful then ever formerly. England was allyed, and had done what what it thought meet, and possibly more then was meet: They sent Embassadors to draw the Lords to a treaty, but they liked not to adventure their necks upon promises and purposes: The Emperor did less, either judging his per∣son despicable for his carriage to his Queen and the Lords:
or the Lords more wise and weary then to adventure upon a second trial of their late Kings Courtesy, unless they were thereto compelled by force; for which the Emperor had neither mony nor time to spare; although the opportu∣nity did lie, as faire for him to do his brother a good turn as he could desire, if he desired it: And lastly though the Common people entred upon an adventure in his be∣half, yet they effected nothing. If joyned with the great men they add both to the number and value; but in opposition to them they (for the most part) are as Ciphers, that fill room but signifie nothing; being neither sensible of approaching good or evil, nor speedy and advised in con∣cluding of a remedy, but as a body without a soul, without reason discerning activity if the orator maybe believed;Cic. 2. Orat. Plan. or as the sea, immovably in their own natural dispsiion, otherwise then as the wind or aire is either quiet or tempestuous, for such is the Historians opinion: Its many times seen that pro∣vidence doth advance some particular persons of the mea∣nest rank,Liv. lib. 28 and make them instrumental in publick Go∣vernment; but never puts the Government into the power of the lowest rank of men, for that is the speedy way to confusion, as may evidently appear by the Earthquakes in Government raised from below by the Anabaptists in Ger∣many in these very times wherein the present story lies; wherein though the issue was abortive, yet it came to that growth as it made the greater powers to tremble. And now comes the time of rest in Sueden from toyl∣some civil war, and both King and people may have li∣berty to enjoy their own several lots. The King had hi∣therto acted the Souldier wondrous well, and now must he try his skill in a peaceable Government, wherein I shall not enter into particulars (the same relating only to that nation and not so imitable by other) but shall satisfie my self with some brief contents of many Lawes and Acts of State, shewing rather the disposition of the Government, then the several actions thereof. The King taking into consideration, that the fewel that maintained the civil warre
was now spent and the people hitherto trained up in the toyl of war; he judged it more safe to find them still negotium quam otiam, as was said of the people of Rome, rather labour then leasure;Val. Mr. l. 7. c. 2 and considering also, that a time must come when a Commonwealth reduced by war, must be Governed and maintained by peace; he now acquaints his people with matters of profit and gained them thereby to the employments in mining, husbandry, fishing, and Sea-trade, all of them advanced by the Kings own inge∣nuous contrivances; and incouraging Labour, banishing idleness, punishing wanderers, and vagabonds, he found a way, thus, to make the Sea to serve the land, the land to serve men, men to serve their Nation, the Nation to observe their Kings, and both Nation and King to ferve God, and thereby laid a foundation of a far better building of Sueden, then Augustus did of Rome, of whom it was said that he found it of Earth, and left it of stone. Dion. l. 56The people likewise soon found the sweetness of this Government and are not far behind in requital of the Kings influence upon them. They had now spent twenty years under the Kings Government, and in a good measure found the benefit of peace though bought with the sweat and blood of the people in a long war, but how sad will it be, if one last breath of the King do put an end to all. The Council therefore at their meeting, taking into considera∣tion the experience had formerly by Sueden that Govern∣ments, by election are alwayes uncertain, and seldom accomplished without deceit and discord and oftentimes at the cost of the peoples blood;Bodin de Rep. that they are of short con∣tinuance, and therefore ill for the people. For that in such cases; Governours, like some birds will plume others to fether their own nests to keep their young ones warm,Sue. In vit. Tib. when themselves are gone; and that its much better for the people to be sucked with one leach, which in continu∣ance may be satisfied, and give the people rest; then by change of many which would increase pain, and suck without satiety; That the advancement of one Family to the
throne is a salve to all this, and is a preparative of a win∣ning aspect from it upon the people, and of a due respect from them to it; and so of a kind of conjugal affection between both against the marriage-day. That it suppres∣seth the turbulent aims of ambitious men that croud into the throne, and yet of all men are most unworthy. And secureth the present Government in the peaceable posses∣sion of him that hath it: That upon such grounds as these Augustus, and other Roman Emperours who left no inheri∣tors to the Emperial Crown used in their lifetime to adopt and declare their successors in the Goveanment, and trained them up for their service; nor did they find it dangerous for themselves or their successors so to do; That the peo∣ple at the siege of Stockholm offered to settle the Govern∣ment upon the King and his children, when as yet he nei∣ther had any, nor was married, nor was resolved upon that course of life. But now is married, and hath children; and hath given such plentiful testimony of his love, industry and faithfulnesse, in adventuring all that he hath even to his own life to vindicate the honour of his Country. What acknowledgment can be sufficient for so great a merit, lesse then the resignation of the Crown of Sueden to him and his posterity for ever. This is the sum, and thus it is unanimously concluded at the Council holden at Orebrogia, and that it shall be propounded to the Convention of States to be by them established for future ages; all which by their instrument in writing profess to be done by them freely and of their own accord, and without any Constraint. Its needlesse to trouble the reader with the many scofs of the Kings ene∣mies hereat, as if he suffered a Crown to be forced upon his family against his own will: It hath ever been the lot of brave men for brave actions to meet with imputations from some that are envious, and against such there is no remedy, but to allow them time to grow stale,Tac Anol. 2 Suet. in vit. Tiberii. and run themselves out of breath, and neglect them as Tiberius did with a com∣plement, That in a Free-state mens minds and tongues
in such cases ought to be free. And some did set the dint of Religion against it, as if God liked not that men should contrive perpetuities. Its true, yet he loves that men should be provident for establishment of justice, truth and peace in a Nation; and to that end, himself did set the Crown upon the Family of David, and hath blessed the same Rule in the Government of most of the Nations with prosperous success; although not alwayes precisely fixing upon the particular person that men design thereto. How∣ever imputations were, as if the King designed all, and its not much material, yet it is less evident, that the Kings de∣sire was not very eager thereupon, for he summoned not a convention of States till four years after, and then at Westerass the point was debated anew, and notwithstand∣ing it might be said that the establishing the Government upon one family might prove the espousing of a quarrel, and setting up of a family in Sueden against a family, or it may be the whole body of the people of Denmark, yet it is e∣nacted and declared. That after the death of Gustavus Ericson, his son shall succeed in the Government and his el∣dest son, and the heirs-males of his body; and for want of such, his next brother and his heirs males of his body shall succeed therein; and for want of such, John the second son of Gu∣stavus and the heirs-male of his body shall succeed, and so the rest of the sons of Gustavus and the heirs males of their body shall succeed in case of failing of heirs-males, and in case of want of heirs males of the son of Gustavus, the eldest of the blood and family of Gustavus shall succed and his issue male, and for want of such, then shall such person succeed as the Council of the Kingdome of Sueden shall elect provided he be no forreigner, and that he shall provide portions for the issue female of Gustavus. This is the summ of the settle∣ment of the Crown of Sueden upon the King and his fami∣ly, and yet the right of election is still saved to the people, not only by special limitation but by qualifying the pow∣er of the Council and excluding forreiners as if they would ever keep in memorial that the great sore in the Gove¦ment
of that Nation, was rather from without then within. The convention of States herein, doing as wise men that bend their course by rule still leaving to God tht supream con∣trol who also even in this case over-ruled their rule, as to the succession of the Posterity in Ericus his Line, which was af∣terward laid aside by the people, (Ericus being found false to the principles of Government established by his father and the Convention of States of Sueden) and yet owned Gustavus his family so far as to build him a sure house (who had builded Gods house) by raising from thence many men of fame both for peace and war; and made it the most illustrious constellation of all the Northern He∣misphere for influence, not only within the Kingdom of Sueden but into the general affairs of Europe. As Gustavus his house groweth in their hopes Christi∣ern the deposed King daily looseth in his. The Empe∣rour being intended for war against France, finds it ne∣cessary for him to quiet his affairs in Germany: And a∣mongst the rest at the convention at Spiers, the difference between him and Christiern the third of that name, King of Denmark comes to debate and is setled; and Chri∣stiern the second the Emperours brother, a deposed King and prisoner, is after fourteen years of imprison∣ment, left still to be a prisoner, who seeing himself now quite laid aside by his chief friends, bethinks himself to make his captivity (seeing it must be his condition) as delightsome as he can, and thereupon sur∣rendreth actually all his right and the right of his po∣sterity in the Crown of Denmark, and the Dukedomes of Holst and Sleswick in as ample manner as should be de∣vised, and thereby obtained though not a release from, yet more elbow-room in prison. And had the title of Sueden been also remembred, it had become the strict league made between the two Nations, but the Suedes re∣garded not any resignation nor would acknowledg any le, now for ought doth occur did any of the friends  the captive King, at any time reflect against Sueden:
The Emperor nevertheless was, it seems, willing enough to countenance any quarrel, picked against the King of Sueden by any other person, more particularly that by the Elector Palatine and the Duke of Lorrain touching their Nieces dowry (which they pretended the Kingdom of Sueden ought to take care of) but the matter went no further then words: the claim was published in print, and the King of Suedens answer also, denying the matter in fact: and alledging that if any thing had been formerly due, it was made void by that inhumane tyrannie, whereby the Tyrant forfeited all his Rights in Sueden for himself and his posterity. And declaring also, that now the publick re∣venues of the Crown of Sueden were otherwise setled and cannot be altered. After all this, the Kings second wife dies, leaving three sons and four daughters: her eldest son named John was afterward King of Sueden, after that the people had de∣posed Ericus the Kings eldest son for misgovernment: her second son Magnus, Duke of East-Gothland: her third son Charles Duke of Sudermania, who also was King upon the deposing of his Nephew Sigismund King of Poland, and after crowned also King of Sueden, but was after ejected by the people, because he would not maintain the liberties of Sueden, but advanced the Polish interest. And after Charles his death, his son Gustavus Adolphus suc∣ceeded in the Kingdom: and after him, his daughter Chri∣stina, who resigning the Government, Charles Gustavus son of Katharine, daughter to Charles, and half sister to Gustavus Adolphus married to one of the house of Casi∣mire, now reigneth. A brave posterity doubtless yet the King, though now stricken in years, cannot live un∣married but takes a third wife, Katharine daughter to Gu∣stavus Governor of West-Gothland. The wisdom, courage, and fortunate success of the King, now made famous amongst other nations, caused di∣vers applications to him from them for assistance; but he was ever wary of going beyond his own Orb.
It is an excellent point of skill in a Commander to know, when his strength hath attained its just bounds of conquest, and there stopping his desires of ginng more, to fix upon the good government of what he hath gotten. And it was one of the last advices given by Augustus to Tiberius,Dion. lib. 56: That he should not endeavour to augment the bounds of the Empire, lest he should find more difficulty in keeping, and less in losing what was gained. For the larger the borders are, the more opportunity is given to invasion from abroad, and rebellion at home. The conspiracy of Cati∣line will witness that, if Florus saith true. The wisdom and moderation of Gustavus is therefore worthy of ob∣servation, for though he wanted not men of war nor hope of success in further undertakings, having notwithstanding adventued for the delivery of his countrey from tyrannie, and accomplished it, he desireth no further happiness on earth, then to maintain what was done: Yet he was once overreached by the Livonians, who would once have com∣mitted themselves to his protection, but he refused, never∣theless being much endangered by the Muscovite, he sent aid to the Livonians, which engageing too forward, and the Livonians hanging behind, left the whole burthen up∣on the Suedes, who finding the Muscovite too heavy for them, and the Livonians heartless, or faithless, betimes withdrew their assistance, and made their own peace. The rest of his dayes the King spends at home, and call∣ing to mind the setlement of the Government upon his son Ericus, thinks it convenient to acquaint him with the man∣ner of Government in his own life time, and thereupon though late it was, viz. about sixteen years after the setle∣ment, and Ericus now nigh five and twenty years old he is made Governour of Calmar and Oland and the Coun∣trey adjoining. It hath been a policy in many Princes to be slow in ad∣vancing their eldest sonnes (that are designed to succeed them in government) into places of government. And it is not without cause, for in such cases especially in times
and places of darkness: for designed successors, if well gifted by nature or education may prove heads of parties and factions, and put the present Governors into much trouble; the one being looked upon as the rising Sun, and the other going down: and therefore such Successors are not usually very pleasing to Governors, who are guilty to themselves of miscarriages in government: they like not Civilia filiorum ingenia the politick or ingenious carriage of their successors,Tacit. An. lib. 2. as was said of Drusus. Yet it seemeth less beneficial to the people to be tried with a raw and un∣experienced Governor, who in such case is also generally yong and cannot govern himself: furthermore in all con∣scientious Governments, there will be less fear of factions considering that it is irrational, causelesly to quarrel at such a present Government, to set up another, whereof no expe∣rience at all is had. And therefore had Ericus been with longer experience in government, he might have either proved more advised by the over-ruling direction of his fa∣ther; or discovered such a temper, as he might never have been trusted, and so many troubles might have been prevent∣ed that ensued afterward. But it is in vain to call back things that are past away, time now drawes on apace that must determine the work of this great King: he had now governed the Nation of Sue∣den long, and seen many changes in other Nations, as well as in his own, and yet he must out-sit one more in Denmark before he leaves this world; and this was a second vacancy of the throne of Denmark, by the decease of Christian the third, and the Kingdom put to the hazard of another e∣lection, which concerned Sueden not a little, for still Chri∣stiern the captived King, was alive, and had another fair opportunity to try the courtesie of the Lords of Denmark: nevertheless the Danes being unanimous for the election of another Frederick son of the Duke of Holst, him they crown, and Christiern is still set aside. Unhappy man, that having lived as a prisoner seven and twenty years in his own Nation, could not in all this time, by his carriage,
gain no better opinion amongst the Nobility of Denmark, then still to remain under the note of an impenitent and obstinate Tyrant. It is the opinion of wise men, that the breach between the King and people, is like the divorce between man and wife, never to be made up again: and yet the difficulty lieth not in any determinate judgment, or rule upon the Case, as in that of Divorce (and therefore cometh not within the compass of impossibility) but in the distemper of the parties by ambition on the one side, and jealousie on the other; both hard to be cu∣red: yet the first leading the way to the second, if that be first allayed the second may be cured: and this Christiern might have observed if he had looked upon the example of Carolus Canutus his corrival in the Suedish throne; who being crowned King, and having fought against the Danes and Norwegians with great success, ruled somewhat too imperiously, and was ejected out of the Throne, yet after∣ward was re-admitted again, and ruled in that manner, that he died, as the Story saith,Soter. satisfied with honor and love of the people. But Christiern's temper was not so, he would fain come again into the Government, yet not under cor∣rection nor with submission, nor by leave, nor with love of his Nation, but depending still upon a foreign interest and power of the Emperor, who then was a true soldier in the Roman cause, is looked upon as an enemy, and his return as that of the unclean spirit, that will render the later con∣dition of the Nation seven-fold worse then the former. For he that is a King indeed, though wrongfully rejected, will still bear the mind of a King, to desire the peoples good, and endeavour to deserve their love: but he that dependeth upon the foreign interest of such as are enemies to the peoples li∣berty and religion professedly, disowneth interest in his people, and in that condition cannot rationally expect any re-acce∣ptance (if that Nations religion be right) either by the leave of God or liking of the people. Now whether Christiern took conceit at this election as seeing all hope quite gone of ever regaining any better
condition then what he was in, Writers do not mention, but he died soon after the election, and within one moneth after the death of Christiern the third, and in the seventy eighth year of his age. And Gustavus King of Sueden outlives him, and all these changes two years well nigh, sees his people in a setled condition for justice, religion, and peace, amongst themselves and with all their neighbors: thriving in trade, industrious in agriculture, and skilful in improving the benefit of their Mines, potent both at sea and land: himself blessed with repute, and honor from his own people and strangers, success in all his affairs, and a numerous off-spring. And having lived seventy years, and thereof passed thirty and eight years in Government, gives in charge to his children to endeavour the peace and maintaining of the liberties of their countrey, but especial∣ly the purity of relgion free from humane traditions: and to live as brethren in unity each with other, all which also as a memorial he left sealed up in his last will. So lived Gustavus or Augustus, for the name is one, that possibly minding him of imitation, made him exceed his pattern. His aimes outreached the Roman Empre, and were higher then the world; his difficulties and dan∣gers greater; his enemies more desperate by conjuncture of Divels; his labour and industry not unsuitable; his suc∣cess beyond all even to wonderment. If he came short of Augustus in time of Government,Dion lib. 56. (the difference was not much) yet he exceeded him in the manner: It being with such an excellent temper of Monarchy and popularity (as is said of Augustus) that he preserved the peoples liberty consistent with the honour of a King, and common securi∣ty without pride of tyrannie. The people living as well under the King without servitude as in a popular estate with∣out sedition, and yet attempted all unto just liberty of con∣science and unto the true worship and service of God; which he owned as the chief flower of his crown, and conveyed all unto his Successors by a better and more en∣during setlement then Augustus did, or could attain unto.
Yet is Augustus Deified by Historians,Eutrop. l. 7. some of whom conceal all faults, and make him Deo similis: Others note but one vice in him, that he was too familiar with his Sena∣tors wives, yet excuse him in that also, that it was not ex libidine from lust, but ex ratione from reason of State,Sueton. in vit. Aug. to gain intelligence from the wives of their husbands designes. I dare not extoll Gustavus to so high a pitch as the first, nor will I match him with the later. His worst enemies did never tax him in publick with any crime but covetous∣ness: and Thuanus a Writer of credit in those times (that noteth the same) gives no countenance thereto; nor did the patrimony left by the King, to his children speak forth any such thing, and therefore if any such thing were, I may also upon better grounds say it was ex ratione for the service of the State of Sueden; wherein if he spared not others, it is confessed of all that he spared not his own estate: his infirmities are common to other men, and must be acknow∣ledged vitia naturae, non animi; as infirmities of nature,Sueton. in vit. Tiberii. not of purpose of minde. Now if his fame rather did mount upward then spread wide: Thank the wiles of those times who liked not that the splendor of his reli∣gion should dazle their own, and pity the distempers of those dawnings, that knew not how to value that Morning∣at till it was set. It was Augustus his lot, after a long ign and honourable, to die, and yet Tum quidem pauci luxerunt, postea temporis omnes;Dion. lib. 5.6. for Tiberius succeeded him who was as wicked, as Augustus was good: and what ever the people thought of Gustavus while he lived, they afterward when Ericus came to reign, soon knew what it was to want their Gustavus: of whom I must con∣clude notwithstanding all that hath been or can be said that he died a King, a Patriot, a Knight, a Christian, true and unconquered, and now lives a monument of the truth of that golden sentence determined by the God of truth, Him that honour, them, I will honour. FINIS.
