s2724 16412482 105380
THE Triumphs of London. Performed on Saturday, Octob. 29. 1692. FOR THE Entertainment of the Right Honourable Sir John Fleet, Kt. LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. CONTAINING A True Description of the Several Pageants; with the Speeches Spoken on each PAGEANT. All set forth, at the proper Costs and Charges of the VVORSHIPFUL COMPANY of GROCERS. Together, with An Exact Relation of the most Splendid Entertainments, prepared for the Reception of Their Sacred MAJESTIES. By E. S. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed by James Orme; And are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1692.
To the RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir John Fleet, Kt. LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, AS it lies in my Duty to Congratulate Your Lordships Accession to the Pretorian Chair; amongst the many unquestion'd Merits that have promoted You to that Dignity, I must joyn with the Acclamations of all that have the Honour to know Your Lordship, that You stand so qualified for Magistracy, that I may truly say, in Your Advance to the Seat of Justice, You come Experienced to the Ballance You hold: Your Commerce with the World, and indeed Your whole Life has been such, that the Scales of Justice have been Your constant Standart. The Dealings of Your Lordship with all Mankind, have al∣ways stood that Test, That a hard Bargain, an Over-reach, a Rigour or Extremity, those too common, and indeed reputed Venials in Trade and Traffick, have been so utterly Stranger to You, that from Your Equality, down to the poorest Person concern'd with You, You never made a Murmurer. A hard Word of Sir John Fleet is a sound that never came near You Gates: The common Voice that speaks Your true Worth and Goodness is, without an Exception, Universal: And if 'tis possibl Your Lordship can have an Enemy, he that is so, must renounc common Humanity, and write Barbarian to qualifie for that Name
Your known Integrity has been so remarkably signal, that Chaffering or Factoring have been thought so unnecessary Preli∣minaries in dealing with Sir John Fleet, that 'tis enough You are the Mouth and Oracle both of Buyer and Seller: Equity and Justice are left to Your own Decree; insomuch that You sit Chancellor, when You trade Merchant. And, that so fair a Character of Your Lordship is no artful nor borrow'd Colours, but Your Natural and Substantial Com∣plexion; besides the Concurrence of all Tongues to give You this Right, we have the particular Smiles of Providence to joyn in the Testimonial; Your extraordinary Affluence of Bles∣sings, and so early and quick an Advance to such a Mass of Prosperity, being undoubtedly the peculiar Showrs of Heaven in Reward of so much deserving Virtue. But now, my Lord, to usher Your Lordship to Your Inaugu∣ration, and the publick Manifestation of the General Applause that waits Your Lordships Enstallment; here, as too humble an Intruder, I leave You to Your VVorthier Train of Vota∣ries. But, in all the Honours of the Day, the proudest of Your Triumph is Your Reception of Your Royal Guests; and the Richest of Their Feast, the hearty Zeal that entertains Them; it being indeed (to summ Your Merits) no little Pride to all Good Men, to have Two such Princes served by such a Magi∣strate: In which Post of Glory I leave Your Lordship, being in all Humility, MY LORD, Your Lordships most Dutiful Servant, E. SETTLE.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF GROCERS. Gentlemen, WHEN I appear before You, and, enter'd under so Spaci∣ous a Roof, presume on one Hand to survey the Worthy and Numerous Members of Your Honourable Society; or on the other hand the more large Extent of your Commerce and Traffick, (either of which Contemplations are a Province above me) I shall content my self to summ up my Speculation on so inviting a Subject, by giving You this Due. Gentlemen, The whole World is but your Garden, and Nature your Confectioner, whilst all the Richest Sweets and Spices, and all the Treasures of your own Phoenix Nest are so intirely Yours, that I may justly say, the softest Dew of Heaven falls for Your sakes, and the warmest Beams of Day smile and cherish for You, whilst the noblest Fruits and Products of the Earth only furnish your Granary: And if the Creation, since the shut Gates of Eden, and the flaming Sword before it, has any Remains of Paradice left, 'tis only in your Hands. To tell the World, how many Monarchs have vouchsafed to make themselves Members of the Grocers Company; for Instance, the Second Charles, and our present Gracious William, (not to mention the several Nobility that have been proud of being en∣roll'd in the same List) too plainly intimates your Particular
Worth and Deserts, when the Inclinations of so many Crown'd-Heads have singled out Your Favourite Society their Particular Election and Choice. And when we look into the Records of Your Numerous Pa∣trons and Benefactors, methinks they stand a perfect Emulation of Piety and Bounty. Nor has your own continued Splendour any ways derogated from the Luster of Your Great Founders. Your Magnificence, on all Occasions, sometimes perhaps even to a Fault, (if Glory can be one, and poor I may dare to call it so,) has ever been Extraordinary. And if the Particular Gallantry de∣sign'd for this Day fall any ways short of your Intended Enter∣tainment of his Lordship, the Misfortune lies only in the Short∣ness of the Preparation, occasion'd by his Lordships Translation to your Society, not early enough to supply the Artists Hands with Time sufficient for a more sumptuous Cavalcade. I have a very ample Feild before me; but in recounting the many Honorus so justly Your Due, alas! I make you but a very slender Oblation, when the Incense I offer is all your own; for the Grandeur of so Honourable a Company challenges both that Eminence and Antiquity, that the little Oratory of so poor a Pen, is but a very feeble Illustration to Merits and Virtues so Con∣spicuous. I shall therefore conclude, with only one hearty Wish: As You have been blest with so many Noble Founders, may the Honorable Living be inspired by the Example of the Great Dead; and may you never want, what You shall always deserve, the kindest of Benefactors: Which shall be the Prayer of, GENTLEMEN, Your most Devoted humble Servant, E. SETTLE.
The Movements of the Morning. Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company design'd for the Duty of the Day, meet at Grocers-Hall. 1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns saced with Foins, and their Hoods. 2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg▪ and their Hoods. 3. Forty Foyns Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his Shoulder, and a White Staff in his Hand. 6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company in their Hats, Crimson and White. 7. The Serjeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, wherof Sixteen are their Majesties, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Crimson; and a White. 8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies Colours, with others of Their Ma∣jesties Drums and Fifes. 9. The Two City Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horse-back, with Rich Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroider'd: Six Servitors likewise Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colours of the Companies. 10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six attendants in Colours. 11. The Master of Defence with the same Scarf and Co∣lours, Eight Persons of the same Science to attend him.
12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employ'd in carrying Standards and Banners. This order'd, and accommodated, they are commited to the management of the Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in seven Divisions, and rank'd all two by two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard-Bearers. In the head of them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentle∣men, bearing the Companies Arms. In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the deceased Benefactors. In the Center of them, fall two Drums. In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats, bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesties, the other of the Companies. After them Six Gentlemen-Ushers, follow'd by the Budg-Batchelors. The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Batchelors. In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen one bearing my Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and and after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division. The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs, Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear. In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Grocers-Hall, where the Lord Mayor Elect attend∣ed from Clothworkers Hall joyns with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all of them in this Order march through Kingstreet down to Three Crane-Wharf, there en∣tring into their several Barges which are gloriously adorn∣ed with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship and this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the
Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremo∣nial and Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths to Their Majesties, he returns again by Water to Black-Fryers-Stairs, with Drums Beating, Trumpets Sounding, Musick Play∣ing, &c. There his Lordship, and the several Companys Landing from their Respective Barges, the rest of the Attendents that went not to Westminster, waiting for his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap-side, where his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant. The First Pageant. ON a Large Stage is mounted a Golden Camel upon a Pedestal most richly Ornamented, with Carved Works of Gold and Silver, being a proper Basis for so Noble a Creature, as the Honourable Crest of the Worshipful Com∣pany of GROCERS. On the Back of this Magnificent Creature, between two Frails of Fruits, as Raisins, and Almonds, Dates, Spices, and Gumms of all sorts, sits a Negro habited according to the Indian Manner, in one Hand the King's Banner, with the other liberally distributing the Bountiful Product of his Country, his Bridle and Trappings being Crimson, as the proper Colours of the Ancient Company of GROCERS. On a Descent beneath, sits placed four Cardinal Virtues, Justice, Temperance, Prudence, and Fortitude, Habited with their proper Ornaments; as Justice in a Robe of white S lk to shew her Innocency; in one Hand a large Banner of my Lords Arms, in the other a Sword of Justice, and a pair of
Golden Scales; which Young Virgin makes a Speech to the Lord Mayor, as his first Entertainment in Cheapside. The reason why Justice is exprest by a Young Virgin, to shew that Judges and Administrators of the Law ought to be Incorrupt and free from Bribes, Partiality, or Flattery, but constant and sincere. On the four Corners of the Stage are Erected four Pyra∣mids of Honour, Ornamented with the Coats of Arms of the Worthy Benefactors and Freemen of the Virtuous Company of GROCERS, as a true Emblem of their Ju∣stice and Piety. The Speech Spoken by JƲSTICE. BEhold Proud Londons Great Praetorian Lord Commands at once my Ballance, and my Sword. Yes, Sir, with Triumph I my Wreaths resign: So well my Chaplets must Those Brows entwine. Justice to You must Tributary be: My Ballance weighs the World, and You weigh Me. Justice!— How nobly must you fill that Sphear, When Sacred William mounts and Plants You there? When Greatness, Honour, Truth, so all Divine, 'Tis He that lends those Rays with which you shine; Whilst from his Hand You hold Your rolling Year, Drive on, Great Sir, a Glorious Charioteer. A Fairer Circle You can never run, Nor can You borrow from a Warmer Sun.
The Two following Pageants. ARe Two Griffons, erected on two large Stages, being the Antient Supporters of the Arms of the Company of GROCERS, Elaborated, Guilded, and Painted ac∣cording to their proper Bearings. On the Backs of these two stately Creatures, between their Wings sit mounted on two large Frails of Fruit and Spice, two Tawny Moors richly adorned, and array'd in choice Indian Silks, the Ha∣bit befitting the Degree and Quality of the Figures, in all the gayest Finery suitable to the Occasion. In their Right Hands they hold the King's Bannor, and the Cities; in their Left, a Shield, with the Arms of the Company. On their Heads are Coronets of Feathers, beset with Pearls and Jewels. On the 8 Corners of the two Stages, sit eight Figures, inti∣mating eight more Virtues, as Love and Honour, Industry and Vigilance, Truth and Mercy, Hope and Piety. All Habited according to the Ancients Description, with Bannors Flying, and Trumpets Sounding, in Honour to the Worthy Magi∣strate, the Right Honourable Sir John Fleet.
The Fourth Pageant. The Triumphal Temple of PALLAS. THis Temple is most exquisitly contrived, and beauti∣fied with all the Ornaments and Embellishments ima∣ginable, the Composure of the Fabrick being of the most stately Ancient Architecture. In the Contrivance of this Temple are four Arches or Neiches, wherein are placed four Figures, Representing four Poetical Deities, all most richly Habited. First Pallus the Goddess of Wisdom, Arts and Arms, ac∣cording to her three Titles of Pallas, Minerva and Bellona; her Habit is a Robe of Purple, with a Silver Head-piece, and a plume of Red and White Feathers; in her Right Hand she holds a Banner of the City-Arms, and in her Left a Spear and Shield charged with a Gorgons Head. The second Figure is Neptune the God of the Sea, in a Sea-green silken Robe, his Coronet of Shells and Corals, in one Hand the King's-Banner, in the other a Trident, in∣timating his Soveraignty of the Seas. The third Figure Thetis the Goddess of the Sea, in a watchet colour silk Robe, and a Coronet of Flowers. The fourth Figure is Mercury the God of Wit in a Sky∣colour'd Robe, on his Head a Silver Cap with two small Silver Wings, in one Hand his Caduce, in the other the Banner of the Companies.
The whole Temple is Dedicated to the Honour of the GROCERS, in intimating these four Gods and Goddesses, the Wisdom and Wit requisite for the Management of their Traffick through all parts of the Universe; and the Ocean the proper Scene of their Commerce, as importing from thence all their Spices and Fruits from the remotest Planta∣tions of the World. And the whole likewise applicable to his Lordship, the Goddess of Wisdom being the principal Figure in the Front of the Temple, implying the necessity of Wisdom to preside at the Helm, in governing the Metro∣polis of England. The Speech spoken by PALLAS. WHen Arts, Arms, Wisdom, in one Goddess joyn, By such proud Attributes enstall'd Divine, How bright must the Illustrious Pallas shine? But hold; why do I fill this borrow'd Throne? And arrogate those Plumes are not my own? To You, Great Sir, I all my Laurels owe; Thy're only Plants which from Your Garden grow. Arts Glorious Patron, and their Founder too, Are Titles, Sir, alone belong to You. Arms too are Yours. Does the shrill Trumpet sound To Battle? is the conquering Heroe Crown'd! Tis Wealth, the Nerve of War, the Soldier fires, And the Rich City the rough Camp Inspires.
And Wisdom, Sir, that's doubly Yours, that fair And brightest Jewel that adorns Your Chair; The Merit that advanc'd, and fixt You there. Let that, Great Magistrate, Your Councils guide, And win all Hearts, the Cities Love and Pride. Then, what Rich Blessings from Your power shall flow? For, Oh, what Wonders cannot Wisdom do! When Wisdom steers the Helm, and rules the Stage, She Plants a Golden, 'midst an Iron, Age. Hence the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, the Aldermen and this whole Honourable Train, move to Guildhall; where they finish the Triumphs of the Day, in the Honour they re∣ceive of attending on Their Majesties at Dinner. The Preparations for whose Reception, are as follows. UPon the Hustings, at the Upper-end of the Hall, is erected a stately Structure of the Corinthian Order. This Structure is supported first by two noble Columns of Aegyptian Marble, whose Bases and Capitals are Gold. On the top of these are advanced two Pyramids of Mo∣dern Trophies, as Banners, Head-pieces, &c. Between these two Columns is planted an Arch, on which is erected the King's-Arms, in a most noble Shield, with Festoons of Silver on each side, and the Cities Arms be∣neath it.
On the Right and Left of these Columns, stand four Pilasters of Lapis Lazari, with Capitals and Bases of Gold, Ornamented with Festoons and Shields of Silver. On the tops of these Pilasters are erected Neptune and Pallas. On the other two Pilasters, are two Pyramids of Ancient Military Trophies, as Helmets, Plumes, Bows, Qui∣vers, &c. Over all is a large Etableture of Silver, in the middle of which, between the Pilasters and Columns, are planted eight Shields, or Targets, bearing the Arms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, interchanged. The other four, the Kings, the Cities, the Lord Mayors, and the Grocers, likewise interchanged. Round the Columns are twisted this Motto, relating to the Poetical Story of Perseus and Andromeda. Huc volat, hoc fugat, hanc solvens cupiente potitur. Thus Englisht. Hither he flew, this Monster he destroy'd, And his dear Care the grateful Nymph enjoy'd. On the Front of all, annext to the Etableture, are four Shields. Two of which contain the King and Queens Effigies, and the other two the late Memorable Fight at Sea, with these Motto's.
FIDEI STATORES. Thus Paraphrased, T' our Faiths Defenders let our Homage bow, Those Titular Names are solid Glories now. Imperium Oceano Famam non terminet Astris. Let the wide Ocean his Dominion bound, But his loud Fame beyond the Stars resound. Nassoviae nil non efficient Manus. What Glories are for Nassau's Arms decreed, His own Steel Pen shall Write, and Ages Read. In the two Naval Targets, under the French Fleet, is writ∣ten this Motto. Extincto sole, victâ invincibili. When Power meets Pride, thus Insolence pursu'd, Their Sun extinct, Invincible subdu'd. Under this Structure adorned with all other state and Magnificence suitable, Dine their Majesties and the Ladies of the Bed-chamber. On Their Right Hand, on the Northside of the Hall, on a rais'd Work sumptuously cover'd, Dine the Foreign A∣gents, and Principal Ministers of State.
On Their Left, on a rais'd Work, equally adorned, Dine Their Majesties Privy Council, and the other Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal. On a second rais'd Work, on the same side, are seated the Commissioners of the Treasury and Custom-House, &c. Right over-against Their Majesties Table, at the West end of the Hall, sit the Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and beneath, on either hand, Dine the Livery. In the Lord Mayors Court above, Dine the Lady May∣oress, and the Aldermens Ladies: And after Them, at the same Table, new spread, are the Queens Maids of Honour are entertain'd. In the Old Council-Chamber, are seated all the Judges and Serjeants at Law. And in the Orphans Court, all the Clerks and their Retinue. And in the Irish Chamber, all those Honourable Atten∣dants that wait on the King at Dinner. The Entertainment is furnish'd with three Sets of Musick, Their Majesties private Musick on a scaffold over the Hustings: The King's and City Musick in the Gallery of the Hall, and the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, &c. on a stage at the Lower end of the Hall, the Serjeant-Trumpet on all occasions giving the Signal to the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums of Their Majesties and the Lord Mayor's Health, from either Table.
Having thus far introduced my Reader into this glitter∣ing Scene of Gallantry, I shall not pretend to give him any farther Particulars, either in setting forth the Tables, or Marshalling the Dishes: I'le omit that unnecessary Relation. I believe there needs but little Description of that Feast, where the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, and the Court of Al∣dermen, &c. are the Founders. I leave my Reader there∣fore to his own Imagination to think, how such Royal Guests may be entertain'd by such Inviters. But among these gay and Jovial Guests I had almost for∣gotten a very important part of our Good Company, viz. the numerous Crowd of Gazers and Spectators of both Sexes, who though not altogether so well provided for, as the other seated Guests, and perhaps their Mouths go not so chearfully, will have nevertheless all the rest of their Senses so highly Banqueted, that undoubtedly they will receive that intire content and satisfaction, as to depart with little less than the whole Pleasure and Riot of a perfect Fe∣stival. And, Gentlemen, You that do me the Honour to peruse this short, but exact Narration I have here made you, be∣ing indeed no more than the Feast in Miniature, were I that Artist, as Apelles with his Grapes, to give your well pleas'd Fancy any Relish or Taste of so glorious an Entertainment, I should not a little pride my self, in adding my Readers to the Number of the Guests. Here leaving the City to their Pride and Glory, in their humblest Tenders of their Loyalty and Zeal to their Royal Guests, and Their Majesties Themselves to the unquestion'd Delight they shall receive from the Loyal Hearts and Knees
that wait them there; in all this Splendour, and all the Ho∣nour and Quality that swell the Grandeur of the Day; I beg the Readers leave, in drawing to a Conclusion, to thrust in my self so far a Sharer and Participater of the Feast, as to joyn both with the Guests and Spectators in, at least, one of the chearfullest parts of the Entertainment, viz. in the Universal Acclamations of Long Live our Gracious Soveraigns, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; And ever Flourish the Honourable City of LONDON. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. FAtal Friendship: Or, the Drunkards Misery. Being a Satyr against that Pernicious Vice of Excessive and Hard Drinking. With the Dangerous Consequences attend∣ing it, both as to Body and Soul: Offer'd to the Considera∣tion of all; but more especially, the Younger sort. Written by way of Essay, by the Author of The Search after Claret. Printed for and sold by Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. Price Stitch'd, Six Pence.
