S3659 12745519 93247
The SUBSTANCE of Sir Bartholomew Shower's SPEECH At the Guild-Hall, Exon, August 19th, 1698. UPON Declaring the Poll for the Burgesses of that City Elected, to Serve in this Present Parliament. Gentlemen, I Am sorry that Sir Edward Seymore, my Partner, is not here present, to excuse me from this trouble of making you a publick Address of Thanks: I am sure 'twou'd be then much better perform'd. I am never found of speaking any thing in my own business, or con∣cerning my self; much less in so publick a manner, and upon such an occasion. However, since something of this kind is expected from me, I hope you will permit me to thank Mr. Sheriff for his Justice and Patience, the Clerks for their Pains and Care, and the Triers, Inspecters and Managers for their Temper and good Manners. I must own, I never knew more Civility, and less ill Usage, in such a troublesom Affair, and where each Party is hearty and zealous for its Principle and Interests; unless it were from One, whom I must publickly take notice of, One of my own Profession, who intruded himself into the Court with a Lye in his Mouth, pretending to be a Free-holder, which he was not, was busie here beyond the Rules of Decency, and afterwards sneak'd out of Court towards the End of the Poll; he is, I suppose, a Gentleman well known, and therefore I need not name him; but shall ever re∣member him according to his Deserts. Gentlemen, I am likewise to take notice of some Reflections, maliciously and falsly cast upon me; particularly in that scandalous Libel, or Queries, posted at the Guild-Hall; a base, mean and unmanly way of injuring a Gentleman's Reputation. It hath been insinuated, as if I was a Papist; whereas I never was present, or ever heard Mass in my Life time. I was in the Service of the Late King, but so far from being a Pa∣pist, that I constantly was a Communicant in the Church of England; and never cou'd, nor e∣ver shall believe Pope Pius's Creed. It was pretended, to my Prejudice, as if I had been eclined to the Eighteen-Penny-Act. I thank God, the Church of England hath a competent Support, and I pray for its Conti∣nuance; but cannot well in that manner wish 'em more, least it encrease the Envy against it, which is more than enough already: Tho' the Motion was made to Me, I thought it very Improper and Ʋnseasonable, and so declar'd, especially at a Time, when the People la∣bour under such, and so great Taxes and Payments, as they are hardly able to bear: The Report therefore was Malicious and False. They have farther Reflected on Me as a Council, and as Pleading for Traytors; I have done it, and with such Manners, as never disgusted my Superiors: And it has been acknow∣ledg'd to be for the Honour of the King and Government, to permit a fair and favourable Hearing of Council in all Cases. There is no Reason that the Principles or Actions of Cli∣ents, should be imputed to the Council that plead for 'em; I am sure it is not so esteem'd A∣bove, or in other Places: 'Tis the greatest Commendation that can be of the Present Go∣vernment, that there have been no Reflections or Hardships upon any Council, that have ap∣peared in any Criminal Cause whatsoever. Those Men have been reckon'd the Greatest and Lest amongst the Romans who undertook to defend Persons under Prosecution: Sure I am, 'tis a much more difficult Province to Defend, than 'tis to Accuse; and I hope the People are by this time satisfied that I was in no Fault upon that Account. Again, they have said in their Malice, that I was Consenting to the taking off the Penal Laws and Test: 'Tis False, and I was never so much as Clossetted to that Purpose. I was a Servant to the late Ʋnhappy King; but I hope 'tis no Reflection upon any Person to be True to his Trust. Had I been in the Service of this King, I shou'd have been as True; and as I am now to serve My Country and the King, I will be True to both, and Zealous in their Ser∣vice to the utmost of my Power. As to the other Little Reflections, I cannot value 'em so much as to allow 'em an Answer, but must despise 'em: I cou'd Recriminate, but think it better to forbear. I can guess who wrote the Queries, and from whence they came: One of the Candidates of the other side is so Good a Man that He freely gave his Vote for Me to be His and Your Representative, and therefore He cou'd not be the Author.
And now as to my Business you send me about: I cou'd wish that you cou'd and wou'd Poll again, for the ascertaining Your Opinions, and acquainting Me what I am to do. I wou'd willingly undergo Three such Days Fatigue more, or stay till the beginning of the Session to know your Sentiments: And Gentlemen, I shall never Vote contrary to your General In∣clinations, unless I can render you a satisfactory Reason why I do so. There are but Three Things that can be of Concernment; Religion, Government and Trade. As to Religion, by the little Conversation I have had in This Place of late, tho' I was Born and Bred among you, and many of you were my School fellows, even till my Age of Seventeen Years, yet that is some time since. Therefore, I say, by the Conversation I have had with you of late, I take it to be your general Sentiment, that the National Esta∣blish'd Church of England, is the best in the World, and the most Necessary, in respect of Publick Government; its Doctrine the most Rational and Primitive, its Publick Liturgy the best fram'd, to Raise and to Express Devotion; and I challenge any Man to shew me any Words so likely to inspire Mens Minds with Fervor and Zeal, as the Magnificat and Te Deum. In This Church I have been a Constant Communicant, ever since the Eighteenth Year of my Age; but yet I must declare (notwithstanding the false Imputation of it to our Church) that my Opinion is against Persecution; and if some differ from me, whom I do respect and value; I hope they will not think it my Fault, but my Misfortune. I cannot forbear thinking that no Man shou'd suffer for acting according to his Conscience, in Mat∣ters meerly Religious: I am for Liberty of Conscience to those, who for Real Conscience cannot comply; But I cannot much respect those Men who pretend to such a Scrupulous Conscience, and yet can Occasionally Communicate with us, on purpose to Qualifie themselves for an Office. I tell you therefore, that I am not for taking away the Toleration as it is Limited in the Ex∣ercise of it by the Laws of the Land, tho' that has been industriously Spread Abroad throughout the Town, as if nothing were design'd but the Silencing of those Ministers: No, My Aim is only to Maintain the Church, as now supported and fenc'd; and I wish and hope, that the Dissenters will now be satisfied with This, since 'tis That, and That only, which for Twenty or Thirty Years together, They have Pray'd for, and Desir'd. We hope there∣fore, that They will be content with it; and that all of us may be Happy. As to the Government, The best we can do is to serve it, by Obedience to the Laws; and to prevent Taxes as much as possible, unless they are of Publick Necessity to preserve the Whole; and in case Taxes are so necessary, to take care that they be Laid Equally, and with as little Burthen to Trade as can be, which puts me in Mind of saying something to That. And here, I hope, I shall agree with You, and You with Me, That Trade is not to be forc'd or restrain'd, but ought to have its Full Liberty. That 'tis the Interest of this King∣dom in General, as well as of this Country, that Ireland shou'd be humbled. Not that the Country shou'd be Drown'd, or the People Massacre'd (such Desires are very unsuitable to an English Temper) but that a Check be put to their bold Attempts for turning The Wool∣len Manufacture out of its Old Channel, by removing it from Hence, Thither. It must of ne∣cessity Impoverish Us, and I wonder our Gentry are not more sensible of the Danger; for 'twill unavoidably lessen the Value of their Lands. Trade and Rents must be Equally En∣couraged; It is therefore the Interest of Every body to Mind this Matter, as well as of Those who are actually concern'd in the Managery of Trade. These, I presume, are Your Thoughts, They are Mine, I assure You, and shall be follow'd unless You contradict it: And if at any time, any thing material should be communicated from any Body or Number of Men among You, in this Place, I shall endeavour to advance it, or convince You that 'tis either not Practicable, or Unreasonable. Tho' I am to be go∣vern'd by my Own Judgment in my Vote, Yet if I can make it comply with the Thoughts of those whom I Represent in the House of Commons, I shall always be glad of it; for in some respects I take my self to be Your Advocate, and I am to do what You wou'd do if Your O∣pinions were known. I have one thing more to take Notice of, it's that which is extreme∣ly to my Satisfaction: Not only that This Election is so Fair, Regular, and Free; but that I came in by the Interest of The Church of England, and by the Chamber of this City, as well as by the hearty Endeavours of the good Trading People here; and I may add, with the Ge∣neral Approbation of the Gentry of Devon, as well as the good Will of The Right Reve∣rend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of this Diocess, who is much Your Friend, and has us'd his utmost endeavours for the Promotion of the Wool-Bill: I was an Eye and Ear witness of it; I was present with Him from Nine till One for several days together, four or five days a Week, for a long time. His Labours were great as was his Zeal for Your service: and I am morally assur'd that He will repeat His Endeavours the Next Sessions, and so will I with all my Heart, and shall be very warm as long as I am in Your service to promote the good of this City, the Place of my Birth and Education. And God preserve King Wil∣liam, and the City of Exeter. LONDON, Printed for M. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick-Lane.
