S3963 09581357 43713
Epithalamium, OR Solomons Song: Together with the Songs of Mo∣ses, EXOD. 15. & DEUT. 32. The Song of DEBORAH, Judges 5. The Song of HANNAH, 1 SAMUEL 2. The Churches Song. Isa. 26. Digested into a known and familiar Meeter, BY SAMUEL SLATER LONDON, Printed by I. Moxon, for William Luggr, at the Postern by Tower-hill, and Livewel Chapman, in Popes-head Alley, 1653.
January 17th MDCLII. Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL,
To my dearly beloved Friends and Fellow-members, the Inhabitants of Katharines Tower, and others, who are called to hold communion together in the Ordi∣nances of the Gospel. IT is a disputing age wherein we live, abounds with Controversies; Religion in the Practicals, yea in the Doctrinals and fundamentals of it, is by adversaries loudly alarum'd, and hotly charg'd; even that which in Paul's account was beyond the line of Controversie, is yet at this day brought within the lists. And if the foun∣dations be undermined, it's no wonder that that which is superstructory hath strong Battery made against it. Such is the present condition of the Ordinance and exercise of sing∣ing. Some endeavour the invalidating of its authority, by Arguments framed against it: Others discourage from the practise, by reproches and scorns cast upon it, and upon those helps which have been afforded for the managing of it; making no more account of the composures of holy men of God, famous in their generations, then of loose Poems, and profane Jigs. Let such take heed lest they be found under a malignant influence, and acted by an Antichristian spirit, blaspheming God and his Temple, his holy Institutions, and them that attend them. A Vindication of this blessed Or∣dinance and exercise, hath been made by M. Cotton of
New England, M. Manton, on Jam: the 5th, and of very late days, by M. Ford of Exon; who have all appear'd in a Polemical way, and militated in this behalf: And I do heartily wish there were better improvement made of such Provisions, and that the Saints would not suffer themselves to fall under a suspension from practising Gospel Duties, meerly upon this account, that they are questioned and contradicted; that they would not fall off from them, be∣cause others fall foul upon them. My business at present is, to promote the practise of that which my self and others have so justly pleaded for. I engaged at first to deal with Solomon's Song, that mysterious Marriage Song; moved thereunto by considering the sutableness of it to Sacramen∣tal Communion. Having performed that task, and com∣municated my papers to some of my Learned Brethren, they perswaded me in like manner to deal with some other Scriptural Songs, and so make them publike. Accordingly I have digested the Songs of Moses, Exod. 15. Deut. 32. The Song of Deborah, Judg. 5. The Song of Hannah, 1 Sam. 2. and the Churches Song, Isa. 26. into a familiar Meeter; and in all, have endeavoured to keep as close as I possibly could, to the letter of the Bible. If what I have done may be in the least to the honour of God, and your ad∣vantage, I have my aym. It is the priviledge that Christ our blessed Redeemer hath purchased for you, and others of his Saints that when his enemies shall weep and howl, you and they shall sing and rejoyce. It shall be my Prayer for you and them, that when others shall lament and mourn for the destruction of Babylon, Rev. 18. you may be counted worthy to stand on Mount Sion, and sing the Song of Mo∣ses, and of the Lamb. SAMUEL SLATER.
The Song of Solomon. CHAP. I. THe Song of Songs, which is Solomons. The kisses of his gracious mouth, O let him grant to me; For why? thy love I do account better then wine to be. Through savor of thine oyntments good, even so thy name doth prove As oyntment poured out, therefore the Virgins do thee love. O draw thou me, and after thee then will we run apace; Into his Chambers did the King conduct me, through his grace. We will be glad, and joy in thee; remembring more then wine Thy love: and as for Upright ones, their love is surely thine. O Daughters of Jerusalem, though black, yet am I fair, And comly; like as Kedar Tents, and Solomon's Curtains are.
Look not on me, because in state of blackness ye me see; Because the sun with scortching heat hath looked upon me. My mothers children angry were, and on me they did frown; A Vineyard-keeper they me made: I did not keep mine own. O thou whom with my soul I love, do thou to me make known Where thou dost feed, and make thy flocks to rest themselvs at noon. Alas my love, why should I be as one that turns aside By flocks of thy companions, and so with them abide? If thou know'st not (O fairest one) by steps of flocks make speed; Beside the shepherds tents, thy kids thou maist with safety feed. O thou on whom my love is set, I have compared thee To company of horses which in Pharaoh's Charets be. Thy cheeks do beautiful appear, with rows of jewels set; With chains of finest gold also full comly is thy neck. We wil prepare for thee (who dost so beautiful appear) Borders of gold, and silver studs, which shall be for thy wear. While that the King in royal state doth at his Table sit;
Then doth my Spikenard send abroad the smell thereof full sweet. A bundle of refreshing myrrhe is my Belov'd to me; And even so between my brests lie all the night shall he. My wel-beloved is to me even such as now I show, As Camphire clusters, which within Engedi's vinyards grow. Behold my love, for thou art fair, lo thou (my love) art fair: Thy beauty in thine eyes appears, yea like Doves eyes they are. Behold (beloved) thou art fair, so do I thee esteem; Yea very pleasant for delight, also our bed is green. Our house, yea ours, not mine a∣lone with Cedar beams is staid, The rafters also which it hath, even they of Fir are made.
2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then wine. 3. Because of the favour of thy good oyntments; Thy name is as ointment poured forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee; the King hath brought me into his chambers: We will be glad and rejoyce in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine, the upright love thee. 5. I am black, but comly (O ye daughters of Ieru∣salem) as the Tents of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.
6. Look not upon me because the Sun hath looked upon me. My Mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the vin∣yards, but mine own vinyard have I not kept. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loveth) where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flocks to rest at noon; for why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy compani∣ons. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest among wo∣men) go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents 9. I have compared thee (O my love) to a com∣pany of horses in Phara∣chs Chariots. 10. Thy cheeks are comly with rows of jew∣els, thy neck with chains of gold. 11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver.
12. While the King sitteth at his Table,  my Spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof. 13. A bundle of Myrrhe is my well-beloved unto me; he shall ly all night betwixt my brests. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Cam∣phire, in the vinyards of Engedi. 15. Behold, thou art fair my love, behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves eies. 16. Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant also our bed is green. 17. The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of Fir.
CHAP. II. I Am the fair and pleasant Rose, in Sharon fields I grow: Yea I likewise the Lilly am of Valleys, that are low. As is the Lilly, when among the thorns it doth appear; Among the daughters so is she that is my love, my dear.
As Apple-tree among the trees that in the wood have place, So is my love among the sons, excelling them in grace. Under his shade with great delight I sate, and was refresht: His fruit likewise I found to be most sweet unto my taste. Unto the house of Banquetting he did me also lead; And there the banner of his love he over me did spread. O stay me now with Flagons, and with Apples comfort me; For I am sick, yea sick of love I finde my self to be. His left hand (my beloved one) under my head hath plac't; And by his right hand I am now most lovingly embrac't. O Daughters of Jerusalem, I give you this in charge; Even by the Roes, and by the Hindes, of fields that are so large: That ye take heed ye stir not up my love, who takes his ease; And that you do not him awake until himself shall please. The voice of my beloved, lo upon the mountains he Comes leaping, and upon the hills comes skipping towards me. Like Roe, or Hart, behold my love behind our wall doth stand:
He looks through window, shews him self through lattess neer at hand. And my beloved thus did speak, to me thus did he say; Thou that my love, and fair one art, arise, and come away. For why? behold the winter time is gone and over-past; The rain likewise which did descend, is ceas'd, and doth not last. The flowers appear upon the earth the birds do sing with chear; Their time is come: within our land Vines the Turtle's voice we hear. The Fig-tree yeilds green figs, the which tender grapes do bear, Do give good smell; arise my love, and come away, my fair. O thou (my dove) that in the rock and clefts thereof dost bide: Thou that in secret places of the stayrs, thy self dost hide. Thy countenance let me behold; thy voice eke let me hear: For sweet and pleasant is thy voice, thy countenance is clear. Take us the Foxes, yea, I say, the little Foxes take; For that our vines have tender grapes whereof a spoyl they make. My wel-beloved he is mine, and I likewise am his: The place where he doth please to feed, among the Lillies is.
Until the day do break, and till shaddows away do fly; Turn love, and be like Roe or Hart, on Bether mountains high.
1. I am the Rose Sha∣ron, and the Lilly of the Vallies. 2. As the Lilly among thorns, so is my love a∣mong the daughters.
3. As the Apple-tree a∣mong the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons; I sate down under his shaddow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. 4. He brought me to the banquettiag house, and his Banner over me was love. 5. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me. 7. I charge you (O ye Daughters of Ierusalem) by the Roes and by the Hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he pleases. 8. The voice of my be∣loved, behold he cometh leaping upon the moun∣tains, kipping upon the hills.
9. My beloved is like a Roe, or a young Hart, be∣hold, he standeth behind  our wall, shewing himself through the lattess. 10. My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away. 11. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone. 12. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land. 13. The Fig-tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell; Arise my love, my fair one, and come away. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the stayrs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comly. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines, for our vines have tender grapes. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, he feedeth among the Lillies.
17. Until the day break, and the shaddows flee a∣way; turn my beloved, & be thou like a Roe, or a young Hart upon the mountains of Bether. CHAP. III. BY night on bed I sought my love, whom I do chiefly mind; Him did I seek, and yet, alas! I sought, but did not finde. Now will I rise, and round about the City will I go: In streets, and in the broadest waies, there I my self will show. Him will I seek, whom with my soul I love; he is my dear: I sought, and when I had so done, yet did he not appear. The City Watchmen did me find, of them I did enquire, If they had seen, or could inform of my beloved dear. It was a very little that from watchmen I was past; But him I found my soul so loves, and then I held him fast, And would not let him go, until I brought him for to see My Mothers house, and chambers where she had conceived me. O daughters of Jerusalem, I give you this in charge;
Even by the Roes, and by the Hinds of fields that are so large; That ye take heed ye stir not up my love, who takes his ease; And that you do not him awake until himself shall please. But who is this that cometh out from wilderness afar, Appearing like to pillars, that of smoak composed are; Sweetly perfum'd with costly myrrhe with frankincense likewise, And all the Powders Merchant men do make their merchandise? Behold his bed which Sol'mons is threescore that are both stout And valiant men of Israel, do stand it round about. They all hold swords, being skild in war, and ev'ry man of might With sword upon his thigh, because of terror in the night. A Princely Chariot was prepar'd by Solomon the King: Made of the wood that in the mount of Lebanon doth spring. The pillars which he made there∣to, of silver pure they were; The bottom also which it had was made of gold most clear: Of costly purple eke there was a covering made above For daughters of Jerusalem, paved in midst with love.
O ye that Sions daughters are, do ye go forth and see King Solomon, who with his crown which appears in dignity. Crowned I say with Crown, the he from his mother had In day of spousals, and the day wherein his heart was glad.
1. By night on my bed, I sought him whom my soul loveth; I sought him, but I found him not. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways; I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not. 3. The Watchmen that go about the City, found me; to whom I said, saw ye him whom my soul loveth? 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth; I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers House, and into the chamber of her that con∣ceived me.
5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalem,  by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please. 6. Who is this that com∣eth out of the Wilder∣ness like pillars of smoke perfumed with myrrhe and frankincense, with all powders of the mer∣chant? 7. Behold his bed which is Solomons, threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. 8. They all hold swords, being expert in war; e∣very man hath his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night. 9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon. 10. He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bot∣tom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love for the daughters of Jerusalem.
11. Go forth (O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown where∣with his mother crowned him, in the day of his E∣spousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. CHAP. IV. BEhold my love, for thou art fair, lo thou art fair, my dear; Thou hast also Doves eyes, which do within thy locks appear. Like to a flock of goats, which do on Gilead mountain feed, And thence appear, so is the hair which is upon thy head. Thy teeth likewise within thy mouth they also do appear Like flock of sheep that's even shorn, being washed, and made clear. All which are fruitful and no less then twins they bear each one; Among them all a barren sheep cannot be found, not one. Thy lips like scarlet thred, thy speech from thee doth comly flow, Thy temples in thy locks, like to piece of Pomgranate show. Thy neck is like an Armory, such as was David's Tower;
A thousand Bucklers hang thereon, all shields of men of power. Thy brests, even both, to two young Roes I have compar'd indeed; Which are both twins, and likewise do among the lillies feed. Until the breaking of the day, and shaddows get them hence; I'le get me to the mounts of Myrrhe, and hill of Frankincense. I said before of thee my love, and so I say again; Thou art all fair, and not a spot there doth in thee remain Come thou with me from Lebanon from Lebanon with me My spouse: from top of Amana look with thine eyes and see. Yea from the top of Shenir look, and Hermon hill likewise; From Lions dens, and eke the mount of Leopards, cast thine eyes. My Sister, thou hast ravished my heart; my spouse most dear: Yea, with one ey; one chain that doth about thy neck appear. How fair, my sister, is thy love? my spouse, how fair to me? Yea, how much better is thy love, then any wine can be? And how much better is the smell (my spouse) which doth arise Out of thine ointments, then the smel of any kinde of spice?
O thou my spouse, thy lips drop down as honey comb apace: Honey and milk under thy tongue are found to have their place. The smelling of the garments eke the which thou puttest on, May well for sweetness be compar'd to smell of Lebanon. A garden that enclosed is, so is my sister dear; My spouse a spring shut up and seal'd even as a fountain clear. An Orchard of Pomgranates are the plants in thee that grow; Camphire, with spikenard, which are sweet are fruits that from thee flow. Spikenard, and Saffron, Calamus, and Cinamon likewise; All trees of Frankincense and myrrh, Aloes, and all chief spice. A fountain eke of gardens, and a well of waters clear; Yea living streams also that do from Lebanon appear. Awake O north wind, come thou south upon my garden blow; That by this means the spices which it beareth, out may flow. And now let my beloved come into his garden fair, And eat his fruits, yea such as to his taste most pleasant are.
1. Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair; thou hast Doves eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of Goats that appear from mount Gilead. 2. Thy Teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which came up from the washing, whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among them. 3. Thy lips are like a thred of Scarlet, and thy speech is comly, thy tem∣ples are like a piece of a Pomgranate within thy locks.
4. Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded  for an Armory, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. 5. Thy two brests are like two young Roes, that are twins, which feed among the Lilies. 6. Until the day break, and the shaddows flee a∣way; I will get me to the mountains of myrrhe, and to the hill of Fran∣kincense. 7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon; look from the top of Amana, from the rop of Shenir, and Hermon, from the Lyons dens, from the mountains of the Leo∣pards. 9. Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse thou hast ravished mine heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse? how much better is thy love then wine? and the smell of thine oyntments then all spices.
11. Thy lips (O my spouse) drop as the ho∣ney combe, honey and milke are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon. 12. A garden enclosed is my sister, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates with pleasant fruits, Camphire and Spike∣nard. 14. Spikenard and Saf∣fron, Calamus and Cina∣mon, with all trees of Frankincense, Myrrhe, and Aloes, with all the chief spices. 15. A fountain of gardens, a Well of living waters, and streams from Leba∣non. 16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
CHAP. V. INto my garden am I come my sister, spouse most dear; And gathered the myrrhe, and spice which it to me doth bear. Eaten I have my honey combe, and honey with delight: Yea drunk my wine, and eke my milk sith thou didst me invite. And now (O friends) that I have eat and likewise drunk, eat ye, And drink yea drink abundantly, ye are belov'd of me. I sleep, but yet my heart doth wake, the voice which now I hear Is my Beloved's, yea he knocks who is to me most dear. Open to me (saith he) thou art my sister, and my love; Thou art my undefiled one, thou art likewise my dove. And why? for fill'd I am with dew that on my head doth light; My locks also bedewed are with droppings of the night. My coat is oft, (said I) how shall I put it on again? My feet also which washed are, how shall I foul and stain? Yet my beloved did put in his hand by hole of dore▪
My bowels then for him did move, yea they were troubled sore. I rose to open to my love, with myrrhe my hands did drops, My fingers with sweet smelling myrrh on handles of the lock. To my beloved then I did open without delay; But my beloved had withdrawn, yea he was gone away. My soul in me began to fail when my beloved spake; I sought, but could not find; I call'd, he would no answer make. The City watchmen found me, and they smote me; yea also Did wound me: they that keep the walls my vail they took me fro. O daughters of Jerusalem, this charge receive from me; Tell my beloved, I am sick of love, if ye him see. This thy beloved, what is he? to us do thou declare, Thou fairest one; what is he more then other loveds are? Yea what is thy beloved more (do thou declare to us) Then other well-beloveds are, that thus thou chargest us? My well-beloved, he is white, and ruddy is also; Compare him with ten thousand more the chiefest he will show.
Yea like unto the finest gold so doth his head appear, Bushy, and black as Ravens, be the locks which he doth wear. His eyes are like the eyes of doves which are by waters fair; Yea such as washed are with milk, most fitly set they are. As bed of spices, as sweet flowers, so doth his cheeks appear, His lips also like lillies are, dropping sweet smelling myrrh. His hands are like to rings of gold which are with Beril made; His belly as bright Ivory, with Saphires underlaid. His leggs like unto pillars are which are of marble made, Set upon sockers of fine gold, and so well underlaid. His countenance like Lebanon excels, as Cedars tall. His mouth likewise it is most sweet yea he is lovely all. Even such is my beloved one, such is my friend most dear; O daughters of Jerusalem, of whom I now enquire.
1. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk; Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my beloved, that knock∣eth, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
4. My beloved put his hand by the hole of the  dore, and my bowels were moved for him. 5. I rose to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrhe, & my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock. 6. I opened to my belo∣ved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone, my soul failed when he spake, I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no answer. 7. The watchmen that went about the City, found me, they smote me, they wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my vail from me. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Ierusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick of love. 9. What is thy beloved more then another belo∣ved, (O thou fairest a∣mong women,) what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou dost so charge us? 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.
11. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a Raven: 12. His eyes are as the eys of Doves by the rivers of water, washed with milk, and fitly set. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his lips like lil∣lies▪ dropping sweet myrrhe. 14. His hands are as gold rings set with Beril, his belly is as bright as Ivory overlaid with Saphires. 15. His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sock∣ets of fine gold, his coun∣tenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. 16. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is a toge∣ther lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Ierusalem. CHAP. VI. THis well-beloved that is thine, O whither is he gone?
Thou that of women dost appear to be the fairest one: Yea whither is he turn'd aside, that is thus lov'd of thee? Tell us and as thou dost him seek, so seek for him will we. Gone to his garden, and the beds of spices, is my dear; To feed in gardens, and withal to gather lillies there. My well-beloved he is mine, and I likewise am his; The place where he doth please to feed, among the lillies is. As Tirza and Jerusalem, so thou my love art fair And beautiful, yea terrible as Troops that Banners bear. Turn thou thine eyes from me, for I am overcome thereby; Thy hair is as a flock of goats that come from Gilead-high. Thy teeth likewise within thy mouth they also do appear Even like unto a flock of sheep, being washed and made clear. All which are fruitful, and no less then twins they bear each one: Among them all a barren sheep cannot be found, not one. Yea even like unto a piece of a Pomgranate, are The temples of thy head, which do within thy locks appear.
There are for number threescore queens with them there are no less Then fourscore concubines, besides the virgins numberless. My dove, my undefil'd is one, she is the only dear Her mother hath, the choice she is of her that did her bear. The daughters when they had her seen did bless her, yea also The queens, and concubines, and they her praise abroad did show. But who is she that morning like looks forth? and doth appear For fairness, like unto the moon, and as the sun, is clear. Yea likewise terrible she is, and greatly to be dread, As is an Army ord'red out, and hath its Banners spread. Into the garden I went down of Nuts, that I might know, And see what fruit was to be found in vallies that are low. Yea likewise I went down to see whether the vine did spring And flourish where they grew▪ & eke Pomgranates buds did bring. Then on a sudden, and before that I was well aware, My soul made me like chariots of Aminadib that are. Return, O Shulamite, return; return again, I say▪
Do thou O Shulamite return, that look on thee we may. What will ye see in Shulamite, so called as ye hear? As Armies two in company, even so she doth appear.
1. Whither is thy belo∣ved gone? (O thou fair∣est  among women) whi∣ther is thy beloved turn∣ed aside? that we may seek him with thee. 2. My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to seed in the gardens, and to ga∣ther lillies. 3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; he feedeth among the lillies. 4. Thou art beautiful (O my love) as Tirzah, com∣ly as Ierusalem, terrible as an army with banners. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have o∣vercome me; thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from Gilead. 6. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof every one bear∣eth twins, there is not one barren among them. 7. As a piece of a Pom∣granate are thy temples within thy locks.
8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number. 9. My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the on∣ly one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her: the daugh∣ters saw her and blessed her; yea the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her. 10. Who is she that look∣eth forth as the morn∣ing? fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terri∣ble as an Army with ban∣ners. 11. I went down into the garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the Valley; and to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomgranates budded. 12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Aminadib.
13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return,  that we may look upon thee: What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two Armies. CHAP. VII. O Thou that Princes daughter art how beautiful to see Are even both thy feet, with shooes, the which upon them be? The joints likewise even of thy thighs are like to jewels rare; The work of cunning workman his hand doth well prepare. Thy Navel like round goblet is, wherein liquor is found; Thy Belly like an heap of wheat beset with lillies round. And as for thy two Brests likewise I do them both compare To Roes that are both young, and twins, they very even are. Like to a Tower of Ivory, so is thy neck for state: Like Heshbons fish-pools are thine eyes neer to Bath-rabbim gate. Thy Nose also is like unto the Tower that hath place Upon the mount of Lebanon, and doth Damascus face.
Thine head on thee like Carmel is the hair upon thine head Like purple is, in Galleries the king is held and staid. How fair art thou? How pleasant eke dost thou to me appear? Even for delights, O thou that art my love, my only dear. This stature wch thou hast attain'd, doth like a Palm-tree show; Thy Brests like clusters of fine grapes which on the Vine do grow. Then did I say that now I will unto the Palm-tree go, And will take hold upon the boughs that thereupon do grow: And now like clusters of the Vine, even so thy Brests shall be, And eke the smelling of thy Nose, like Apples of the tree. The roof and Palate of thy mouth that also shall appear Even like unto the choycest wine, for my beloved dear. Such wine (I say) as goeth down most sweetly▪ and doth make And cause the lips of them that are asleep, to move and speak. I am my well-beloveds, and to me a right hath he; And as for his desire, even that is also towards me. Come my beloved, let us go into the fields abroad▪
Yea let us lodge in Villages, and there make our aboad. Up to the Vinyards let us go early, that we may see If that the Vine do flourish, and if tender grape there be. Pomgranates also, whether they their buds put forth and show; And there will I give out my loves, and them on thee bestow. The mandrakes smell, and at our gates all pleasant fruits there be, Both new and old, which (O my love) I have laid up for thee.
1. How beautiful are thy feet with shooes (O Princes daughter) the joynts of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman. 2. Thy Navel is like a round goblet which wanteth not liquor; thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lil∣lies. 3. Thy two Brests are like two young Roes that are twins. 4. Thy Neck is as a Tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, which looketh toward Damascus.
5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like purple, the King is held in the galleries▪ 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou O love for delights? 7. This thy stature is like to a Palm-tree, and thy brests to clusters of grapes. 8. I said I will go up to the Palm-tree, I will take hold of the boughs there∣of; now also thy Brests shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the smell of thy Nose like Apples, 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved, that go∣eth down sweetly, causing the lips of them that are asleep to speak. 10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is towards me.
11. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the  field, let us lodge in the Villages. 12. Let us go up early to the Vinyards, let us see if the Vine flourish, whe∣ther the tender grape ap∣pear, and the Pomegra∣nates bud forth, there will I give thee my loves. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of plea∣sant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved. CHAP. VIII. O That thou wert to me as he that is my brother near; As he that sucked hath the breasts even of my Mother dear: And when I should thee find without thou should'st be entertain'd With kisses, yet I should not be despised, or disdain'd. Then would I lead thee lovingly, and likewise thee conduct Unto my Mothers dwelling, who would duely me instruct: Yea, I would cause thee for to drink within my Mothers house Of wine that is well spiced, and of my Pomegranate juyce.
Under my head his left hand should be laid, and there have place; And with his right hand eke he should me tenderly embrace. O Daughters of Jerusalem, my love now takes his ease; I charge you that you stir not up, nor wake him till he please. But who is this from wilderness, that doth depart away, Leaning on her beloved one, and doth upon him stay? Under the Apple-tree I did brought thee raise, and also there Thy mother brought thee forth, yea thee forth that did thee bear. Upon thine heart let me be put, and set like as a seal; And as a seal upon thine arme, thus do thou with me deal; For love is strong as death, as grave, cruel as jealousie. The coals thereof are coals of fire, which flame most vehemently. By many waters love cannot be quenched, and likewise It cannot drowned be by flouds, though they against it rise. Although a man would give for love (that so it might be gain'd) Even all the substance of his house, yet would it be disdain'd. Our little sister hath no brests, what shall for her be done
In day she shall be spoken for, and into mention come. A silver palace we will build, if so a wall she be; And if a dore, with Cedar boards enclosed shall she be. I am a wall, and eke my brests like unto Towers arise; And then as one that favour found, so was I in his eyes. A Vinyard was in Baal-Haman, which Sol'mon did possess; The Vinyard he to keepers let, that they the same might dress: A thousand pieces of silver, each of those keepers were To bring, which did the vinyard keep for fruit which it did bear. My Vinyard which is mine, and wch I chalenge as my right; Before my face it doth appear, I keep it in my sight. A thousand thou O Solomon must have, as due to thee; To them that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred there shall be. O thou that in the gardens hast thy dwelling, they that be Companions, hearken to thy voice; to hear it cause thou me. Make haste O my beloved one, and be thou like a Roe, Or a young Hart, which is upon the mount where spices grow.
1. O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the brests of my Mother, When I should find thee without, I would kisse thee, yet I should not be despised. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee into my Mo∣thers house, who would instruct me; I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juyce of my Pomgranate.
3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me 4. I charge you, O daugh∣ters of Ierusalem, that ye stir not up▪ nor awake my love until he please. 5. (Who is this that cometh up from the wil∣dernesse, leaning on her beloved?) I raised thee up under the Apple-tree, there thy mother brought thee forth▪ there she brought thee forth that bare thee. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal up∣on thine arme; for love is strong as death, jealou∣sie is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the flood drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned,
8. We have a little sister, and she hath no brests,  what shall we do for our sister in the day she shall be spoken for? 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver, and if she be a dore, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar. 10. I am a wall, and my brests like Towers, then was I in his eyes as one that found favour. 11. Solomon had a Vin∣yard at Baal Hamon, he let our the Vinyard unto keepers, every one for the fruit thereof, was to bring a thousand pieces of sil∣ver. 12. My Vinyard which is mine, is before me; thou O Solomon must have a thousand, & those that keep the fruit there∣of, two hundred. 13. Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the com∣panions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it. 14. Make haste my belo∣ved, and be thou like to a Roe or to a young Hart upon the mountains of spices.
The SONG Of MOSES. EXODUS XV. UNto the Lord I will sing praise, for he hath gloriously Tryumph'd the Horse and Rider he hath thrown into the sea. Jehovah is my strength and song, yea my salvation; My God, for him I will prepare an habitation. My fathers God, him will I then exalt and spread his fame: Jehovah is a man of war, Jehovah is his name. He Pharaoh's chariots, and his host, into the sea hath thrown; His chosen captains he likewise in the red sea did drown. The depths below have cov'red them yea they did sink each one Into the bottom of the sea, even like unto a stone. Thy right hand Lord it is become glorious in power, yea lo Thy right hand (Lord) to pieces hath dash'd and destroy'd thy foe.
In thine excelling greatness thou hast vanquish'd them that rose Against thee yea thy wrath consum'd (as stubble) hath thy foes. And by the breath and blast which was out of thy Nostrils sent, The waters which divided were, again together went. The floods likewise did stand upright and as an heap appear: And in the heart even of the sea, the depths congealed were. The enemy said, I will pursue, yea I will overtake; And of the spoyl which shal be found I will division make. Upon them I will satisfie my lust, and it fulfil; I will draw out my sword, my hand shall them destroy and kill. Thy winds did blow, and over them the sea it self did spread; And in the mighty waters they sank down like lumps of lead. O who is there that's like to thee, O Lord? sure there is none; Who is there like to thee among the Gods? there is not one. Glorious thou art in holiness, yea and in praises, thou Art very fearful, and thou dost abroad thy wonders show. Thou didst put forth, & stretchedst out the right hand of thy power;
And then the earth did swallow up deem'd thy foes, & them devour. The people which thou hast re∣thou ledst forth in thy grace: Guiding them by thy strength, unto thy holy dwelling place. The people they shall-hear of this and fear shall them oppress; And such as dwell in Palestine, sorrow shall them possess. Then Edoms dukes shal be a∣maz'd and trembling shall take hold On Moabs mighties, Canaans folk shall melt when this is told: Yea fear and dread shall fall on them, and they shall be each one By greatness of thine arm and power as still as is a stone. Until the people which are thine, O Lord, are passed over; I say, until the folk which thou hast purchased▪ pass over. Thou Lord shalt bring this people in, and planted they shall be Even in the mountain which belongs dwell as heritage to thee. The place O Lord, where thou wilt and where thy house shall stand, The sanctuary which thou hast establish'd with thy hand. The Lord shal reign for evermore For Pharaohs horse did go With charets & with horsemen eke into the sea below.
The Lord then made the sea return▪ and over them to stand; But Israels folk in midst of Sea did walk upon dry land.
1. I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath tryumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the Sea. 2. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation; he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitati∣on, My fathers God, and I will exalt him. 3. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name. 4. Pharaohs chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea, his chosen cap∣tains also are drowned in the red sea. 5. The depths have co∣vered them, they sank in∣to the bottome as a stone. 6. Thy right hand O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand O Lord, hath dashed to pieces the enemy.
7. And in the greatnesse of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee, thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. 8. And with the blast of thy nostrills the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the Sea. 9. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; My lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. 10. Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty wa∣ters. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fear∣ful in praises, doing won∣ders?
12. Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth  swallowed them. 13. Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeem∣ed, thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation. 14. The people shall hear and be afraid▪ sorrow shal take hold on the inhabi∣tants of Palestina 15. Then the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inha∣bitants of Canaan shall melt away. 16. Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatnesse of thine arme they shall be as still as a stone, till the people pass over which thou hast purchased. 17. Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place O Lord which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary O Lord which thy hands have established. 18. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.
19. For the horse of Pha∣raoh went in with his chariots, & with his hors¦men into the Sea, and the  Lord brought again the waters of the Sea upon them, but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea. DEUT. XXXII. GIve ear to me, ye heavens high, and I will utter speech; And hear O earth, attend unto the words my mouth shal teach. My doctrine as the rain shall drop my speech as dew shall pass; As rain that's small, on tender herb, as showers upon the grass. Because that I will utter forth, and publish all abroad His name, who is the Lord, ascribe ye greatness to our God. He is the rock, perfect his work, his ways all judgement be; A God of truth, without all sin, yea yea just and right is he. They have themselves corrupted▪ yea the spot which they do bear, Is not his childrens spot, perverse and crooked ones they are. And do ye in this sort requite the Lord, O ye that are A foolish people, and unwise, so ye your selves declare? Is not the Lord thy father? yea and hath he not thee bought?
Hath he not made & stablish'd thee? Oh hath he not thus wrought? Look back unto the days of old, do ye the same remember; The many generations past, do ye likewise consider. Ask thou thy father, and enquire, and he to thee will show; Ask thou the Elders, they will tell, and thou by them shalt know. When the most high divided to the Nations their estate For heritage, and Adam's sons did likewise separate. Then did he set the peoples bounds, within the same to dwell, According to the number of the seed of Israel. For why? the Lord his people doth his portion take to be: The lot of his inheritance, Jacob alone is he. Even in a dry and desart land he found him to be cast; And in the houling wilderness, both desolate and wast. He did him gently lead about instruction also gave; And as the apple of his eye he did him keep and save. As Eagle stirreth up her nest, and flutters o're her young▪ Spreads forth her wings, doth take & bear them on her wings along.
So did the Lord him lead & guide yea he himself alone; And as for other stranger god, with him there was not one. Upon high places of the earth he made him ride, that he Might eat of such increase as in the fields abroad should be: Yea from the rock he made him suck honey, and thereon feed; And likewise oyl, which did from hard and flinty rock proceed. Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, was that whereon he fed; Yea also fat of lambs and rams that were in Bashan bred. On goats he fed, yea with the fat of kidneys of the wheat; Yea and the pure blood o'th grape thou drankest with thy meat. But Jesurun he waxed fat, and did begin to kick; Even thou I say art waxen fat, and likewise art grown thick. Covered with fat▪ then he forsook God which did him redeem, The rock of his salvation he lightly did esteem. With strange gods▪ unto jealousie they did him much provoke; And with abominations, they his anger made to smoke. To divels (not to God) they did their sacrifice present;
Yea unto Gods they did not know, their wicked heart was bent. New gods (I say) whom they did serve newly come up they were; They were such gods as formerly your fathers did not fear. Thou art unmindful of the rock, even him that thee begate; Yea thou forgotten hast the God that form'd thee to this state. And when the Lord saw this, they were abhorr'd of him therefore, Because his sons and daughters eke provoked him so sore. And being thus provok'd, he said I will now from them hide My face, and likewise I will see what end shall them betide. For why, a generation of froward ones they be; Yea they are children in whose hearts no faith at all I see. With that which is not god, they made my jealousie to smoke: To anger with their vanities, they did me much provoke: I will them move to jealousie, their anger eke shall rise, And be provok'd by such as are no people, folk unwise. For in mine anger kindled is a fire, which I will shew; Yea I will make it burn unto the deeps of hell below.
The earth with her increase it shall consume and waste away; Foundations it shall set on fire whereon the mountains stay. Yea mischiefs I will multiply, by heaps upon them send; The arrows also of my wrath I will upon them spend. They shall be burnt with hunger, and also a burning heat; Bitter destruction shall devour and eat them up like meat. Yea I will send the teeth of beasts, wherewith they shall be crusht Together, with the poyson of the serpents of the dust. The sword without, terror within shall stroy, and shall not spare Yongman, nor Virgin, sucking babe, nor him that hath gray hair. I said that I would scatter them, and into corners chase; And cause that their remembrance should wth men have any place Were it not for the enemy that I his wrath did fear, And adversary should himself strangely behave and bear; And lest that they should speak & say our hand full high it is, And lifted up; as for the Lord, he hath not done all this. For they are such a Nation, as is void of counsel sound,
For understanding there is none they in them for to be found. O that these men were wise, that hereto their minds would bend, To understand this thing, and would ponder their latter end. How should one chase a thousand men and two ten thousand put To flight, except the Lord their rock had sold and shut them up. For why, their rock, it is not like the rock whereon we stay; Our enemies themselves, if they be judges, thus will say. Their vine of Sodom is the vine, and of Gomorrahs field, Yea grapes of gall, and bitter are the clusters which they yeild. As Dragons poyson, is the wine that doth thereout proceed; Yea cruel venome of the Aspe, even such it is indeed. Is not this laid in store with me, my treasures seal'd among: Vengeance & recompense, it doth of right to me belong. Their foot shal slide even in due time the day that shall them waste It is at hand, the things that shall come on them, do make haste. For God shall judge his folk, and shal repent when he shall see His servants power is gone, and that shut up or left none be.
And then the Lord himself shall speak yea on this wise shall say, Where are their gods, their rock, in whom they trusted, and did stay? Which of their sacrifices ate the fat, and drunk the wine They offer'd? let them rise, and for your safety now combine. See now that I, even I am he, and with me there is none, No God with me, I kill, I make alive, even I alone. I wound, and I do heal again, and surely there is none That can deliver from my hand, or rescue, no not one. For I lift up my hand on high to heaven, and then I give This word, and of my self do say, for ever do I live. If I my bright & glittering sword shall go about to whet, On judgement if my hand take hold, and thereunto be set: Vengeance I render will on them mine enemies that are; And eke they shall rewarded be, to me a hate that bear. Mine arrows they shal drunken be with blood, which shall be shed, My sword also shall flesh devour, therewith it shall be fed. The blood I say even of the slain, and them that captives be,
From the beginning of revenge upon the enemy. Rejoyce then O ye nations with his people, for he will Avenge his servants blood upon all them that do it spill. Upon his adversaries he the vengeance just will send, But to his land and people he his mercy will extend.
1. GIve ear O ye hea∣vens, & I wil speak; and hear O earth the words of my mouth: 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the render herb, and as the flowers upon the grasse. 3. Because I will publish the name of the Lord, a scribe ye greatnesse un∣to our God. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgement, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his chil∣dren, they are a perverse and crooked generation. 6. Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee and established thee?
7. Remember the days of old, consider the yeers of many generations; Ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy El∣ders, and they will tell thee: 8. When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. 9. For the Lords portion is his people, Iacob is the lot of his inheritance. 10. He found him in a desart land, and in the waste howling wilder∣ness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye; 11. As an Eagle stirreth her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth a∣broad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings.
12. So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him. 13. He made him hide on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields, and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oyl out of the flinty rock. 14. Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of Lambs, and Rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kid∣neys of wheat, and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape. 15. But Iesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed far, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he for∣sook God who made him, and lightly esteem∣ed the rock of his salva∣tion. 16. They provoked him to jealousie with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger.
17. They sacrificed to Divels, not to God; to  gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not. 18. Of the rock that be∣gate thee thou art un∣mindful, and hast for∣gotten God that formed thee. 19. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters. 20. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be; for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith. 21. They have moved me to jealousie with that which is not god, they have provoked me to an∣ger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousie with those which are not a people, I will provoke them to an∣ger with a foolish nation.
22. For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the lowest he, and shall consume the earth with her increase▪  and set on fire the foun∣dations of the mountains. 23. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them. 24. They shall be burnt with hunger, and devour∣ed with burning heat, and with bitter destruction, I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust. 25. The sword without, and terror within shall destroy both the young∣man and the virgin, the suckling also, with the man of gray hairs. 26. I said I would scatter thē into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men. 27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversa∣ries should behave them∣selves strangely, and lest they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this.
28. For they are a Nati∣on void of counsel, nei∣ther  is there any under∣standing in them. 29. O that they were wise that they understood this that they would consider their latter end. 30. How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, ex∣cept their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? 31. For their rock is not as our rock, even our e∣nemies themselves being judges. 32. For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorah, their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. 33. Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venome of Aspes. 34. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? 35. To me belongeth vengeance & recompense. Their foot shall slide in due time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, & the things that shal com upon them, make haste. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and re∣pent himself for his ser∣vants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.
37. And he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted? 38. Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings; let them rise up and help you, and be your protection. 39. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me; I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deli∣ver out of my hand. 40. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. 41. If I whet my glitter∣ing sword, and mine hand take hold on judgement, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.
42. I will make mine ar∣rows drunk with blood, and my sword shall de∣vour flesh, and that with the blood of the slain, and of the captives, from  the beginning of reven∣ges upon the enemy. 43. Rejoyce O ye nati∣ons with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people. The SONG of DEBORAH, JUDGES V. PRaise ye the Lord, for that he did revenge for Israel take, When as the people of themselves did willing offer make. Hear O ye kings, ye Princes eke, give ear unto this thing; Even I will praise the Lord, yea I & didst to Israels God will sing. Lord when thou went'st from Seir march out of Edoms field, The earth did tremble, heaven drop, the clouds did water yeild. The mountains frō before the Lord even they on melting fell,
Yea Sinai from before the Lord, the God of Israel. In days of Shamgar, Anaths son, and eke in Jaels days The common paths were left, & men did travel in by-ways. They that in villages did dwell, they ceast in Israel, Till I arose, I Deborah, within a mother in Israel. They chose new gods, and then the gates did war appear: Mongst forty thousand Israelites was there a shield or spear? Towards Israels rulers is my heart, that did with free accord Offer themselves among the flock, for this bless ye the Lord. Ye that upon white asses ride, see that ye speak and talk; Ye also that in judgement sit, and by the way do walk. They that are freed from the noise shal and fear of Archers fierce, Where they did draw their water, Gods righteous acts rehearse. The acts perform'd for Villagers, in Israel that were; Then shall the people of the Lord within the gates appear. Awake, awake, O Deborah, I say awake, awake, And to the uttering of a song do thou thy self betake.
Barak do thou also arise, and now perform thy part, Lead captive thy captivity, Abinoams son that art. Then over Nobles of the folk he made him rule to have, That did remain, ore mighty ones to me the rule he gave. Gaist Amaleck there was a root of thee from Ephraim; Among thy people after thee O tribe of Benjamin. And out of Machir governours came down, and likewise men From Zebulun, that handle well the skilful writers pen. The princes eke of Issachar, with Deborah they were; Even Issachar and Barak too, with her they did appear. Into the valley was he sent, yea sent on foot, but lo Reubens divisions they did cause great thoughts of heart to grow. Why didst thou bide among the folds the bleating flocks to hear? Reubens divisions they did cause that great heart-searchings were Beyond the river Jordan, did Gilead make his abode And why did Dan remain within his Ships that were at rode? After continued on the shore, the sea was at his side,
And in his breaches he remain'd, yea there he did abide. But Zebulun and Nephtali were people that did yeild To run the hazard of their lives fought even in the open field. Kings came, yea Canaans kings, & in Tanaach, by the brook And water of Megiddo: they no gain of money took. They fought from heaven, yea the stars that in their courses were, Against the Captain Sisera in sight they did appear. The ancient river Kishon, did them sweep away and drown, The river Kishon, thou my soul their strength hath trodden down. Then did their horses fail them much their hoofs in sunder brake, By prancings of their mighty ones, the prancings they did make. The Angel of the Lord thus said, let Meroz cursed be; Yea the inhabitants thereof, even bitterly curse ye. Because they came not to the help the help even of the Lord, Against the mighty, yea because they did not help afford. Blessed be Jael, Hebers wife the Kenite, blessed she; Yea more then other women, in the tent shall blessed be.
He asked water, and she did with milk the man refresh; She brought forth butter, wch she did present in lordly dish. Then did she put her hand unto the nail which she had fet, And to the workmans hammer she her own right hand did set. With hammer Sisera she smote, his head she did remove, When she had pierc'd his temples, & through them the nail had drove. And at her feet he bow'd himself he fell, and down did ly; He bow'd, & fell, & when he bow'd, he did ly down and dy. The mother of the Captain from the window cast her ey; She looked through the lattess, and after this sort did cry. Why is it that his Chariot is so long upon the way? Why is it that his Charet wheels do make such long delay? The ladies wise that were wth her thus did they answer make; Yea even from her self also she did this answer take. Have they not sped, and have they not the prey divided so? That every man hath for his part a damsel, one or two. To Sisera a prey, which is with divers colours laid;
A prey of divers colours, and of needle-work is made; I say of divers colours, wrought with needle on each side, Meet for the necks of them that take and do the spoyl divide So let thine enemies perish all, O Lord, but as for those That love him, be they like the sun when forth in might he goes.
2. PRaise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered them∣selves. 3. Hear O ye kings, give ear O ye Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel. 4. Lord, when thou went∣est out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, & the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.
5. The mountains melted from before the Lord, e∣ven that Sinai from be∣fore the Lord God of Israel 6. In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the high ways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through by-ways. 7. The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they cea∣sed in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I a∣rose a mother in Israel. 8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates; was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? 9. My heart is towards the governours of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the peo∣ple; praise ye the Lord. 10. Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgement, and walk by the way. 11. They that are deli∣vered from the noise of Archers, in the places of drawing water▪ there shall they rehearse the righte∣ous acts of the Lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his vil∣lages in Israel, then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates
12. Awake awake Debo∣rah, awake, awake, utter a  song; arise Barak, and lead thy captivity ca∣ptive, thou son of Abi∣noam. 13. Then he made him that remaineth have do∣minion over the Nobles among the people, the Lord made me have do∣minion over the mighty. 14. Out of Ephraim was there a root of them a∣gainst Amaleck, after thee Benjamin among thy people. Out of Machir came down governours, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer. 15. And the Princes of Issachar were with De∣borah, even Issachar, and also Barak, he was sent on foot into the valley, for the divisions of Reu∣ben there were great thoughts of heart. 16. Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the flocks? for the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart. 17. Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and why did Dan remain in ships? After continued on the Sea-shore, and abode in his breaches.
18. Zebulun and Neph∣tali were a people that jeoparded their lives un∣to the death in the high places of the field. 19. The kings came and fought, then sought the Kings of Canaan in Ta∣naach by the waters of Megiddo, they took no gain of money. 20. They sought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Si∣sera. 21. The river of Kishon swept them away, the an∣cient river, the river Ki∣shon; O my soul, thou hast trodden downe strength. 22. Then were the horse-hoofs broken by the means of the prancings, the prancings of their mighty ones. 23. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the in∣habitants thereof because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. 24. Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of He∣ber the Kenite blessed above women shal she be in the Tent.
25. He asked water, and she gave him milk, she brought forth butter in a lordly dish: 26. She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans hammer, and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced & striken through his tem∣ples; 27. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down at her feet; he bowed, he fell; where he bowed, there he fell down dead; 28. The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cryed through the lattess; why is his Cha∣riot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his Chariots? 29. Her wise Ladies an∣swered her, yea she re∣turned answer to her self;
30. Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey, to every man a damsel or two? To Sise∣ra a prey of  divers co∣lours, a prey of divers co∣lours of Needlework, of divers colours of Needle work on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoyl? 31. So let all thine ene∣mies perish O Lord, but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. The SONG of HANNAH, I SAM. 2. MY heart rejoyceth in the Lord, joyful in him am I. Yea in the Lord my horn also exalted is on high. Over mine enemies my mouth enlarged is likewise, Because that my rejoycing doth in thy salvation rise. There is none holy as the Lord, for other there is none Beside thee; neither any rock like to our God, not one. Do ye no more so proudly talk, do not so much exceed,
And arrogancy, let it not out of your mouth proceed. For why, the Lord he is a God of knowledge, and thereby The actions which performed are, he doth them weigh and try. Broken in sunder are the bows of mighty men and stout; And they that stumbled, are with strength begirded round about. They that were ful, have hir'd them selves for bread, they did decrease; And they that hungry were, have found their hunger for to cease. So that to her are seven born, before that barren was, And she that many children hath, is now in feeble case. It is the Lord that killeth, and alive again doth make; He bringeth down unto the grave, and from the grave doth take. It is the Lord that maketh poor, he maketh rich also; He bringeth low, and then his power in lifting up doth show. He raiseth up the poor from dust, and doth the begger fet From off the dunghil, and among Princes he doth him set. That of the throne of glory, they might be by him possest, For pillars of the earth are Gods, the world on them doth rest.
The feet of saints he will them keep whereas the wicked shall Be silent in the dark, because by strength shall none prevail. Gods adversaries they shall all to pieces broken be; Yea also out of heaven above, thunder on them shall he. The Lord shal judg the earth, he shal give strength unto his king; The horn of his anoynted he to honour high shall bring.
1. MY heart rejoyceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord; my mouth is en∣larged over mine enemies, because I rejoyce in thy salvation. 2. There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none beside thee; neither is there any rock like our God. 3. Talk no more so ex∣ceeding proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth; for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. 4. The bows of the migh∣ty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with strength. 5. They that were full, have hired out them∣selves for bread, and they that were hungry, ceased; so that the barren hath born seven, and she that hath many children, is waxen feeble. 6. The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bring∣eth down to the grave, and bringeth up. 7. The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lift∣eth up. 8. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the begger from the dunghil, to set them a∣mong princes, & to make them inherit the throne of glory; for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he hath set the world upon them.
9. He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail; 10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be bro∣ken to pieces; out of hea∣ven shall he thunder up∣on them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his Anointed. The CHURCHES SONG, ISA. XXVI. VVE have a City wch is strong God will for it ordain Salvation, and therewith as walls and bulwarks it maintain. The gates thereof do ye set ope, that thereinto may pass the righteous Nation, wch doth keep the truth, and it embrace. Thou wilt him keep in perfect peace even so shall he be blest Whose mind is staid on thee, because on thee his trust doth rest.
Trust, ye for ever in the Lord, let him be still your stay; For in the Lord Jehovah, is such strength as lasts for aye. He brings them down that dwel on high he lays the City low, Even to the ground, that lofty is, to dust he makes it bow. It shall be trodden under foot, the poor on it shall make Their feet to stand, the needy ones thereon their steps shall take. The just mans way is uprightness, thou Lord that art also The most upright, do streight the paths wherein the just do go. Yea Lord, for thee we waited have in way thy judgements be; Our souls desire is to thy name, remembrance eke of thee. Even unto thee, in the night time hath been my souls desire, Yea with my spirit, for thee I will seek early, and enquire. For when thy judgements in the earth themselves abroad do show, The worlds inhabitants will then learn righteousness to know. Let favour shewed be unto the wicked, ne'retheless He will not set himself to learn and practise righteousness. Even in the land of uprightness unjustly will he deal,
And not behold the Majesty the Lord doth there reveal. Lord when thy hand is lifted up. they will not it behold, But yet they shall be made to see shame shall on them take hold; Even for the envy which their minds against the people bear; The fire even of thine enemies shall devour, and shall not spare. Lord thou for us wilt peace or∣dain to us it shall be brought, For why, the works that are in us, even thou thy self hast wrought. O Lord our God, even other lords ore us the rule did take, But by thee; only of thy name the mention will we make. But they are dead, they shall not live deceas'd, and shal not rise. Thou hast them visited and stroy'd their mem'ry fades likewise. The nation Lord thou hast increast and thou art glorify'd, Thou hast remov'd it far abroad, throughout the earth so wide. O Lord they have thee visited when they in trouble were; They poured out a prayer, when they thy chast'ning hand did bear. Like one with child, whose time is neer yea is in pain, and cries By reason of her pangs, so we have been (Lord) in thine eyes.
We were with childe, & in that state anguish and pain did find; And that wch is by us brought forth, is as it were the wind. We have not wrought deliverance in earth, no none at all: Inhabitants eke of the world, we have not made them fall. Thy dead shall live, they shal wth my dead body rise and spring: Ye that do dwell even in the dust, do ye awake and sing. For as the dew that falls upon the herbs, and doth them spread, So is thy dew, the earth also it shall cast out the dead.
1. VVE have a strong City, Salvation will God ap∣point for walls and bul∣warks. 2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. 3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee.
4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever▪ for in the Lord Iehovah is everlasting strength. 5. For he bringeth down them that dwel on high, the lofty City he layeth it low, he laveth it low, even to the ground, he bringeth it even to the dust; 6. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy: 7. The way of the just is uprightness, thou most upright dost weigh the path of the just. 8. Yea in the way of thy judgements O Lord, have we waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name, to the remembrance of thee. 9. With my soul have desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit with∣in me wil I seek thee ear∣ly; for when thy judge∣ments are in the earth the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. 10. Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousnes in the land of uprightnes will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the ma∣jesty of the Lord.
11. Lord, when they hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people, yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. 12. Lord, thou wilt or∣dain peace for us; for thou also hast wrought al our works in us. 13. O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name. 14. They are dead, they shall not live, they are deceased, they shall not rise; therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish. 15. Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased the Nation, thou art glorified; thou hadst removed it far, unto all the ends of the earth. 16. Lord▪ in trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. 17. Like as a woman with child, that draweth ueer the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cryeth out in her pangs, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.
18. We have been with childe, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabi∣tants of the world fallen. 19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they a∣rise; awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. FINIS.
