S4680 11914795 50917
A SONG of the Light of the three Nations turn'd into DARKNES Or Otes made Free-man of Whitington's Colledge, for Perjury, Scandalum Magnatum, and something like Treason. To an excellent old Tune called Cavalilly-man. COme all our Caballers & Parliament Votes That stickl'd for hanging & cuting of throats, Lament the misfortune of perjured Otes. Who first must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. What Devil suspected this, 5 years agon, When I was in hopes to hang up half the Town, I Swore against Miter and Cursed the Crown. But now must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. I cursed the Bishops and hang'd up the Priests, I swore my self Doctor yet never could Preach, But a Cant full of Blasphemy all I could reach. I now must be Pillor'd, and after be Hang'd. Now Otes is i'th' Cubboard & Manger with Colt, The Caldron may boyl me for fear I should molt, here I 've ne'r a Bum for a VVheel-Barrow jolt. Yet now must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. My forty Commissions and Spanish black Bills, Invisible Armys lodg'd upon Hills, Such old perjur'd Nonsence my Narrative fills. That I now must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. My twelve pounds a Week I want to support For stinking i'th' City and fouling the Court, Like Devil in Dungeon I'm now hamper'd fort. Yet first must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd They hang us in order, the Devil knows how, 'Zounds all that e're put one paw to the Plow, I ne'r fear'd the Devil would fail me till now. That I first must be Pillor'd & after be hang'd For Calling the Duke a Papist and Traytor, I often have call'd the King little better, I'm fast by the heels like a Beast in a Fetter. I first must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. I swore that the Queen would Poyson the King, That VVakeman had monys the Poyson to bring, When I knew in my heart there was no such thing. I now must be Pillor'd and after be Hang'd. I'm Resolv'd to be hang'd dead drunk like Hugh Peter If I can but have my Skin stuft with good Liquor, Then I shall limp to old Tapskie much quicker. But I first must be Pillor'd and after be hang'd London Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-street near Newport House in Leicester-Fields 1684.
