s5994 13038548 96856
BABYLON's Fall in MARYLAND: A fair WARNING to Lord Baltamore. OR, A RELATION Of an Assault made by divers Papists, and Popish Officers of the Lord Balta∣more's against the Protestants in Maryland; to whom GOD gave a great Victory a∣gainst a greater force of Souldiers and armed Men, who came to destroy them. Published by Leonard Strong, Agent for the people of PROVIDENCE in MARY∣LAND. Printed for the Author, 1655.
Babylons fall in Maryland. A fair warning to Lord Baltamore. IN the yeer 1649. many, both of the congregated Church, and other well-affected people in Virginia, being de∣barred from the free exercise of Religi∣on, under the Government of Sir Wil∣liam Barkely▪ removed themselves, Fa∣milies, and Estates into the Province of Maryland, being thereunto invited by Captain William Stone, then Gover∣nour for Lord Baltamore, with promise of Liberty in Religion, and Priviledges of English Subjects. An Oath to the Lord Baltamore was urged upon this peo∣ple soon after their coming up, which if they did not take, they must have no Land, nor abiding in the Province. This Oath was very scrupulously looked upon: first, In regard it bindes to ac∣knowledge and be subject to a Royal Jurisdiction and absolute Dominion of the Lord Baltamore, and to defend it and him a∣gainst all power whatsoever. This was thought far too high for him, being a Subject, to exact upon such terms as it was ex∣acted, and too much unsutable to the present liberty which God had given the English Subjects, from Arbitrary and Popish Government; as the Lord Baltamore's Government doth plainly
appear to be. Secondly, It was exceedingly scrupled on another account, viz. That they must swear to uphold that Govern∣ment and those Officers who are sworn to countenance and up∣hold Antichrist, in plain words exprest in the Officers Oath, the Roman Catholick Religion. And for these people to own such by an Oath, whom in their hearts they could by no means close with; what could it be accounted, but Collusion? Yet nevertheless the people that were then come up to Provi∣dence, considering Lord Baltamore to be Lord of the soil, and willing to acknowledge him, and pay him his due Rents and Services; upon that account took an Oath which was much qualified and moderated from its former rigour: but this, though it was accepted by Captain Stone the Lord Baltamore's Lieutenant, yet utterly rejected by his Lordship, who gave or∣der, That the Oath absolutely should be urged; and gave spe∣cial instructions and charge to his Leiutenant to proclaim, That all that would not take the Oath within three Months after publication, and pay Rents, and sue out Patents, should be expulsed the Province, and the Land seized to his Lordships use; who required his Officers to see the contents of the Pro∣clamation executed. Now the people having been formerly sensible of such yokes, imposed contrary to what was promised them before they came into the Province, complained by their Agent in England, First, to the Lord Baltamore, desiring his Lordship, That such burthens as the Oath and other great inconveniences men∣tioned in our instructions, might be removed. But the Lord Baltamore rejected the motion. Our Agent presented a Peti∣tion to the then Councel of State, where it hath been depending neer four yeers, without any hearing, Answer or Relief; which hath brought unspeakable troubles upon this Province, & now at last occasioned the shedding of much English blood; yea, of the Saints in Maryland. God grant that Right and Justice may have a more open course to flow into all the Domi∣nions of England, without obstructions; and, that innocent blood be not shed any more for want thereof. In the yeer 1652. Richard Bennet Esq Colonel William Clayborne, and Captain Edmund Curtis, Commissioners from
the Supream Authority of the Commonwealth of England, arrived in Maryland, in the Guiny Friggot to reduce that Province into the obedience of the Commonwealth of England, according to their Commission; which was effected by them, first, in their taking away the Commissions and Powers of the Lord Baltamore, in the hands of Captain William Stone his Governour, and Thomas Hatton his Secretary, and the rest of the Lord Baltamores Councel; as they had very good cause so to do; for none of the English Dominions had more need of being reduced; and caused them to take the Engagement to the Com∣monwealth of England, as it was then, without King or House of Lords. And so they might have continued in their places still, onely to the Commonwealth of England; but they would not yield to issue out Writs in any other name, then Lord Balta∣more's, because of their Oath to him. In the yeer 1654. upon some Instructions and Relations from the Lord Baltamore out of England, Captain William Stone, and Mr. Thomas Hatton, and the Popish Councellors, rose up against the Reducement, displacing those whom the States Commissioners had placed, and introducing the old Po∣pish Councel; calling that which was done by commission from the Councel of State in England, Rebellion against the Lord Baltamore; and those that were Actors in it, Factious and Se∣ditious Persons: which was done by a Proclamation full of railing terms, published at Providence in the Church-meet∣ing. The Commissioners for the Commonwealth of England, hearing that new Orders and Instructions were come to Maryland from Lord Baltamore, and that one Scarborough a mischievous instrument of the Lord Baltamore was gone up Maryland, resolved to come and see in what condition their affairs stood. And finding a direct contradiction to, and re∣ceding from that obedience to the Commonwealth of England, which was promised, but not performed, by the Lord Baltamore's Officers, applied themselves in a peaceable and loving way to per∣swade them into their due and promised obedience, yet became the said Commissioners were given to understand, That there was a mischievous design by Lord Baltamore's Officers and
their Complices, to apprehend their persons, and to raise Forces against the lawful Power of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land; The said Commissioners desired some to come down from Providence, and some from Putuxent to guard their Persons, and defend themselves & people from that power of mē in Arms, which by this time Captain Stone had pressed in Lord Balta∣more's name, upon pain of death to assist him against the said Commissioners, and gathered together in a formidable manner. But the said Commissioners being greatly desirous of peace, and willing to avoid the shedding of blood, applyed themselves to the said Captain Stone▪ to bring him to a parley and conference; where, after some arguing, the said Captain Stone resigned up the Government which he took up in the Lord Baltamore's name, into the hand of the Commissioners of England; pro∣mising to be obedient to that Government, which by their Au∣thority should be set over them, under his Highness the Lord Protector. The ordering and governing the affairs of Maryland, was then committed to Captain Will. Fuller, Mr. Rich. Preston, Mr. Richard Durand, Mr. Edward Lloyd, &c. others mentioned in the Commission, who were required to attend the Engagement of the Commonwealth of England, to keep Courts, &c. and to summon an Assembly in October following. At this As∣sembly there was a full and lawful Representative of the whole Province, where the Act of Reducement of this Province by Commission from the Councel of State in England to Richard Bennet Esq Colonel William Cleyborne, Emund Curtis, was freely and fully acknowledged by the whole Assembly; the Burgesse of every respective County and Limit confirming the same, and submitting thereunto. And did pass, and record an Act, That whosoever did publish any Writ or Summons, De∣claration or Proclamation, either in the Lord Baltamore's or any other name, then the Government so setled as afore∣said had and received, should be accounted a Delinquent a∣gainst the Commonwealth of England, and dealt with accor∣dingly. The same Assembly did make Protestation against a Decla∣ration
sent over by his Lordship, and recorded by his Secretary; wherein the said Lord did declare the people at Providence, by him called Annardundel, to be Rebels; and strictly charged his Officers efficaciously to deal with them accordingly: but no ground or reason thereof could be found, But their not com∣pliance with his Arbitrary and Popish Government, and the adhering to the Engagement and the Reducement aforesaid, and Government setled by the aforesaid Commissioners. After this Assembly, the Province was quiet, and so continued until the later end of January; about which time, the Ship Golden Fortune, whereof Captain Tilman was Commander, arrived in Maryland. Then the Lord Baltamore's Officers, and the Popish party began to divulge abroad, and boast much of power which came in that Ship from his Highness the Lord Protector, to con∣firm the Lord Baltamore's Patent to him, and to re-establish his Officers in their former places under him: which pretended power they assumed to themselves; Captain Stone and the rest giving out threatning speeches, That now the Rebels at Pu∣tuxent and Severne, should know that he was Governour a∣gain; giving Order, That neither Act of the said Assembly should be observed, nor Writ from the power established by the Commissioners aforesaid obeyed, but what should issue forth in the name of the Lord Proprietory, viz. Lord Baltamore. And further, the said Captain Stone gave several Commissions to the Papists and other desperate and bloody fellows, to muster and raise men in arms to be ready upon all occasions, giving out that he would go to Putuxent, and seize the Records of the Province at the place where they were appointed to be kept by an Act of the Assembly, and to apprehend Mr. Richard Preston also, at whose house they were; which shortly after was effected by Vertue of a Warrant in Captain Stone's name, without Proclaiming, or shewing any power by which he acted such high Robberies. But in threatning speeches declared, That they would have the Government; and for the terror of others, would hang some of the Commissioners, which were entrusted with the Government by the Commissioners of the Common∣wealth of England, under his Highness the Lord Protector,
namely, Captain William Fuller, Mr. Richard Preston, and Mr. William Durand. About this time Captain William Fuller, Mr. William Du∣rand, Mr. Leonard Strong, and Mr. Richard Ewen, to whom among others the Government was committed, sent two Mes∣sengers of quality and trust with Letters to Captain Stone, in a way of peace and love; desiring him to make it known by what power he surprised the Records; and desiring him, the said Captain Stone▪ to give an Answer, as by the Letter, relation thereunto being had, more at large appeareth: But the said Captain Stone, instead of giving a satisfactory Answer, im∣prisoned the Messengers, and in much wrath and sury said he would shew no power: at last he affirmed, that he acted by a power from Lord Baltamore; and that the Lord Protector had confirmed the Lord Baltamore's power. If so, Sir, said one of the Messengers, if it be confirmed, let that appear, and it will satisfie. Confirmed, said Captain Stone, I'll confirm it; and so sent them home. After this, the said Captain Stone and his Officers proceeded in their wicked design; yet to colour it over, the said Captain Stone published a Proclamation to deceive the amazed and distracted people at Putuxent; wherein he called God to witness, that he intended not to use any hostile way to them or the people at Providence. Which Protestation how false and feigned it was, the following proceedings of himself and Officers, will clearly evidence to all the World: for notwith∣standing this Proclamation and Protestation, the said Captain Stone sent up to Putuxent one William Eltonhead and Josi∣as Fendal, and with them twenty men in Arms, who did beset and entred the house of Mr. Richard Preston, with intent to surprise him; but not finding him at home, took away in Guns, Swords and Ammunition to the value of 30 l. sterling; ran∣scked every place in and about the house, to seek for the said Richard Preston; and as some of the Company then said, with purpose to hang him for his rebellion against the Lord Bal∣tamore. At the same time they surprised John Sutton, who was appointed by the Assembly and Secretary to attend the Records, for any that should have occasion to use them, either for search or Copy; and carried him away Prisoner with such
Guns and Ammunition he had, and kept him about twenty dayes; even so they dealt with Lieutenant Peter Johnson; se∣veral other houses at Putuxent, they served in the like kinde. And when they were desired to shew by what power or Com∣mission they so acted, they would in a proud bravado clap their hands on their swords, and say, Here is a Commission. This was no sooner effected at Putuxent, but presently they mustered in Arms two hundred or two hundred and fifty men at the house of the aforesaid Eltonhead, which Eltonhead and Fendal sent up by night several Boats with armed men, and forced many of Putuxen whether they would or not to go with them upon their warlike Expedition to Providence; taking all the Guns, Pow∣der, Shot, and Provision, they could anywhere finde. And when they had done what they pleased at Putuxent, they bent all their Forces towards Providence, the chief place of the residence of most of the Commissioners, and people that were forced out of Virginia by Sir William Barkely for conscience sake. Some of the said Company marching by Land, others by Water; they that marched by Land, did much spoil and robbery in all the Houses and Plantations where they came, breaking open Doors, Trunks and Chests. In this barbarous manner they carried it for about forty miles. Now again the Commissioners at Providence sent other Messengers with a Letter to Captaine Stone, still complaining his proceedings, and seeking the knowledge of his power; and that some better accommodation might be attended to prevent the ruine and desolation of the whole Province, which this course was very likely to bring to pass. If he were resolved to come to no Parley or Treaty, they protested in the said writing, that by the help of God, they were resolved to commit themselves into the hand of God, and rather die like men, then live like slaves. This was also rejected by the said Captain Stone and his Com∣plices, the Messengers apprehended, their Boat seized, and onely three of six escaped to bring the report of their desperate and bloody design, and that they were upon their march in a hostile way. Capt. Stone and his Company still drew neerer to Providence, unto a place called Herring-Creek, where they apprehended
one of the Commissioners, and forced another man of quality to flie for his life, having threatned to hang him up-at-his own door; and not finding the man, affrighted his wife, and plundered the house of Ammunition and Provision, threatning still what they would do to the people at Providence, and that they would force the rebellious factious Roundheads to submit; and then they would shew their power. Having now left the Country behinde them bare of men, save onely such as fled into the Woods from their cruelty and rapine, as also of Arms and Ammunition; the poor women urging this to them, What should they do if the Indians should come upon them, being thus strip'd of men and Arms to defend them; and in what a sad and sorrowful condition they were left: These merciless men answered scoffingly, It matters not, your sorrow is our joy. And indeed, it is too apparent, that the Indians waited upon their motions, and by examination it was found at Providence, that the Indians were resolved in themselves, or set on by the Popish faction, or rather both together to fall upon us: as in∣deed after the fight they did, besetting houses, killing one man, and taking another prisoner. Now the people at Providence perceiving such a tempest ready to fall upon them, and all messages rejected, prepared for their coming, looking up, and crying to the Lord of Hosts and King of Ston, for counsel, strength and courage, being resolved in the strength of God to stand on their Guard, and demand an account of these proceedings, seeing no other remedy, for so great a mischief, could be found. About this time Captain Stone sent two men to publish a Proclamation quite against the Law established by the Commis∣sioners of the Commonwealth of England, and against an Act of a lawful Assembly; which being read, and having no other Treaty to offer, they were quietly dismissed to their own Com∣pany, to whom they might have gone if they would. That night Captain Stone and his Army appeared in the Ri∣ver of Severne at Providence, with eleven or twelve Vessels greater and lesser, some of which had plundred by the way, in which their whole Army were wafted.
Capt. Fuller & the Councel of War appointed at Providence Mr. Wil. Durand, Secretary, to go aboard the Golden Lion which then lay at Anchor in the River, and to fix a Proclamation in the main mast, directed to Captain Heamans, Commander of the said Ship, wherein he was required in the name of the Lord Protector, and Commonwealth of England, and for the main∣tenance of the just Libertyes, Lives, and Estates of the free Subjects thereof, against an unjust power, to be aiding and as∣sisting in this service. The said Captain Heamans at first was unwilling; but af∣terwards seeing the equity of the Cause, and the groundless proceedings of the Enemy, he offered himself, Ship, and Men for that service, to be directed by the said William Du∣rand. The Enemy was come within the command of the Ship at the shutting in of the evening: the Captain of the Ship was required to command them aboard by a piece of Ordnance. The Enemy with a great noise rejected the warning. Then ano∣ther Piece was levelled where they heard the Boats rowing; the shot whereof lighting something neer, but doing no hurt; A Messenger came aboard; but had nothing of any message to deliver, save onely, that Captain Stone thought the Cap∣tain of the Ship had been satisfied. To which the Captain answered, Satisfied, with what? I never saw any power Captain Stone had, to do as he hath done; but the su∣perscription of a Letter. I must, and will, appear for these in a good Cause. That night the Enemy run into the Creek, where they landed out of the reach of the Ship. But in the morning, all their Vessels were block'd up by a small Barque with two pieces of Ordinance, which was com∣manded to lie in the mouth of the Creek, and so kept from coming out.
The same day being the first day of the week, and the 25 of March, the Enemy appeared in a body upon a narrow neck of the Land, neer their Vessels, and with Drums and shoutings said, Come ye Rogues, come ye Rogues, Roundheaded Dogs; which caused the Captain of the Ship to give fire at them, and forced them to march further off, into the neck of Land. In the mean time Capt. Will. Fuller with his Company came up the River with shoutings and couragious rejoycings, and landed with a hundred and twenty men, six mile distant from the Ene∣my: and immediately sent away all their Sioaps and Boats, committing themselves into the hand of God: he marched di∣rectly where the Enemy lay waiting for him. The Enemies Sentry shot; immediately they appeared in order. Captain Fuller still expecting, that then at last, possibly they might give a reason of their coming, commanded his men upon pain of death not to shoot a Gun, or give the first onset; setting up the Standard of the Commonwealth of England: against which, the Enemy shot five or six Guns, and killed one man in the front before a shot was made by the other. Then the word was given, In the Name of God fall on; God is our Strength, that was the Word for Providence: the Marylanders Word was Hey for Saint Maries. The Charge was fierce and sharp for the time; but through the glorious presence of the Lord of Hosts manifested in and towards his poor oppressed people, the Enemy could not endure, but gave back; and were so effectually charged home, that they were all routed, turned their backs, threw down their Arms, and begged mercy. After the first Volley of shot, a small Company of the Enemy, from behinde a great tree fallen, galled us, and wounded divers of our men, but were soon beaten off. Of the whole company of the Marylanders there escaped onely four or five, who run away out of the Army to carry News to their Confederates, Captain Stone, Colonel Price, Captain Gerrard. Captain Lewis, Captain Hendall, Captain Guither, Major Chandler, and all the rest of the Coun∣cellors Officers and Souldiers of the Lord Baltamore▪ among whom, both Commanders and Souldiers, a great number being
Papists, were taken, and so were all their Vessels, Arms, Am∣munition, provision; about fifty men slain and wounded. We lost onely two in the field; but two died since of their wounds. God did appear wonderful in the field, and in the hearts of the people; all confessing him to be the onely Worker of this victory and deliverance. Examinatur per me, William Durand, Secretary of MARYLAND.
The Postscript. THus God our Strength appeared for us; and the blood which they thirsted after in others, was given to them∣selves to drink; the miseries which they threatned to the innocent, fell upon the guilty; the pit which they digged for o∣thers, themselves fell into; the cords which they brought to binde us, bound themselves. This is the Lord's doing, it may well be marvellous in our eyes. What hath been written, is but a very abstract of those great and various providences of God toward his people, and against Antichrist; a great Volume would not contain the wonders which the Lord himself hath wrought and manifested to the hearts of his people in this dispensation. The sum is, Satan and his seed, rising up against the seed of the woman, bruises the heel of Christ, but destroyes himself utterly. The further evil men proceed in their own way, the neerer to destruction: so is it with all flesh, it works it self into ruine, through the adored depths of the wisdom of God. Those who are acquainted with the clear and familiar ap∣pearances of God to his people in times of distress, can understand and rejoyce in what may be now a little further hinted. First, the Lord confounded the Language of Babel in the hearts, projects, and consultations of his people, when they were devising to defend themselves from this danger, till they came to that condition of Jehosaphat, We know not what to do, but our eyes are towards thee; wilt thou judge them? for we have no strength against this multitude.
Secondly, Now the Lord gives testimony from himself in the Spirits of many of his Saints, in a wonderful, plain, yet glorious manner; (for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him) so that as well women as men spake, or rather God spake in them an express testimony what should be the issue of this conflict, that is, glory to God in the highest, deliverance to his people, destru∣ction to Babylon, Songs unto Sion: which was revealed so power∣fully, evidently, and certainly, that it ravish'd the hearts of some, astonish'd others, and encouraged the heart both of Gene∣ral, Captains, and Souldiers, as well as others that could not fight, to a Triumph before the Engagement, and the enjoyment of a victory by the assurance of faith, before one stroke of the battle. The bow of the Lord was made quite bare, to be seen of all that had an eye to see, & his arrows were seen to be sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies before they fell under him. God made the feeble to be as David, and David as God: they were carried out in the strength of the Lord, who gave this testimony to one of the Captains, just as the Enemy came up, The Victory is yours; but God shall be seen, and not man in it. After the battle, what acknow∣ledgement of God in is was in every mean Souldiers mouth, as well as the Commanders, what praising of God, is beyond expres∣sion. They run through all the Company, Give God the glory, Blessed be the name of the Lord. FINIS.
