T1976 R204856 13550245 100179
DISLOYALTY OF LANGUAGE Questioned and Censured. OR, A SERMON Preached against the licencious loose∣nesse of Seditious TONGUES. By Rich. Towgood B. D. one of His Majesties Chaplains, and Vicar of Saint Nicholas Church in Bristoll. Ian. 17. 1642. WITH A BRIEF COROLLARIE Now added, questioning and censuring Rebellious Actions. Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in minde to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evill of no Man. BRISTOLL, Printed for Rich. Harsell, and are to be sold by him in Bristoll, 1643.
To the Reader. CHristian Rea∣der, give me leave to ac∣quaint thee concerning this Sermon following, that as it was necessary discharge of duty that at first drew it to the Pul∣pit, so it is vehement im∣portunity that hath now brought it to the Presse; of such foule Schisme and Faction did our Pul∣pits
ring of late, that it was tedious to hear, grie∣vous to remember. At last there wasIanuary 15. 1642. on the words of the Psal∣mist, Psal. 94.20. brought into the Pulpit such a singular master-piece of furious Sedition, that myAct. 17.16. spirit was stirred in me,Jer. 20.9. I was weary with forbearing and could hold no longer, but took advantage of my next Lecture-turn, which fol∣lowed immediately there∣upon, not to answer the arguments, (which in∣deed were none,) butSi natura negat, fa∣cit indi∣gnatio ver∣sum Qua∣lemcunque potest. Iu∣venal. Sa∣tyr. 1. to
shew the iniquity of such disloyall, such unchri∣stian invectives. The Presse being now brought to Bristoll hath given opportunity to some, to presse me for publishing these Notes, with urgent importunity.Luk. 11.8. what will not impor∣tunity do? Lo, it hath prevailed to make this short discourse subject to thy view, liable to thy censure, yet intend∣ing both thine and the publique peace. Compt∣nesse
of stile and cu∣riosity of words expect not; A trim curious dresse would have required ei∣ther longer time or nim∣bler abilities: such as it is be pleased favour∣ably to accept & candid∣ly to interpret. If here∣by any little profit may accrew to thee upon the perusall of it, I shall abundantly be satisfied for all the wrath and displeasure that by many was taken against me at the hearing of it. It is
not to be expected, I know, that all men should have a minde to imbrace the truth, but be thou, good Christian Reader, be thou satisfied, and I am, Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, RICH. TOWGOOD.
ly with his lipps, which was  apprehended by the hearers a if Iob had said, That his punish∣ment was without desert of sinn or transgression by him commit∣ted. Hereupon Elihu in thi Chapter, takes up the Buckle against Iob, and undertakes  maintain and defend the Justi of God. Peruse the Chapte and ye shall easily perceive this  be the drift and scope thereo Among other expressions to con∣vince Iob, Elihu here useth a argument, a minore, &c. verse  19. Is it fit to say to a King, th art wicked? and to Princes, yee  ungodly? How much lesse to hi that accepteth not the persons  Princes, nor regardeth the rich m then the poor? which is, as if  should have said, It is not fit  tax an earthly King, and to sa to him, Thou art wicked thoug he be so, and therefore mu
more unfit it must needs be to accuse God wrongfully, who is higher then all Kings. The an∣tecedent of this Argument is contained in verse 18. the former part whereof I have now pro∣posed unto you; Is it fit, &c. It is delivered by way of Question, but to make it Argumentative, it must be reduced into a Proposition. Now ye shall observe, that negative Questions are to be re∣duced into affirmative Propositi∣ons, and affirmative Questions, that is, such as have no nega∣tion in them, into negative Pro∣positions; as for instance Nehem. 13.26. Did not Salomon King of Israel sin by these things? that is, he did sin by these things: So Isai 51.9. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? that is, thou art it; And Luke 17.17. Were there not ten cleansed? that is, there were ten, &c. the
Question in all these places being negative, but the Proposition, a is obvious to every common ca∣pacity, affirmative; So again y shall see on the other side, Ezek. 1.13. He that is a Robber a shedder  blood, &c. shall he live? that is,  shall not live, & so it is expound∣ed in the same place. Again, I 58 5. Is it such a fast that I have ch∣sen? that is, it is not such a Fast, & The questions here being affirm∣tive without a negation, but  every eye sees, such as ought  be reduced into negative Propo∣sitions. And indeed such negati Propositions are uttered by w of Question, because Interro∣gations do more vehment deny. Thus, I say, It is gen∣rally throughout the wh Scripture. This Question th in the Text being affirmative, it to be reduced into a negati Proposition, Is it fit, &c. that
It is not fit. Thus then ye have the sence of this Scripture. As for dividing it into parts, I for∣bear, as unnecessary to our pur∣pose. There is one main thing in the Text, and that onely I shall commend unto you, and it is this, being, ye see, the very sence of the Text, namely, To speak bitterly and reproach∣fully of supream Authority, it is a very unfit, unwarrantable, and unlawfull thing. The words in the Originall are something defective, but that this is the sence, and that some such word, as fit, or lawful, or the like, is to be understood & supplyed, is acknowledged not onely by our Translatours, but also by Beza in his Paraphrase on this Book, thus rendring the words, Num dicere Regi fas fuerit? and so Lavater in his Commentary on the place; An dicere licet Regi? is it lawfull to say to a King? Mercerus, a man very
Suitable hereunto is that charge given by the Preacher, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Curse not, that is,Ne ver∣bis eleues, extenues, aeprimas, ne leviter loquaris ut d re abje∣ctâ. Lorin: in Locum. ne veris eleues, &c. do not with thy words lighten his esteem, exte∣nuate or depresse it, speak not slightingly of him as if he were of no worth. This, saith the Preacher, thou mayst not do, no, not in thy secret heart; how much lesse may it be lawfull to be done openly, and in the hea∣ring or others? And M. Cartwright upon this place adds,ex in u∣niversum vetat, ne Principi quis male∣dicat. Hu∣jus autem loci circum∣stantia nos eo ducit ut ue de Rege quidem in∣justo, & stulte regnum procuranti ex subdi quispiam maledicat. Cartw. in Locum. Lex in universum vetat, &c. The Law of God doth forbid, That any ma should in any case speak evill o his Prince; and the circumstance of this place leads us so far, that it may not be lawfull for any o the Subjects to speak evill o
their King, no, though he be un∣just, and do but weakly govern his Kingdom. Thus far he: And if ye look upon the coherence of the Text with the foregoing ver∣ses, ye shall easily perceive the truth hereof. For Eccles. 10.16. Salomon shews the misery of a Land under a bad and vicious Governour, Wo to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child, (that is, moribus, not aetate, not in yeers, but manners) and thy Princes eat in the morning; that is, are given to riot and untimely feasting in stead of hearing and debating matters of State, This misery of a Land (after a short touch of the con∣tary happinesse under a gracious King, inserted ver. 17.) this mi∣sery of a Land is amplified; first, by the effect, which is ruine of the Kingdom, verse 18. set down by comparison with an edifice or building, which if it be neglected,
ledge, the Word of God teache me otherwise; for it is writter Thou shalt not speak evill of the R∣ler of thy People. The place  aimes at, when he saith, It is wr∣ten, is that in Exod. fore-me∣tioned; and here, by the way, y may take notice, that, that which is there called cursing, is here ca∣led evill speaking: ye see Sai Pauls Practice, ye see his Judg∣ment. He will not allow himse to speak one evill word to  Ruler, no though he be never  bad, and that because of t Commandement of God. Ca∣ye have any thing more plai And yet hereunto Reason al might be added, if need were. For first, consider him wi reference to God; (The Ruler  speak of, the supream Rule Consider him, I say, with re∣rance to God, and he is Gods Vi∣gerent. He is the Minister of Go
and the powers that be, are ordained of God, Rom. 13.1.4. they bear Gods name, they sit on his throne; his name they bear; for to them it is spoken, I have said ye are Gods, Psal. 82.6. And on his throne they sit, for so it is said, Salomon sate on the throne of the Lord as King, in stead of David his Father. 1. Chron. 29.23. And can it be lawfull then to speak bitterly, or reproachfully of them whom the Lord hath thus exalted? Surely this very thing is couched in the Precept foremen∣tioned, Exod. 22.28. Thou shalt not curse the Gods; this being intimated as a reason why they may not be evill spoken off, because they are Gods, because they bear his name, and sit on his Throne. Secondly, consider him with reference to us, he is our Father. Abimelech (the signification
whereof is, my Father, the King was a title commonly given to the Kings of Palestina, but may fitly indeed belong to all Kings. For who knows not, that under∣stands his Catechisme, that the fifth Commandement in requi∣ring us to honour our father, doth instruct us in our duty, as well toward our Prince that is over us, as toward our naturall Father that did beget us? and this is the title that the Scripture gives unto Kings and Queens, They are nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers. Isa. 49.23. Now as he in the Poet spake of a naturall Sonne, and his carriage towards a naturall Father, so may we say in this behalf,Terent. Heauton. Act. 1. Scen. 2. Quem ferret, parentem si non ferret suum? With whom should we bear, if not with our Father? Looke on the carriage of Ionathan towards King Saul his Father. 1. Sam. 20.30.34.
though his Father called him Rebell,See the Marg. of our new Translat. 1 Sam. 20.30. perverse Rebell, nay, Son of perverse Rebellion; that is, one wholly given to rebell against him, and thereupon also cast a Javelin at him, yet ye shall not finde one evill word replyed by Ionathan. Nay, and that all the world may know that Ionathan continued in his duty and allegi∣ance toward Saul, notwithstand∣ing all the harsh and cruell dea∣ling of King Saul shewed towards him, it is recorded by the Holy Ghost, at the death of them both, that Saul and Ionathan were lovely and pleasant in their Lives, and in their Death they were not divided. Nothing could put Ionathan from his Duty and Faithfulnesse to a Father, 2 Sam. 1.23. In a word what shall become of him, that will speak evill of a Father; the Wiseman shewes, The eye that mocketh his Father, &c. The Ravens
of the valley shall pick it out, and  young Eagles shall eat it, Pro. 30. Thirdly, and lastly, Co∣sider the mischief that will fo∣low, if Soveraign authority b once made vile.Drus. Apophth. lib. 1. Nisi esset me regni, said Rabbi Hananiah, alt alterum vivum devoraret. L fear of authority be laid aside which must needs be when it  made vile, and confusion sudden∣ly must be expected. It is wort your noting that you read Iosh. 14. The Lord magnified Ioshua in th sight of all Israel, and they feare him. The wise God knows, tha authority the more it is honour∣ed, the more also it is awed and reverenced by the people; and therefore did he magnifie Ioshu in the sight of all Israel, and the effect was answerable, they fear∣ed him indeed. To the like pur∣pose ye finde, that after Saul had mmitted that great sin in spa∣ring
Agag the King of the Ama∣lekites and the cattell, and had therefore sharply been reproved by Samuel the Prophet, Saul at length making some confession of his sin, and desiring the Pro∣phet to go with him to worship the Lord, though Samuel at the first refused, saying, I will not re∣turn with thee, for thou hast reje∣cted the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee, &c. yet upon a second request, when Saul saith to him, yet honour me now, I ray thee, before the Elders of my people, and before Israel; Samuel now for the Common peace and publick good, and to prevent the langerous mischiefs that might ensue, if Soveraign authority, by such a man as he was, should m in any measure to be sligh∣ted or dis-regarded, he doth yeeld to the Kings desire to honour him before the people, and turned
again after Saul, 1 Sam. 15.25, 20, 30, 31. Well then, these premisses con∣sidered, that is, the charge and Commandement of God more then once given, Saint Pau judgment in the point, and pra∣ctice answerable, with these rea∣sons out of Scripture thus mani∣fested, we may well infer thi conclusion, surely, It is not fit  say to a King, thou are wicked; or  you will give me leave, fromIn his Cōment on the Text. Lvter a judicious and piou expositour, to borrow a few words, thus we may expresse i sapiens & mentis compos non facil∣dices Regi suo, &c.S. Hierom also doth count it a kinde of madnesse. Simplex praeceptum aedifi∣cat audientes, ne ira & furre superati in mi∣ledictum & in detractionem Regum & Prin∣cipum prorumpamus. Hieronym. in Eccles. 10.20. A wise m and one that is well in his wits wi
not easily utter bitter, and reproach∣full speeches concerning his King, the Lords annointed. First then, to apply it, this may Lesson us of the Clergy, not to bring such maledictions with us into the Pulpit; such evill spee∣ches concerning supream Autho∣rity, neither directly nor indi∣rectly. A naughty person, saith Sa∣lomon, winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers. Prov. 6.12, 13. that is, by very nods and signes, he will make the bitternesse of his minde understood; but much more powerfull are his words, though they be but even indirect Glances. Oh how many young Divines have we, (I will not sayCicer. de senectute. Prodierunt Oratores novi, &c.) how many young Divines have we in these dayes, that choose for the Pulpit such Theams, and frame for their Auditory such
lumniate the doings of a Prince  De peccatis Principum apud plebem conqucri, est seditionum Semina ja∣cere, saithWolph. in 2 King. 12.7. fol. 291. Tigur: ex∣cus. per Christoph. Froschon. Anno 1566. Wolphius a Learned Divine, and Civilian both. To complain unto the People of the Princes errours, is nothing else but to sow the seeds of sedition. And Melancthon, that fa∣mous and Learned Divine, that was so great an assistant unto Luther in the Reformation, doth within the compasse of two or three pages in Octavo, no lesse then three severall times, speaking of the Magistrate, declare his judge∣ment in this behalf.Scholia Phil: Me∣lanct: in Coloss. cap. 2. propefi∣nem. ex∣tant Phil: Mel: & Scholia in Epist: ad Colss. & enarratio Epist: ad Col. Non minim part est honoris, errata corum nostr Patientia tegere, sicut filii Noae ma∣jores natu tegebant Patrem. It is n little part of honour (saith he, speaking of the honour due to Magistrates) to cover their errour by our Patience, as the elder So of Noah did hide their Father
nakednesse; and again a little after,Nihil est vulgarius quam de Magistra∣tibus queri, beneficia quae per illos accipimus nemo intel∣ligit, vitia omnes vi∣dent, alius negligenti∣am, alius saevitiam accusat, quemad∣modum ca∣lumniaba∣tur Patrem Absolon. ibid. Nihil est vulgarius quam de Ma∣gistratibus queri, &c. Nothing is more common, then to complain of Magistrates; the Benefits we receive by them, no Man doth consider, their vices all Men behold; one Man accuseth their negligence, another their cruelty, even as Absolom did calumniate his Father. At ejusmodi Querelas prohibet Scripturae, cum Inquit, Principi populi tui non male∣ledices. But such complaints, saith he, the Scripture doth forbid, when it saith, thou shalt not curse the Ru∣ler of thy People. And yet again a little after, neque vero est volunt as Dei ut criminatione aut seditionibus torum vitia emendentur; It is not the will of God that either by crimi∣nation or sedition, we should go about to amend their errours; thus he: And if this be a course univer∣sally unwarrantable, how much lesse fit is it for Ministers and
thereunto called. So did Elij deal with Ahab. 1 King. 18.1 and 21, 20. So did Azariah t Priest with King Vzziah, it p taineth not to thee, &c. 2 Chr. 2 18. and Iohn the Baptist with Her It is not lawfull for thee to have  Brothers wife, Mark. 6.18. A if the Preachers at the Court o any way fail, as occasion shall  quire, to do their duty in this Be∣half, they must expect to gives account thereof unto Almigh God. But in the Kings absen unto his Subjects, behind h back, as the saying is, to spe evill of him, this cannot go for reproof, this can neither info him, nor reform him, nor a way tend to his amendment,  is a meer reproach and calum∣tion. Give me a Prophet,  example of one Prophet, that  ever before the people reprehe the errours of a Magistrate
the Magistrates absence, but one∣ly so far as the people were in∣volved in those errours, and be∣came guilty by obeying their sin∣full commands. Thus the Pro∣phet Micha, cap. 6. when he saith, vers. 16.A Scrip∣ture much insisted on to counte∣nance dis∣obedi∣ence; though the Pro∣phet doth not re∣prove them for passive o∣bedience; neither have we (God be thanked) an Omri to Reign o∣ver us. The statutes of Omri are kept, doth not so much blame the Prince for making those Statutes, as the People for keeping of them: But give me a Prophet that ever did to the people de∣claim of the errours of his Sove∣raign, as they were simply his own errours. I will give you a Son of Belial that did so, that is, Absalon, who slandered his Fa∣ther, and spoke evill of his Go∣vernment in his Fathers absence; there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee, said he, 2 Sam. 16.3. ay, I will give you a Prophet and a Prophetesse that did so too; but whether they did well, or whether it be safe to tread in their stepps, judge yee. Miriam
that Miriam who seems to have been chief in the transgression, (for though she were but the sister, yet she is mentioned in the first place, and set before Aaron the brother, ibid. vers. 1.) she,  say, for this offence is smitten with leprosie, and though Moses himself did most earnestly make intercession unto the Lord for her, yet could he not wholly take of the punishment; for seven dayes at least she must endure the leprosie, and be shut out of the Camp, ibid. vers. 10—15. Let them that like the reward, if they think good, follow the example. True indeed, ye shall finde sometimes how the Saints, espe∣cially in the Psalms, do complain and make their moan unto th Almighty God, concerning the tyrany of ungodly Rulers, as,A Scrip∣ture that was like∣wise abused to disquiet the peo∣ple, though the Psal∣mist there speaks not of his own So∣veraign. Psal. 2.2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsell together against the Lord, and against his Anointed; andThe se∣ditious handling of which words gave occa∣sion to this Ser∣mon. shall the throne of iniquity have any fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a Law? Psal. 94.20. Many other places might be mentioned of the like nature, but generally ye shall observe, those complaints were made to God, not to the People. David that goes by common repute for the Authour of the Book of Psalms, and was indeed the Au∣thour of the greatest part of them, though in many places he com∣plains unto the Lord of Sauls cruell dealing with him, yet there∣by to dishonour, and vilifie King Saul before his subjects, this sure∣ly was far from him; for look into the story, in the first Book of Samuel, and there ye shall not finde so much as one evill word uttered by David concerning Saul, no not to his own dearest friends
thered, promising withall to gi him Merab his elder daughter  wife, which yet as appears, h had no purpose ever to pe form; the Gibeonites he slew co trary to Publick Oath, and  lessE then fourscore and five o the Lords Priests did he cause  one time barbarously to be m thered, 1 Sam. 22.18. upon h servants did he bestow oth mens fields and vineyards, 1 Sa 22.7. as it was foretold the  raelites before hand, should b fall them by the King who they desired to have over the 1 Sam. 8.14. he consulted wi Witches, and many other  besides was he guilty of; for  evill spirit was upon him, and  must needs go whom the De drives; and yet notwithstanding all this, in that Epitaph or Fun rall Elegie, David doth not  much as touch upon any one
his vices, onely he takes notice of the good things that were in him, and commemorates the hap∣pinesse they enjoyed under him. Look upon the very entrance of the Song, and thus it begins, The beauty of Israel is slain, 2 Sam. 1.19. this glorious title he giveth unto Saul, because he was King, as bad as he was; The Beauty of Israel: after this he proceedeth to speak of his valour, and other vertues, the sword of Saul returned not empty. &c. ibid. vers. 22, 23. and then at length he comes to the happinesse the people lived in under his Government; ye daugh∣ters of Israel, weep over Saul who athed you in Scarlet with other lights, who put on ornaments of ld upon your apparell, vers. 24. they for the generall did live hap∣pily under him, though some few and endured hard measure from him: and thus David ye see,
when he hath occasion unto the people to speak of their Sove∣raign, he hides his vices, h commends unto them his ver∣tues; this becomes Prophets  Let us take him for our pat∣tern. I meddle not with that un∣happy Difference between H Majesty andSo it was then ac∣counted among us. His Parliament a businesse I tremble to think on onely my Prayers are, that th Most High God, the God o Peace, who maketh War t cease, when he pleaseth, in all th world, would of his great mer finde out some Reconciliation  and cause this unnaturali War cease, and settle once again Pea in our Borders; but this we ma observe in the language of th Honourable House, they are mo sparing of His Majesty then ma∣ny particular men of mean cor∣dition. They charge His Maje∣sties
evill Counsellours, they sel∣dom ascend so high as to touch the Throne; but however, thoughThis was spok∣en not to justifie the one, but to con∣vince the other. sometimes they do, yet who knows not what a vast difference there is between that which goes for the whole representative Bo∣dy of the Kingdom, and one single private man? tibi privato nè mutire quidem concessum est. It is not lawfull for thee a private man so much as to open thy lips; saith Cartwright on E cles. 10.20. and he was wont to be of some e∣steem among us; and therefore let that of Saint Iude foremen∣tioned ever be remembred by us, that for Seducers and false-teachers by the Holy Ghost they are all esteemed, that despise Do∣minion and speak evill of Digni∣ties, that is, of the persons of those that are in authority, as by the instance of Michael and the Devill in the next verse there
extraordinary sins, for he did that which was evill in the sight of the Lord his God, and humble not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet speaking from the Mouth of the Lord; and he alsoHe was not then the su∣pream Magi∣strate, but a Rebell against his Soveraign and had broken his oath of Alle∣giance, Ezek. 17.15, 16, 18. rebel∣led against King Nebuchadnez∣zar who had made him swear by God, but he stiffened his neck and hardned his heart from turning unto the Lord God of Israel, 2 Chron. 36.12, 13. these were heinous sins, and therefore was the Prophet Ezekiel extraor∣dinarily stirred up by the Spi∣rit of the Lord to give him such an unusuall sharp re∣proof 2. For the absence, he was a state-Preacher, and directed his Speech to the King, and sent it from Babylon to Hierusa∣lem by the Embassadours, that wereJer. 29.3. come thither from Ze∣dekiah; and so it was all one a
if he had delivered it in pre∣sence before the King. To the second, concerning that of our Saviour to Herod, I like∣wise answer, 1. The Pharisees came to our Saviour like Foxes and a∣bused Herods name, (as the Kings name is sometimes false∣ly pretended) get thee out, say they, and depart hence, for He∣rod will kill thee, Luk. 13.31. this was a meer forgery of theirs, for Herod had no such purpose, he being glad, as is mentioned afterward, that he had an opportunity to see our Saviour, whereof he had had a desire a long season, Luk. 23.8. and therefore it is conceived by Theophylact and Euthymius, that our Saviour directs his Speech to the Pharisees here present, not to Herod; and that so much the rather, because
our own; andHe that goeth a∣bout to perswade a multi∣tude that they are not so well go∣verned as they ought to be, shall never want at∣tentive and fa∣vourable heares. Hooker. Eccles. Polit. lib. 1. the very first words. nothing doth please better in these dayes then bitter invectives against miscar∣riages of Authority, and I will shew you some reason for what I say, 1. The great concourse and flocking to such Preachers, from whom such discourses are expected. 2. The diligent attention given to them; while Christian Duties are Preached, that tend to salvation of Souls, how do some willingly give themselves to sleep? how do others o the female sex especially, play with their Children? but le there be some Bitter discourse against Soveraign Authority how do they shake off all Drowsinesse? not suffer their Children to Quap? and lister with all the best attention that possibly they can afford?
3. The applause that is given after such a discourse hath been heard: An excellent man, an admirable Sermon, sweet matter, would we might have more of it; it was but too short, &c. I cannot here but remember that ofDe Tran∣quill. anim. cap. 2. Seneca, sunt ulcera quae∣dam quae nocituras manus appetunt. Some kind of itching ulcers there are that love to be rubb'd, when yet by the rubbing the disease is increased. Such an itching ulcer there is in the eare of many hear∣ers of this kinde, they love to hear of the failings of superiour powers, and the more they hear, the worse they are; the more doth disloyalty and forgetful∣nesse of duty creep into their hearts. But, Beloved, let me put you in minde of that of our Savi∣our. Mark. 4.24. Take heed what yee hear, and Luk 8.18. Take heed
how ye hear. First, be not desirous to hear that which is not fit to be spoken, take heed what ye hear; o if unexpectedly ye do hear such things, yet hear it not with de∣light, Take heed how ye hear; ye shall give an acount of you hearing, both what, and how ye have heard. This ye know, that he who receives an evill repor against his Brother, his Equall, i not fitly qualified to be reckoned amongDetra∣here, aut detrahen∣tem audire, quid horum damnabi∣lius sit, non facilè dixe∣rim. Ber∣nard. de Considerat. lib. 2. prope fm. the Citizens of Zion. Psal. 15.1.3. how much lesse he that receives a re∣proach against his Superiour, his Soveraign? and therefore stop your eares, take no delight in hearing such contumelies against Authority; and surely, this will be one means to further Peace. It is to be feared in this great dif∣ference there are fomenters o both sides; There may be such on the Kings side, and how they
re censured, that stir up the Kings of the earth to war, ye may ee, Revel. 16.13. unclean spirits like unto Froggs. Spirits, because by Profession, spirituall; unclean, Because of their unwarrantable Practise; like Froggs, because of their clamorous Loquacity; such  say, there may be on the Kings side, and it is too evident there are those that stir up the Peo∣ple on the other side, and why they may not receive the same censure I know not; but this I m sure of, the withdrawing the are from such Preachers, is the way to make contention cease, Take away the fewell and the fire goeth out, Prov. 26.20. Well, this is the first thing con∣cerning the people, that they take no delight in hearing such discourses. The second is, that they take no liberty to vent concerning the
King, evill and dishonourabl speeches themselves. The ar∣gument in this case holds goo also; he that backbiteth h equall, shall be no Citizen o Zion. Psal. 15. how much le he that backbiteth or speake evill of his Prince? A strang pronesse there is in our corrup nature, if we conceive our selve a little wronged; or that we can not obtain things according  our minde, presently to let loo our tongues even against our bet∣ters, and not to spare Suprea Authority it self; nay, too ready hereunto some be, though the be no cause given them; such one was Shimei, who railed so bit∣terly on King David, Come out come out, thou Bloudy man, and the man of Belial, 1 Sam. 16.7. Davi had done no wrong to him, onely he took advantage of the times which then did favour every on
that was Davids Enemy, and some wrong he conceived had een done by David to his Cousin ing Saul; but mark what be∣came of this man that so inveigh∣d against the King: David  deed pardoned him, 2 Sam. 19.3. but by the just hand and Pro∣dence of God he was brought to  Malefactours end, 1 King. 2.6. ye know that of the wise an, The wrath of a King is as essengers of Death, Prov. 16.14. d whoso provoketh him to anger inneth against his own soul, Prov. 0.2. surely David had just cause to be wroth with Shimei, for though he had unjustly shed some nocent blood, yet he ought not still, and by every one to be up∣raided with it, and therefore hough David pardoned him, yet God made that wrath which David had so just a cause to conceive, to become as Messen∣gers
of death unto him; and will not the Lord still make his own words good? hath he said, the wrath of a King is as Messengers o Death, and shall it not be so? think upon that of our Saviour, Heaven and earth shall passe away, but my words shall not passe away, Matth 24.35. no, not one jot, or tittle  it, but shall all be fulfilled, Matth 5.18. and therefore delight no to hear, be not ready to spea any evill of the King, for a Brid of the aire shall carry the Voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter, Eccles. 10.20. Such wa their care in those dayes, they durst notAs is im∣plyed by forbid∣ding it to be done in the thought or bed∣chamber, in that Eccles. 10.20. openly speak evill o the King: But see, strange way the Lord hath to bring this sin t light, though it be never so se∣cret; and strange wayes also  hath to bring it to punishment even when the King hathAs in that instance of Shimei. par∣doned it.
Well then, to conclude; let us all both of Clergy and Laity, be carefull to observe that counsell, and to practise that Duty com∣mended to us by the Apostle, Fear God, Honour the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, saith our Sa∣viour, Matth. 22.21. Nay, we render not unto God the things that are Gods, unlesse for his sake we render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars; and therefore let Caesar have our honour and Re∣ference, yea though in every point perhaps he may not be such as we would have him to e. Si Magistrorum vita jure re∣rehenditur, oportet ut cos subditi iam cum displicent, venerentur, reg. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 22. for Magistrorum put Magistratuum, nd it will hold more strongly:  the life of the Magistrate de∣serve
justly to be blamed, yet ought he by his Subjects, even when he please them not, still to be honoured. We justly cry out upon the Papists for abolishing the second, upon the Libertines for nullifying the fourth; let us take heed, we be not guilty of the same sin in making void the fifth commandement. Have there been any mistakes in our Dread So∣veraign, as there is no man living free from errours (and yet be certain Relation of those that have well observed him, he is a Pattern of Piety to those that are about him; but I say) have there been any? are there yet any why, yet do not thou falie like wise to do thy Duty; Three things belong to thee in this Be∣half, 1. Pity him. Though we may deceive our selves in our own mis-apprehensions too
for who knows the Kings heart? and the best constru∣ction that may be, we ought to make of every mans acti∣ons, much more of the Prin∣ces. But be it so, that there be indeed reall errours, yet thy duty is to pity him, not to re∣vile him; thou knowest not what strong temptations he hath to wrestle with,Drus. Apoph. lib. 1. socium tuum priusquam ad locum ejus adveneris, ne judicato, said Rabbi Hillel. Censure not thy Brother (much lesse thy Father) till thou hast stood in his place, and hast tryed the difficulties of his standing.The se∣cret lets and diffi∣culties which in publique proceedings are innu∣merable and inevitable, they (meaning the multitude) have not ordinarily the judgement to consider, Hooker, ubi supra. High places are slippery places, and were it not
sion an happy continuance o severall gracious Princes, and for many yeers we have lived under them in much happinesse and prosperity no to be paralleld in other ages or by other nations.Deut. 32.15. But I surun waxed fat and kicked; ou long peace and great plenty hath begot aboundance o pride, wantonnesse, excesse, se∣curity, and other abominable impieties: for these sins Go hath a controversie with us  and through the anger of God upon us for these sins have we not cause to beleeve that some errours in Government may have been committed for our punishment? Oh, therefore let us judge our selves, not speak evill of the King; let us condemn our selves, not ca∣lumniate the Lords Anointed. If there be any thing amisse in
him, we have cause to suspect it is through our own default; and if there be any thing we would desire should be re∣formed in him, it is to be done by our Prayers, not by our criminations; by the amend∣ment and Reformation of our own wayes, not by the male∣volence and bitternesse of our Tongues. These things, Beloved, belong nto us. Let us1 Thess. 4.11. study to be Quiet nd do our own Businesse, namely ose Duties that do concern our elves; Let us not be Eagle-eyed broad, especially above us, and ot discern what faults there areat ome; Let no evill words against overaign Authority upon any ther suspected or known errour op from thee, seeing by that ve∣ry act thou doest attract upon y Soule that very thing which  eagerly thou reprehendest,
A Corollarie that was not then delivered, but now added. IF it be so unlawfull to say to a King, thou art wicked, that is, to smite him with the tongue; how is it much more unlawfull to strike him with a sword or bullet, or to take up Arms against him?With this Con∣troversie indeed I medled not when the Ser∣mon was Preached, but obvi∣ous it is to every mean un∣derstand∣ing, that of necessi∣ty this must fol∣low. The con∣sequence is unavoidable; for as bitter words outwardly expressed are sins of a higher nature then rash anger inwardly conceived, Matth. 5.22. so are bloody acti∣ons of the hand sins of a deeper die then malevolent speeches and bitter words of the tongue. Saint Paul did indeed confesse his er∣rour when in words he had abu∣sed
the High Priest; but when David by an injurious action had wronged King Saul, the text saith, his heart smote him, as in∣timating a more then ordinary measure of sorrow for what he had done, 1 Sam. 24.5. and worth your noting it is, that David there had but cut off a lap of the King Robe, which a man would have thought had been no great injury and if for this Davids heart smot him, Oh! how would his hear have ak't, how would it hav bled within him, if he had of∣fered any little violence to th Kings person? And further it i to be taken into consideration that Saul at that time1 Sam. 15.26. was re∣jected from being King,1 Sam. 16.12, 13. David was chosen and anointed to b King in his stead; nay, and more the hearts of the whole Kingdom were with David, both of th Countrey and of the Court too
for the Text tells us, that1 Sam. 18.5. he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Sauls servants: and again,ibid. v. 16. all Israel and Iudah loved David, and yet again,ibid. v. 30. his name was much set by; so that we may justly say, That not onely the representative body, but the whole Kingdom it self were with David. Now lay all these things together and see if there can possibly any fairer co∣our be imagined for rising up a∣gainst any Prince then was here against Saul; so bad and eminent∣ly vicious was he, that he was re∣jected of God, & (as we may just∣lyFor known it was that David was designed to be his successour 1 Sam. 25.30. conceive) publikely known so o be, Another chosen & anoynt∣ed of God to succeed him, the hearts and votes of the whole Kingdom likewise following and applauding him, and yet so far is David from striking the King, that he doth not onely prohibit
peoples hearts not onely Such as openly re∣prove supposed disorders of state are taken for prin∣cipall friends to the com∣mon be∣nefit of all Hooker, ubi supra. think well, but also obstinately to persist in their good thought of them that seditiously oppose Authority. Look upon that sto∣ry, Numb. 16. Korah and those rebellious Princes that were with him had not a few, but all th congregation on their side, ver. 1 and though the Lord made a new thing, and commanded the earth to open her mouth and swallow up the Rebells and their houses, and after that caused a fire to break out, that consumed two hundred and fifty more of the same crew; yet on the very next morrow all the Congregation o the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron saying, ye haveAnd so now they cry out, the Children of God are per∣secuted. killed the people
of the Lord, Numb. 16.41. so strongly opinionated were they concerning the worth of Korah and his Complices; but let it not  so with us, let us not be like nto these obstinate Israelites; umanum est errare, incident it is o all mankinde to erre and be deceived, but wilfully and despe∣rately to persist in an errour, this s scarce humanum, I forbear to mention to whom this belongs. Neither let any man say, we e not yet convinced, and how hen shall we change our mindes or alter our course? Why, doth not that which hath been spoken, convince thee of the unlawful∣nesse of disloyall words? and if so, thou canst not but acknow∣ledge much more the sinfulnesse of disloyall actions. But yet a little more to further thy delivery out of this snare, give me leave, Oh
pressed in many parts of divine Writ both of the old and new Testament; as for instance, a plain precept, My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knoweth the ru∣ine of them both? Prov. 24.21, 22. Again, another as plain and powerfull, I counsell thee to keep the Kings commandement, and that in regard of the oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evill thing, for he doth what∣soever pleaseth him. Where the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto him what doest thou? Eccles. 8.2, 3, 4. What need I mention that famous place, too plain to be evaded, Let every soul be subject to the Higher powers: for there is no power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Rom. 13.1, 2. Lastly, to mention no more, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as su∣ream, or unto Governours, as unto them, that are sent by him. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. In all these Scriptures and many more that might be produced, obedience to Sove∣raign Authority is plainly and expressely required, and in all this we know, God speaks, and therefore we cannot be deceived. On the other side, they that plead for the taking up of Arms, to stop the mouth and stifle the sence of all these Scriptures, and to avoid the duty therein re∣quired, they bring strange glosses,As be∣tween the man and the Magi∣strate; be∣tween the Kings Person & His power &c. such a distincti∣on did the Jewes use when they went about to stone our Saviour, for a good work we stone thee not. Ioh. 10.33. new-found distinctions, & far∣fetcht expositions, but in all this
1. If the Jewes had no such Priviledges, how comes it to passe that we should have any? were the Contrivers of our Government wiser then the Almighty that Consti∣tuted theirs? Indeed 'tis true the Jewes sinned in desiring a Kingly Government over them, yet it is evident that the Almighty had a purpose be∣fore hand to settle them in∣to a Monarchy. The pro∣mise was long before made unto Abraham,Gen. 17.6. Kings shall come out of thee, which promise was principally to be fulfilled in Isaac's seed; and therefore though the people sinned in asking a King, yet it cannot be conceived that the Al∣mighty in bringing his own purpose to passe, would make it the lesse beneficiall to them (for what if some did
not beleeve?Iacob u∣sed un∣warrant∣able means in obtaining the bles∣sing; yet foras∣much as the Lord had be∣fore hand purposed that Iacob should have it, it was esta∣blished upon him in as ample manner as if he had not sinned in obtaining of it, Gen. 27. shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? Rom. 3.3.) or that he would neglect in that government which himself framed, to make such provision as might best secure the honour of his own name, the purity of his worship, and the safety of his people from the tyranny of back sliding Princes; surely, if the Lord in his wisdom had fore-seen such a power in the people to have been the best means to prevent the mischiefs that might have befallen that na∣tion, it cannot be conceived, he would have with-held, or have kept it from them; and if he saw it not to be good for
and such an absolute Con∣querour did he shew himself, even over our very Laws, that he made the Laws them∣selves to learn another lan∣guage, speaking in the Saxon tongue before, but ever since in the French dialect. Some immunities and priviledges were afterwards by some of his Successours granted to their Subjects; but a power to take up Arms against them∣selves did never any of them grant. Indeed if both Hou∣ses in their full number had unanimously agreed touching the reall being of such a Con∣stitution; it would have cau∣sed some doubt in the hearts even of those who of them∣selves had little inclination to believe it: but now when we see the Houses in this Cause deserted by the greatest part
of their own Members, what can we imagine, but that by their departing, they disa∣vow the thought of such a Constitution? 4. If there were any such Constitution of our State, why should it now be put in execution, when His Majesty hath promised, and that with so many solemn Vowes, to maintain our Religion, and to preserve both our Laws and Liberties? Nay, if there were any such secret Constitution of the State, doth either it, or any Law of necessity en∣able a wilfull heady Partie under pretence of opposing innovation, by tyranny and assistance of a forraign Power, to change the known Consti∣tution of the State, and to in∣troduce a forraign Govern∣ment? If Pareus himself were
Whether therefore we look upon the King, or whether we look upon the Kings op∣posites, there is no need that this Constitution (if any suc thing there be) should now be put in execution. If w look on the King, he vows t preserve our Religion, Laws and Liberties; if we look o the Kings Opposites, there i nothing can justly enable them to change that Govern∣ment that is not absolutely evill, and wherein Christian souls may undoubtedly be sa∣ved: and why then is the sword unsheathed against him, to whom properly i belongs to bear the sword If happinesse here, and heaven hereafter may be had without the sword, to whom may we think shall all these rivers of Christian blood now shed, be
imputed at that great and dreadfull day? See then, is not here enough to convince us of the unlawfulnesse of bearing Arms against our law∣full Soveraign? The Scripture doth by the mouth of many wit∣nesses most plainly forbid it; there is nothing but strained in∣terpretations, and an imagina∣ie Constitution left to warrant . And are not these poor and eak grounds for a Christian to enture his soul upon? Yet one thing more there is, hereat many I know do stum∣ble, and that is, the multitude of so many judicious and godly men that walk that way; and surely this must needs be acknowledged  be the principall part of the eavy judgement that is upon us at this day, the strange division hat is among us, and that so great a number of able men
lsse thenAnd these two hun∣dred and fifty drew the whole Congre∣gation after them. two hundred and fif  consumed by fire; such was the number: & for their eminency th Text tells us, that they were fa∣mous in the congregation; Nay,  is doubled, that we might tak the more notice of it, men of re∣nown. Numb. 16.2. and if w look on Numb. 26.9. we shall finde the Holy Ghost speaking o some of them with an Emphasis. This is that Dathan and Abiram which were famous in the Congrega∣tion; and for what were they so famous and renowned? Was it not for their Religion and Piety, that is, for the externall shew of it at least? do not the words of the Congregation intimate so much unto us, calling them  Gods People, when they murmured against Moses and Aaron saying, ye have killed the People of the Lord? well, as ma∣ny as they were, and as famously
pious as they were, they were in  foul fault, and in terrorem for ll future Ages, they received a arfull punishment. I write not his to cast an aspersion upon eligion, better it were my pen hould cleave to my fingers, but atly to warn us, That the con∣ert of our religion draw us not in∣o the like transgression (for pride nd self-conceit, as appears in the meOut of their pride they told Moses and Aaron, they took too much upon them. instance, Numb. 16.3. are incipall actors in sedition and  bellion) and partly to shew ow little cause we have to be wayed even by religious mul∣itudes, there being in them no fallibility, though they be never o famous for the profession of Piety. And therefore if we have been deceived, let us yet return to our duty again. It is good counsell given by Elephaz, Iob. 15.31. Let not him that is deceived trust in va∣nity;
that which is our errou let it not be our'Twas so with Dathan and Abi∣ram, their cause was bad, but their con∣fidence was won∣derfull and that even unto death. Numb. 26.27. confidence; tha which is our sin, let it not be  steemed as the principall part  our sincerity. Let us not preten that we take up Arms for th Lord Jesus Christ; he is not wi∣ling thus to be defended, heMatth. 26.52. re∣buked Peter for drawing hi sword in his defence, and adde further a generall commination all they that take the sword, mean∣ing against the Magistrate, shall perish with the sword, Matth. 26.52. And certainly if we look over Histories, we shall finde the event of things to have been agreeable to this commination, even in all ages. Unnecessary Wars have seldome good successe, especially those that are taken up by Sub∣jects against their Soveraigns; They may prosper for a while, but the end is seldome blessed. See what examples the Scripture
it self doth furnish us withall. The Sodomites rebelled against Chedorlaomer and were taken cap∣ive, Gen. 14. Zedekiah rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar and be∣des many other miseries,2 King. 25. had is eyes put out.2 Sam. 18. The confusion f Korah and his associates was entioned before.2 Sam. 20. And did not  Alsalon likewise come to a olefull end? Did it go well with  Sheba or1 King. 1. & 2. Adonijah? had  Zimri peace? TheAct. 5.36, 37. & 21.38. Ioseph: Antiq: Iudaic: lib. 18. cap. 1. 2 King. 9.31. Gaulonites  Galibaeans that among the Iees ere so rebellious against the man Emperours, how many ultitudes of them came to an timely death? and among the st some of them being at their votion, Pilate came upon them d mingled their blood with eir sacrifice, Luk. 13.1. And e Iewes universally, when uni∣rsally theyIoseph: de bello Iu∣daic: lib. 2. cap. 17. &c. rebelled against  Romans, they were wholly
ruined and the Ntion rooted out and scattered all the world over. Nay, there is a worse thing yet behinde, the Apostle tells us tht theyIde v. 8.11. who dispise dominion and speak evill of dignities (beingvers. 16. murmurers and omplainers, that is, ambitiously factious,vers. 19 seperating themselves, as he there doth further describe them) their doome is toThough all Magi∣strates be not imme∣diately by God him∣self set up, as Moss and Aaron were, yet they that rise up against them, involve them∣selves in Korahs sin, and draw upon them∣selves Korahs punishment, as in this place o the Apostle appears. perish in the gain-saying of Core, that is they immitate him in their sin, and they shall partake with him in the condemnation. And yet once again to descend as low as to words and speeches, the Israelites did but question with
themselves how King Saul could save them, and thereupon omitted to being presents unto him, and this very thing was im∣puted unto them as a heinous transgression, and themselves re∣puted for it no better then the Children of Belial. 1 Sam. 10.27. But on the other side, see what blessings God hath in store for those, who in all lawfull things yeeld obedience to those that are over them The fiftEphes. 6.2. Commande∣ment is a Commandement with promise; the blessing of long life is promised to them that keep it: And the Preacher tells us, thatEccles. 8.5. whoso keepeth the commandement (speaking of the Kings comman∣dement shall feel no evill thing. A most notable example of Gods singular favour towards them that are obedient in this kinde, we may see in the RechabitesIer. 25.18, 19. Thus saith the Lord of Hostes, the
Here's the lively Character of cursed sedition, new Captains to lead them, & a mercilesse daling with all those that dare gain-say or oppose them; yea though  be done never so sweetly with most friendly advice, and most Christian Counsell for their own good. In the relation of this mutinie it is said of Caleb, that he had another spirit with him, vers. 24. He was not like to this seditious company; for he stilled the people before Moses, cap. 13.30. And when he saw their Rebellion, he rent his clothes, and spake to all the company to disswade them, though it were to the hazard of his life cap. 14 6, 7, &c. Now behold th reward both of the one and o the other. All the seditious mul∣titude are excluded, and Caleb onely with Ioshua, who joyned with him, are admitted into th Land of Canaan: And yet that i
not all, it was no little comfort and happinesse, besides all this unto Caleb, that the Lord was so graciously pleased to honour him with that high title of being his servant, & with that singular com∣mendations of having another spirit; But my Servant Caleb had another spirit with him (& hath fol∣lowed me fully) him will I bring into the land, where into he went, and his seed shall possessent, v. 24. Thus were Caleb and Ioshua (for that which is spoken of one, is to be understood of both, as appears, Numb. 14.6, 7. & 32.12.) thus, I say, were they rewarded for their peaceable, quiet, and dutifull behaviour to∣wards their superiours. I will adde but one instance more, and that is the Children of those sedi∣tious parents, that were kept out of the Land of Canaan; they ta∣king warning by the example of their Fathers, promised better
