V358 12202541 56136
VIENNA'S Triumph; WITH THE Whigg's Lamentation For the Overthrow of the TURKS. To the Tune of, Now now the fight's done. NOw now's the Siege rais'd, and the numerous Train Of the Turks, Iove be prais'd, are Defeated again: Their Mahomets aid, they in vain did implore, And they swear they'l not trust the dull God any more: The Sham of the Load-stone, at last they have found, And their God is Condemn'd to be laid under ground. II. Let the English give praise, let all Christendom joyn, In singing of Lays, to the Powers Divine, Vienna once more hath the Victory won, And the TVRKS though so mighty are put to the run: The Gyant Goliah by David was slain, Thus who fight against Heaven, do fight but in vain. III. The Grand Vizier's fled, in vain he did boast, And 'twill cost him his Head, since the Battle he lost: His many of Thousands, he Invincible thought, Yet they by few hundreds, to Confusion were brought; To the great King of Poland, let the Honour redound, Whose actions with Credit, and Fame do abound. IV. To the Duke of Lorrain, great praises are due, Who had Fought but in vain, if proud words had prov'd true: At the Emperor's Threats, he laught in his sleeve, And all his great proffers, he scorn'd to believe: But Great as he was, he withstood all their Charms, Chusing rather to dye in his Country-mens Arms. V. His Loyalty true all the World doth admire, But the Whiggs who look blue, and Commotions desire: Ruine and strife is Whiggs Element still, They'r an obstinate People, if crost in their Will: And what their Will is, is as hard to be known, As it is to find out the Philosophers Stone. VI. No Devotion but theirs, all others they say, Of the Devil are Snares, for to lead us astray: The Pope to avoid, they'l do what they can, And instead of an Image, they'l Worship a Man: To the Turks they no Martyrs but Converts would be, But in time we may see them all dye by the Tree. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Sign of the Angel in Guiltspur-street. 1683.
