W2037 R220184 99831607 36072
TO Queen Mary: THE Humble Salutation, AND FAITHFUL GREETING OF THE Widow Whitrowe. WITH A WARNING TO THE RULERS of the Earth, BEFORE The Day of the LORD breaks forth, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Wicked, and all the Ungodly shall be as Stubble: The Mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. Printed in the Year, 1690.
TO Queen MARY: THE Humble Salutation, AND FAITHFUL GREETING OF THE Widow Whitrowe, &c. LET QƲEEN MARY Live for ever, which is the desire of my Soul to GOD for Thee, That the Crown of Righteousness Thou mayst Wear, and be Adorned with the rich Jewels of Eternal Life; [which are the Heavenly Vertues of GOD in Christ] and in Order thereunto, my Hum∣ble Request to the Queen, is, That She may live in the Fear of the LORD, that She may be Rich in Good Works, that She may take the Apostles Advice to the Primitive Christians, after they were called from their Heathenish Ways, into that Honourable Proession of the Christian Life: Not fashioning your selves, saith he, as you did in the former Vanities, in the days of your Ignorance, but as He that hath called you, is holy; so be ye holy in all manner of your Life
and Conversation; as it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy: And take the holy Women in former Ages for your Example, Whose Adorning was not that of cost∣ly Jewels, or rich Attire, but the Hidden Man of the Heart; that is, Christ in you the Hope of Glory: And surther, saith the Apostle Paul, Tim. Chap. 2. Let Men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting: Likewise also, the Women, that they array them∣selves in comely Apparel, with shame-fac'dness and Mo∣desty, not with broidred Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Apparel, but as becometh Women that professes the Fear of GOD with Good Works. This is more, O Queen, than a pretended out-side Holiness of Bodily Worship, and voluntary Humility; and those that come no further, than to follow the Precepts and Commandments of Men, may be vain∣ly puft up in Pride and high-mindedness; and then in that Spirit, they are no more but as the Apostle saith, Silly Women, ever learning, but never come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and this is but the out-ward Court, where the worst of Men and Women may come, as that Pious Man, Bishop Ʋsher, Charged, saying, Look you be not found in the Out-ward Court, but a Worshipper within the Temple, before the Altar; for, saith he, Christ will measure all those that pro∣fess his Name, and call themselves his People, and the out-ward Worshippers He will leave out: The Out-ward Court, saith he, is the formal Christian, whose Religion lyes in performing the out-side Du∣ty of Christianity, &c. Let the Queen be pleased to hear this Good Mans humble Confession, which he made a little before his Death, (tho' a Preacher 40 Years before the Rebellion in Ireland) to one of his Friends that challeng'd a Promise made by him: He Reply∣ed, That he had not writ, and yet could not charge
himself with any Breach of Promise; for, said he, I did begin to write, but when I came to write of Sanctification, that is, of the New Creature, which GOD formeth by his Spirit in every Soul, which He doth truly regenerate: I found so little of it wrought in my self, that I could speak of it only as Parrots, by Rote, and without the Knowledge and Under∣standing of what I might have express'd; and there∣fore, I durst not presume to proceed any further up∣on it. And Added: I must tell you, we do not well understand what Sanctification and the New Crea∣ture is, it is no less than for a Man to be brought to an intire Resignation of his Will to the Will of GOD, and to live in the Offering up of his Soul, continually in the Flames of Love, as a whole burnt Offering to Christ: And how little (says he) are many of those who profess Christianity experimen∣tally acquainted with this Work in their Souls? A Man worthy of Honour: I question not, but HE that gave him that sight, brought him into a good Measure of the Life thereof, before he depart∣ed this Life: and I heartily wish; yea, with all my Heart, and with all my Soul, that the Church of England, together with all the rest of the Churches of what sort soever, that bears the Name of Christi∣ans, were in the Life of what this humble Man had the sight of; then shall Wars cease, when HE comes to Reign, whose Right it is; GOD over all Blessed for ever, Amen. Therefore, O Queen, Live for ever in this Life, which this Humble Man had the sight of, that is the New Creature, born again; not of that which is cor∣ruptible, but of the incorruptible Life of Jesus, who said to Nichodemus, A Man must be born again, before he can enter into the Kingdom of GOD. But this was
a Mystery to him: For said he, How can this be? Can a Man enter again into his Mothers Womb? So ignorant was he of the Heavenly Life, tho' a Ruler in Israel: And I wish too too many that are wise in their own eyes, be not covered with this Cloud of Ignorance and Errour, that whilst they Govern and Teach others, they themselves have need to be taught. But, O Queen, live thou for ever in the holy, hum∣ble, and self-denying Life of Christ; that a holy Pattern thou mayst be, that thy Light may so shine, that all may see thy good Works, and give Glory to GOD that ever the Queen came into this Nation. In Or∣der to this, I humbly intreat the Queen, That She believe not every Spirit that shall come to her, and say, It belongs to the Queens Dignity to take State up∣on her, and to go in Rich and Gorgious Attire: Know this, O Queen, That there can be no more said to the Ignorant Heathen, that knows not GOD: But I hope the Queen will have more of the Wisdom of GOD, than to suffer her innocent Spirit to be betrayed, or captivated into such Trumpery and foolish Fopperies; for She being a Christian, Christ is to be her Teacher, and Christ to be her Pattern: And where was His State, and His Gorgious Apparel? He wore a plain Garment without a Seam: It's true, whilst they were a Crucifying Him, they put on a purple Garment to scoff and deride His humble self-denying Life: And doth not the Christians of our Times do the same? And where was His State; for He often sate on the Ground; and who His Companions? Poor Fisher men, who left all and followed Him; the Lame, and the Blind, poor Publicans, which were heavy laden; their Sins being a Burden too heavy for them to bear, and so were glad of a Physitian to Cure them of their Maladies; but indeed the proud high-minded
Pharisees, were offended with Him for this humility. But the Queen keeping in the humility of Christ; She will place her Affections upon more high and sub∣lime things; for the Spirit of the LORD, is a noble Spirit, High and Mighty above all transitory Things. The Queen being of His Spirit, will be the same: She'll scorn the Pomps and Pleasures of a poor, dirty, perishing World: She'll place her Delights upon more high and excellent things, than the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, wherein the worst of Heathens takes delight; but for the best of them, they mind more Divine and Heavenly things: As Socrates, (that Divine Philosopher;) Fine and rich Cloaths, saith he, are only fit for Commedi∣ans; and being demanded from what things Men and Women ought to refrain, From Pleasures, said he; temperate Persons become the most Excellent; they eat that which neither hurts the Body nor Mind, and that which is easy to be got: The only and best way (saith he) to Worship GOD, is to mind and obey whatsoever He Commands; that the Souls of Men and Women may pertake of the Di∣vine Nature; that GOD is seen of the Vertuous Mind, that by waiting upon Him, they are United unto Him in an accessible place of Purity and Hap∣piness; GOD hath asserted them always to be near unto Him. These are they that were worthy of the Name of Christians, because they imitate Him in their Lives, who were Plain, Humble, and Self-denying, like Christ their LORD; who said, Learn of me, Learn of me; saith he, that was GOD over all Blessed for ever; yet, humbled himself to the Death, yea, the Death of the Cross; before whom, let all Kings, Queens, and Potentates of the Earth lick the Dust; before Him who is LORD and Governor of all things, from whom
the greatest Monarch in the Earth hath his Breath, and He can take it away at his pleasure; therefore, who shall not sear Him, the Everlasting; before whom, all Nations are as a drop of a Bucket. Yea, let the Hea∣vens and Earth tremble before Him, who shall lay all Flesh in the Dust, and then, Where shall its Glory be? Therefore, O Queen, live for ever in this plain, innocent, and humble Life of Jesus, who made Him∣self of no reputation; and, said He, to his Disciples, (when they were striving for the Mastership, one o∣ver the other;) The Gentiles which bear Rule, ex∣ercise Lordship one over the other, but with you, it must not be so; but he that is chiefest among you, let him be Servant to all. And this did He in Practice, as well as Doctrine, when He washed His Disciples feet; and so left them and all His followers an Example to fol∣low His Steps: He did not say, follow this Man, or that Man; no, nor the footsteps of the Flock; no, for He knew that all Men might Err, therefore he char∣ged and commanded, saying, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest for your Souls. Oh! the Treasure of Treasures, the Pearl of great Price, that whosoever hath it, will Sell all for it; all their perishing Glories, with all their fading Delights; and count it all, but dung and dross, for the Excellency of this Life in Christ. Therefore, hear O Princesses, and give Ear ye Ladies of the perishing Honours of this World; Did Christ Jesus the LORD, and only Saviour, the Immaculate Lamb of GOD that takes away the Sins of the World; Consecrate a Way for you, through His Agonies of Sorrows, and Griefs, bitter Death, and bloody Passi∣on; for you to live a Life of Vanities and Pleasures, the Pomps and Pride of Life, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye? Was all his strong Cries,
Groans, Sighs and Sobs, Watchings and Fastings, cruel Mockings and Scourgings; exposing Himself to all the Malice that Men or Devils could Invent, Was all these Miseries to End here? Or was this to be the End of all, to fasten you to your cursed Plays, with your whole Life of sinful Pleasures? Ye careless Daughters, ye Women that are at Ease, be astonish∣ed, pluck off your Gorgious Attire, put on Sackcloth, and cover your Heads with Ashes, and sit on the Ground; and from thence, take up a deep and heavy Lamenta∣tion for the miseries that are coming upon you; when your Songs shall be turned into Howlings, your Joys into Heaviness and bitter Lamentations; which shall be the Reward of all your vain and wicked Pas∣times, that hath been spent in vain and wicked Recrea∣tions; of which precious time, the least moment there∣of upon a dying Bed, is more than the Gold of Ophir. Then shall you call, said the LORD, but I will not an∣swer. You shall seek Me early, but you shall not find Me. And, why? Because you hated Knowledge, and did not chuse the Fear of the LORD: You would have none of my Counsel, but despised all my Corrections, therefore shall you Eat of the Fruit of your own ways, and be filled with your own Devices: For Ease, slayeth the foolish, and the Prosperity of Fools destroyeth them; but they that obey Me, saith the LORD, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear of Evil, Prov. 1. Chap. There∣fore consider these things, all you that forget GOD, least I tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver you, saith the LORD. But, O Queen, live for ever! The way for the Queen to obtain this Everlasting and Eternal Life, is to watch against the Evil of her own Heart, for so the LORD com∣mands, saying, Watch, Watch, Watch, which He fulfill'd before He gave it out to others, when He was led into
the Wilderness, and there thrice tempted, as the Apo∣stle said, He was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin, that He might be able to succour us that are tempted: For this know, O Queen, it is no sin to be tempted; but the sin is to yield to the temptation; as saith the Prophet, When sinners inticeth thee, consent not thou unto them; therefore the LORD commanded to make the Defence strong, double your VVatch; yea, treble your VVatch; and saith the Prophet, A threefold Cord cannot easily be broken. O how good is the LORD, to give us these Heavenly Precepts, and not only so, but to be our Strength in weakness. Thou hast covered our Heads in the Day of Battle, when the Enemy hath come in like a Flood. Thou hast lifted up Thy Standard against him, Glory he unto Thee for ever. Thus hath the LORD stood by them that fear him in all Ages, to be their Preserver from the Snares and Temptations of the Devil; but then, they must be found in His VVay, otherwise, He is not engag∣ed to preserve them: The VVay of Christ, is His daily CROSS; You cannot be my Disciples, siath He, Except you deny your selves, and take up My Cross and follow Me; (VVhether must we follow Him?) Through all the Tra∣vels of his Soul; as Isaiah the Prophet prophesied of him, saying, He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, His righte∣ous Soul shall be satisfied; and in vain is all your Preach∣ing, Hearing, Praying, and Praising out of his Holy, Pure, and Incorruptible Life. And further of his Life, you may read in Isaiah's Prophesy of Him, how He was a Man of Sorrows, and was well acquainted with Griefs; and after he came into the World, in the Holy History of his Life of temptations and miseries, he saith, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; none can come to the Father, but by Me, and he that climbs up another way is a Thief and a Robber. Another Way, O Queen! Then through his bitter Suf∣ferings;
a Way indeed, that at the first Entrance, his Visage seems black, and his Form to be without Com∣liness; yet is he the Beloved of our Souls, and the Chiefest among Thousands, to them that have follow∣ed Him through the many Tribulations, and have wash∣ed their long-suffering Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb: These shall walk with me, saith He, in White, for they are worthy; for because you have suf∣fered with me, therefore shall you Reign with me for ever∣more, saith he, that is Holy and True. But, at the first, you know, the Learning of any Lan∣guage, or lawful Art, it cannot be attained but with great Industry and hard Labour; so this inward Exer∣cise of the Soul, at the first, saith the Prophet, She [meanng Wisdom] will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring him into fear and dread, and torment him with her Discripline until she have tryed his Soul, and hath pro∣ved him by her Judgments: Then will she return the strait way unto him, and comsort him, and shew him her secrets, and heap upon him the Treasures of Wisdom, and the Ʋn∣derstanding of Righteousness: Oh! This was an expe∣rienced Man in the Work of GOD, on the Soul; this I bear Record, is the way of the LORD, which He takes to redeem Mankind to Himself, out of his fallen State: But, saith the Prophet, if he goes wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his Destruction: There∣fore, O Queen, live for ever in the holy and self-deny∣ing Life of Christ; for be it known to the Queen, when I heard of the vain Pastimes, and sinful Pleasures with the Excess of Finery, in Richness of Apparel, that was at the Court, on the Kings Birth Day, which was Re∣ported by one of the Ladies at Court, to a Lady a near Relation of hers; which told me, that there was never seen such costly Apparel at the Court. After I heard this, and that the Queen went to Plays, Oh how was
my Soul bowed down before the LORD, crying bit∣terly to the LORD, that He would be pleased to for∣give the Queens Transgression, as hoping it was not in the Queens Inclination, but overcome by the Perswasi∣ons of others: Oh Queen! Is this to return Thanks to the most High GOD, according to the great Benefits she hath received? Is this to Answer the end of her Creation, and the King's safe Return from Ireland? Must all the Goodness of GOD, and his manifold Fa∣vours, end here, in the Excess of Vanities, the Abomi∣nations of England, as Plays and Dancings, the Two grand In-lets to all other Abominations? I knew it once, to my Sorrow, as I could give a large Account thereof, the Influence those cursed Vanities, as Pride, Plays, Dancing and Singing, had upon me when I was young; but in my Youth, the LORD had Mercy on me, and called me to himself, out of all those sinful Pleasures, into the Pleasure of Waiting and Attending upon Him who is alone Worthy, to have all our pre∣cious Time, Love and Delights, whose Right it is; and for that end it was given us, to return it with that In∣crease of Grace, that shall never have an end: For, O Queen, Wherein should Youth take pleasure, But in seeking a Measure, Of Wisdoms saving Treasure. And saith Christ, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: But this know, O Queen, it must be a Heart-breaking seeking, that must find the LORD: an inward seeking; yea, more inward, than our most inward Parts. We must often retire alone, as Christ did from the Multitude, and inwardly into our own Souls, to the Spirit of GOD in us, waiting upon the Spirit,
to receive Power to do the Will of GOD in all things; constantly watching against the Out goings of the Mind to any thing, but to GOD alone: This is waiting at Jerusalem, to receive the Promise of the FATHER. And in my seeking, I have found this to be the Way, in which GOD will be found in: Here I have found, and do sind, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplications poured into my Soul; here I find my Heart and Mind taken off from all Visibles, and set upon GOD alone; here I find my heart united to the LORD; here I find the height and depth of His Love, that hath so fast∣ned me to Him, as a Nail is fastned in the sure place; so that height, nor depth, things present, or to come, shall ever be able to separate me from the Love of GOD, which I have received in Christ my LORD, who hath given me the Victory over Death, Hell and the Grave; so that, here I can do as my Saviour hath com∣manded me, Love my Enemies, and Pray for them that hate me; and so not to be overcome with Evil, but to overcome the Evil with the Good. Glory for ever be given to Thee my Soveraign LORD, and to Thy Glo∣rious Power, from a Heart rended to pieces before Thee, in the sence of Thy Gracious Goodness, and boundless Fa∣vours: Oh! When shall it be, that my Tongue shall ne∣ver cease praising Thee. And this was the Way that all the People of the LORD ever sound him in; as the Queen may be pleased to search the Scriptures, and she shall find what that Holy Prophet Isaiah saith; With my Soul have I desired Thee in the night, and with my Spirit within me, will I seek Thee in the Morning: O LORD, we have waited for Thee, in the Way of thy Judgments: The De∣sires of our Souls is to Thee, and unto thy Name: Like as a Woman with Child, that draweth near to the Time of her Travail, is in sorrow, and cryeth in her Pains, so
have we been in thy sight, O LORD. And David saith, The sorrows of Hell hath compassed me about; I eat Ashes as my Bread, and mingled my Drink with my Tears: Besides, Time would fail to Mention all the Travels of the Souls of the Righteous: But Queen Hesther, that Honourable Queen, who was worthy of the Dignity she was brought to, for that very Act of deep Humiliation; who with a holy Zeal, and couragious Spirit, Commanded Mordecai, saying, Go and assemble all the Jews in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and eat not, nor drink in three days, day nor night; I and my Maids will do the same, and so will I go to the King, which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish: Now see the Effect of this holy Act; for it prevailed both with GOD and Man: It had Pow∣er to change King Ahashuerus's heart from a Lyon's to a Lambs; For this kind, saith Christ to his Dis∣ciples, can come out no other way, but by Fasting and Prayer. And thus shall it be with Queen Mary if She fol∣lows Christ her Pattern. In the first place, her Domi∣nion will be great within, bearing Rule over her own Will, Ways and Works, Words and Thoughts, not giv∣ing her self the least Liberty to any thing, that shall bring the least Dishonour to the holy Name of the LORD. In the next place, She shall have the Wisdom of GOD to Govern her People, beginning first at the Court, Ru∣ling in the Fear of GOD, keeping all in Subjection by her pious Life, and heavenly Instructions, encouraging Vertue, and suppressing all Vice; and great Necessity there is for the Reformation to begin there: For by lamentable Experience, we have seen, that as it hath been at the Court, so it hath been, for the most part, throughout the Nation: Therefore, O Noble Princes,
for the Glory of GOD and the Everlasting welfare of thy Immortal Soul, and the Good of all these Na∣tions; be not negligent in this great Work; and this know, O Queen, there is more required of you; that is, of KINGS, QUEENS, and POTEN∣TATES of the Earth, than of others, for you stand in the place of GOD to the People: Therefore, the blood of all must lie at your Doors, if you do not quit your selves by your saithfulness to GOD and Man; for, saith Wisdom, Mighty Men shall be mightily punish∣ed: Therefore, Hear O ye Kings and Queens, and Judges of the Earth: Give Ear, ye that Rule the Multitudes, and Glory in the multitude of People, for the Rule is given you of the LORD, and Power from the Most High, which will try your Works, and search out your Inventions; for if you that are Officers of His Kingdom, judge not right, and keep not His Commandments, to walk after the will of GOD, horribly and suddenly will He appear unto you, and give you the reward of your Works; for He that is LORD over all, will spare no Mans Person, neither shall He stand in awe of any Mans Greatness. For He will take His Jealousy for his Armour, and shall Arm the Creatures to be revenged of his Enemies, as might be seen in that astonishing, amazing, great and wonderful (never to be forgotten) Thunders which were lately in these parts of the World; and those horrible Earthquakes beyond the Seas; for as by the greatness of His Eter∣nal Power, He made all things, and upholds all things by the same; so by the Word of his Power, can He consume us all, and turn all things into nothing; and yet in this Work will He put on Righteousness for a Breast-plate, and take true Judgment instead of an Helmet; He will take Holiness for an invincible Shield, He will sharpen his fierce Wrath for a Sword, and and his Angels (who are his Ministring Spirits) in
Flames of Fire, shall sight with him against the unwise. Therefore, be wise, O ye KINGS, and understand; learn ye Judges of the Earth; serve the LORD in fear and rejoyce in trembling, kiss the Son least he be angry, and you perish in your ways; for when His wrath shall suddenly burn, O then, blessed for ever will they be that put their whole trust in Him; and that the latter may be your Portion, is the desire of my Soul to GOD for you all, Your faithful Friend, and the LORD's Servant, Joan Whitrowe. AND further, to the Queen, my desire to GOD for her, is, That GOD would give her another Heart, a heart to walk in all the ways of the LORD, and that the LORD would pour out his Holy Spirit upon her, as He did up∣on all His Anointed Ones; and that she may be an Instru∣ment in His Hand to convert many to Righteousness; then shall the Prophesy of Daniel be fulfilled on her, which saith, Those that convert many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever more. And, O that GOD would touch the Hearts of them that follow the Queen, as He touched the heart of those that followed Saul, after he was Anointed King over Israel, and that the Spirit of the LORD would come upon the King and Queen, and all that belongs to them, as it came upon David after the LORD had Anointed him in the midst of his Brethren; that by the Power of his Holy Spirit, they may follow the LORD fully, as Joshua and Caleb did; that they may be possessors of the good and holy Land of everlasting Peace and Rest for evermore. This is the Land that flows with Milk and Honey, but not a Land for outward pleasures, but the inward ra∣vishments
of the Soul, which is the reward of the faith∣ful, who follow their LORD through the strait and narrow Way, which is the way to Eternal Rest; as their LORD said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to life, and few there be that finds it. Ah! but broad is the Way, and wide is the Gate that leads to de∣struction, and many there be that goes therein. Indeed, to Flesh and Blood, the Way to Life and Glory, seems strait, and narrow at the first entrance, until the Soul is accustomed to bear the Yoke; but afterwards, it is Eternally true, as Christ said, My Yoke is easy, and my Burthen light. Yea, for ever, I am a Witness, That in all His Ways are Pleasantness, and in all His Paths are Peace. And this I declare, in the Power and Spirit of the LORD, there is no Tongue can speak, Heart conceive, nor Pen can write the sweet Reposes, and Heavenly Enjoyments in the Ravishments of His Love, which that Soul is a posses∣sor of, that keeps upon its Watch-Tower, whose Medita∣tion is in the Law of the LORD, Day and Night it en∣joys Heaven, whilst it is on Earth: Well might David say, A day in Thy Courts, O LORD, is more than a Thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a door-keeper in the House of the LORD, than to dwell in the Tents of the wick∣ed; and to this, Wisdom answers, saying, Blessed are those that heareth me, watching daily at my Gates, and giving at∣tendance at the Posts of my Doors; for he that findeth me, findeth life, and obtaineth favour of the LORD. And the Apostle Paul, in a holy Extasy, cries out, O the height and depth, of the love of GOD; neither can it enter into the Heart of man, the things that GOD hath prepared for them that love Him. No certainly, not the men of this World, who have their Portions in this Life, which David desired to be delivered from: But it entred into the Heart of Mary, when she sat so attentively at Jesus Feet, to hear the precious Words that dropt from
His Gracious Lips; where she received the sweet in-comes of His Eternal Love, whilest the Martha's of this World are hurried, incumbred, and distracted in their covetous, earthly Spirit, caring how to add House to House, Land to Land, and one Thousand to another; and the other sort, how to consume what they have upon their lusts, in vain & wicked recreations; and both these, dispossesses the LORD of Life of his Right, and robs him of his Glory. And Farther, I am to acquaint the King and Queen, That the late Brewers-Tax falls heavy upon the Poor; the general Discourse, is, the Rich will be richer, but the poor Brewers, will not be able to hold it; and for the poorer sort of the People, if they can get Bread for themselves and their Children, so; but for Drink, they say, they must drink Water; if the Parliament had been pleased to have laid it upon the Rich of all sorts, and upon the Drunkards, the Feasters, the Swearers, Game∣sters, the Whoremongers, the proud Persons that goes in Rich and Gorgious Attire; but above all, that Mon∣strous Babylonish Dress of the Head, the abomination of the Christians, (which if the King and Queen will not bring down, GOD will, by his righteous Judg∣ments;) and those cursed Play-houses, and every one that goes to them; and the scant Measures, with the false Weights (which Robs the Poor of their Right) If it please the Parliament for the future, That these Taxes may be laid upon all these as heavy as Lead; and this will be for the Glory of GOD, the Good of Souls, and the Renown of the Kingdom: For these were the crying Sins of the Jews in their Day, which brought that heavy Destruction upon them, Pride and fulness of Bread. The Daughters of Zion are haughty, saith the Prophet, Isaiah 3. They go with their out-stretched-Necks, and their wanton Eyes, and then naming their abominable Attire, as may be read at large. But those were the
Rich, that are guilty of these abominations; For they Ground the Face of the Poor, and kept scant Measures, and false Weights, and sold the needy for shooes. And thus far, I have cleared my Conscience to GOD, and my Neighbour, in making the King and Queen ac∣quainted with these things: And I humbly desire, That the King and Queen may do the same, by using all means possible to rectify these things; First, in their own Ex∣amples, then by Proclamation, and Penalties; And I pray GOD, the King and Queen may not be slack in this their Work for the LORD; For it is written, Cursed is he that doth the Work of the LORD negligently; and that it may be done in the LORD's time, for delays are dangerous: As Christ said unto the Jews, You neglect the Weighty Matters of the Law, which should have been done first, and not have left the other undone: and the Prophet Haggai, saith, Thus speaketh the LORD, the LORD of Hosts, saying, this People say, the time is not yet come, that the LORD's House should be builded. Then came the Word of the LORD by the Ministry of the Prophet Haggai, saying, Is it time for your selves to dwell in your Ceiled-Houses, and this House lye waste? Therefore thus saith the LORD of Hosts, con∣sider your own ways in your Hearts; ye have sown much, and brought in little; ye looked for much, but it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it; and why? saith the LORD of Hosts, because of mine House that lies waste, and ye run every Man into his own House. O King and Queen, is not this the present State of the Nation? I beseech you consider: My great Concern for the King and Queen, is, That they may not slip their Time, or the opportunity GOD hath put into their hands; for man hath but a Day or Hour given Him to do his work herein; and if he doth it not in that time, his Power is
gone: Therefore it is, that the LORD calls so upon Man∣kind; saying, Whilest it is to day, harden not your Hearts, as they did in the Provocation, when they tempted and proved Me, and saw My Works. For altho' they saw His wonderful Works, yet they believed Him not, but disobeyed His righteous Laws; therefore, they never saw the good Land. We see what a dangerous thing Unbelief is; but David be∣lieved in GOD: I believed, saith he, therefore have I spoken; and then presently, he longs to be upon returns, saying, What shall I render to the LORD for all His Mercies, and for all His Goodness? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon His Holy Name: I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me: I will walk with∣in my House with a perfect heart, Psal. 101. and so he goes on to the end of the Psal. which may be worth the King and Queens reading. And then after these Engagements, with many more; he promises to pay his Vows to the LORD, in the presence of all: O that this Holy Spirit of Life, and Love, that was in David, who loved the LORD dearly, might Rule and Reign, and have the Dominion over all, in the King and Queen, and all that belongs to them: For why, else, am I thus concerned, that never was concerned with any King, Queen, or Prince, further than in the general to all, of that, which my Eyes hath seen come to pass; and now with you in particular, of that which is to come? And that the Fame of your righteous Acts, may Sound to the furthermost parts of the Earth, to alarm the Nations to come up to the Mountain of the LORD of Hosts; to learn His Ways, and to walk in the Paths of the GOD of Jacob; that as the Name of Christians hath been a stink, a proverb, a by word of re∣proach among the Turks; saying to English-men, Do you think I am a Christian to falsify my word? So now by your holy Lives, and wor∣thy VVorks, that Name may be a good Savour, that the Nations on your behalf, may have cause to Praise, Magnify, Worship, and Adore the Most High, and Everlasting GOD for evermore, Amen. Which is the earnest Desire of her, who doth humbly Prostrate her self at the Feet of Christ, on the King and Queens behalf: Your humble Hand-maid, Joan Whitrowe. Putney-Park, the 14th. of Decem. 1690.
