B1685 12566246 63344
TWO PETITIONS FROM THE KINGDOME OF IRELAND: HVMBLY PRESENTED TO THE HONOU∣rable, the House of Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT. C ◆ R LONDON. Printed for I. Reynor, 1641.
TO THE HONOVRABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITISENS, and Burgesses, now assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Henry Beecher, Gent. and Richard white: Marchants, Inhabitants of Baltamore in Ireland, in the behalf of them∣selves and divers others; whose sad and deplo∣rable Condition, they are desired to represent un∣to this Honorable Assemblie▪ Humbly sheweth, THat your Petitioners having by the violence of the barbarous and bloody Rebels lost all their Lands and E∣states, and meerly by the providence of Al∣mighty God escaped with their lives: as
As by the Certificate annexed may appeare, do humbly crave leave to declare, that all the South and Soutwest parts of that Coun∣ty is subiected to the force and tyranny of those cruell Rebels (except the Castles sci∣tuate in the Ports of Baltamore, Castle-haven, and Crook-haven) wherein there are a thousand English. But hve no Com∣mission or force whereby to defend them∣selves from the power and force of their E∣nemies whereby not onely their persons, but also the said Castles are exposed to ex∣tream danger; and vnlesse very speedy suc∣cours be sent unto them, must miserably pe∣rish by those bloudy hands Which Forts be∣ing sustiate on the Sea Coast in the South Southwest parts of Ireland, are of great consequence, being well manned and supplyed with Victuall and Ammunition for the se∣curity of those parts from any forreign In∣vasion: but being lost, will be very advan∣tagious to the Rebels, and a great helpe to a forrein Enemy. The Consideration whereof, your Peti∣tioners are confident, cannot but move this
Honourable House to pitty and Commisera∣tion▪ And therefore they humbly implore that for the peservation of the lives of those who are yet left, the security and safe∣guard of those Castles, and Posts, the regain of what is there already lost, a Regiment of 500. men for the present: together with sufficient Arms and Victuals may be spee∣dily sent: Either of which being done, by Gods blessing may be an effectuall meanes to preserve the lives of the said Inhabitants, and the said Castles and Ports. But the delay thereof will be inevitably & produce ruine and distraction to them. All which they humbly leave to the grave wise∣dome of this Honourable Assemblie. And your Petitioners, together with many more who escaped to Bristoll, but want meanes; so that they can come no further: together with that remnant of English, which yet are left in those parts of Ireland, shall pray for the good successe of it.
TO THE HONOVRABLE, THE HOUSE OF COMMONS In this present Parliament. The humble Petition of Richard White, Gent. who hath formerly Petitioned this Honourable House, in the behalf of the Inhabitants of Baltamore, Crook-haven, and Castle-haven, in Ireland. THat your Petitioner being an Inha∣bitant in the Parish of Alphadown a mile from Baltamore, was sur∣rounded with those fierce and bloudy Rebels in the County of Cork in Ireland, who threatned distraction unto your Petitioner, and all the English there. Whereupon your
Petitioner was forced to to leave his habi∣tation, and to provide for the security of him¦self his wife and Children, leaving two Sons within the Castle of Baltamore: to∣gether with victuals, to the value of 100. l. ster. and some Ammunition, without which Victuals the said Castle could not have sub∣sisted; and so with his wife, and his other Children repaired into England, As by the Certificate from Bristoll may appear. Your Petitioner being thus deprived of all stay of maintenance for himself and family humbly desires this Honorable House, that his said two Sons, left in the said Castle, may be imployed in his Maiesties service in those parts, the one as a Lieutenant, and the other as an Ensign, having bin both bred souldiers: and that your Petition may have likewise some implyed in that ser∣vice, for the keeping of the store and provi∣sions of the said Castle and Army: or o∣therwise, as to this Honourable Assembly shall seeme meet. And your Petitioner shall pray, &c.
