D2617 12256258 57530
A DESCRIPTION Of all the Shires, Cities, and Towns, &c. IN ENGLAND.
Anglia Rediviva; Being a full DESCRIPTION Of all the Shires, Cities, Principal Towns and Rivers, in ENGLAND. With some useful Observations concerning what is most Remarkable, whether in relation to their Antiquity, Situation, Buildings, Traffick, or Inhabitants. To which is Prefix'd, A short Account of the first Origine of our Nation, of its being Conquer'd by the Romans As also the occasion of the Saxons and Danes first entring England. Collected from the best Historians By Mr. DUNSTAR. Vincit amor Patriae.— Virg. London: Printed for T. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Church-yard; C. Coningsby at the Turk's Head in Fleetstreet; and D. Midwinter and T. Leigh at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1699.
To the HONOURED Sir Thomas Twisden, In the County of Kent, BARONET. SIR, THE desire I always had to serve You, encouraged me to prefix Your Name to this fol∣lowing Treatise.
Which being Collected from the best of our English Historians, whose Writings You have frequent∣ly conversed with, I presum'd that what was here so compendiously Digested, would revive in Your Mind some remarkable Observati∣ons, not unworthy Your remem∣brance. You have here, SIR, a short view both of the ancient and pre∣sent state of England; as also an account of the most memorable Battels, annex'd to the places near which they were Fought. I have spar'd for no Pains and Industry to make it Perfect, I being ear∣nestly desirous that it might in some manner Merit Your Favour and Esteem; which being once gain'd, would be a great means in engaging others (who are ambi∣tious
of emulating Your Exam∣ple) to receive it kindly. How happy I have been in this Performance, the Reader can best determine; this I am sure of, That if Learning and Sense, Wit and Humour, join'd with an Address that is every way becoming and agreable, are accomplishments fit to recommend a Gentleman, All those who know You, and those who are to know You, will ap∣plaud my Judgment in chusing You for my Patron. Be pleased then, SIR, to af∣ford a kind Reception to these my first Offerings; let the fulness of my Joy for Your safe return amongst us, plead in my behalf, and make an atonement for the Faults You will here meet with. Give me leave to hope that this
short Description of Your own Country, which cannot but be very dear unto You, may find some place among those excellent Remarks which You have so late∣ly made Abroad. SIR, since the greatness of Your Quality forbids me to come near You as a Friend, Permit me to Subscribe my self with all ima∣ginable sincerity, SIR, Your most Humble Servant, S. DUNSTAR.
Anglia Rediviva. UNDER the Title of ENGLAND we comprehend the better part of one of the best and greatest Islands of the whole Earth; which together with that of Scotland, is generally term'd both by Ancient and Modern Writers, Great Brittain, or Al∣bion. It is bounded on the North with the Hyperborean Ocean; on the West with the Vergivian, or Western Ocean, which parts it from Ireland; on the South it is divided from France with the English Channel; and on the East it is separated from Germany, Belgium, and Danemark, with the Brittish, or as some call it, the German Ocean.
It is in length from Berwick in the North, to the Isle of Wight in the South, 375 Miles, whereof 73 make a Degree; and from Do∣ver in the East to the Lands-end in the West, about 328; in compass 1300. In shape it is Triangular, it having Three Promonto∣ries shooting out into divers parts, viz. the Cape of St. Burien in Cornwall, the Foreland of Kent, and the Point of Catness in Scot∣land; it contains according to Mr. Morden's computation, near 30 Millions of Acres, being about the 1/1000 part of the Globe, and the 1/33 part of the Habitable World. Its Air is Temperate, the Cold in Winter being neither so extream, nor the Heat in Summer so vexatiously scorching, as in some parts of the World, which have either a more Southern, or Northern Scituation. The whole Country is exceeding Fruitful, 'tis Bless'd with all the Commodities of Heaven and Earth; it has Corn in abun∣dance; it is rich in Pasture; it hath innu∣merable quantities of Cattel; plenty of Wild and Tame Fowl, and variety of all sorts of Fish. The People are Bold and Warlike, very Tenacious of their Liberty, of a Generous and Noble Disposition; see what the Inge∣nious Mr.  says of them in his late Poem.
See, in the Ocean yon fair Western Isle, Whose Three sharp Points th' insulting Waves divide! See with what beauteous Rivers 'tis suppli'd! How rich the happy Fields thro' where they glide! Well knew the Old Phoenicians that blest place: Enur'd to Pain, there lives an hardy Race; Daring as Virtues self for Conquest made: Peace but their Recreation, War their Trade. Jealous of Liberty they Chains refuse; Fair Death before Inglorious Life they chuse: Force cannot bend, but Kindness may improve, And mildly melt their generous warmth to Love. Book the 3d. C. 1147. As concerning its Name and its First In∣habitants, Historians have left us in so great an uncertainty, that we scarce know what to resolve on; but we need not wonder at so great an Obscurity, if we consider that the First Inhabitants of Countries had other Cares to employ their Thoughts, than to deliver their Beginnings to Posterity; and possibly had they been never so willing so to do, they could not have effected it, see∣ing their Life was so uncultivated and void of all Literature, that it was almost impossi∣ble for them to preserve the Memory of things, and to make over the same to suc∣ceeding Ages.
Besides their Druides and Bardi, who Re∣hearsed and Sung the Actions of their He∣roes, not only like other Heathen Priests Monopolized that little Learning they had wholly to themselves, and were by this means the only Persons suppos'd to be able to give an account of what was past, thought it not lawful to Write any thing. Nor indeed have we any better account of ancient times, even in those Civiliz'd parts of the World, wherein Learning chief∣ly flourished, when a profound Ignorance overspread the face of Greece its self, as well as other Nations; for if we would take the pains to enquire strictly into the matter, we shall there find as much darkness and obscu∣rity as to their Original, as in these our Eu∣ropean Parts. What Fabulous Stories would the subtle Greeks impose upon us if we had the Faith to believe them? Who (as a Learned Father of our Church affirms) had not learn'd to speak plain truth till the World was about 3173 Years old; for so it was when the Olympiads began. If we would enquire further into the Succession of the Latins, and would take the trouble to examine the two first Dynasties the first before Aeneas's coming into Italy and the second of the Aeneadae after; fo certainly it will be sufficient ground to que¦stion
the account of times before, if in the third Dynasty, when the Succession seems so clear, and so certain an Epocha as the Build∣ing of Rome to deduce their accounts from, their Chronology be yet uncertain; for se∣veral of their best Historians make no scru∣ple to confess, That no certain account can be given of Rome, which was 25 Years af∣ter the Olympiads, and but 752 Ante Chri∣stum, till the Regisugium, which was 268 Years Ante Christum 384. A fair account then we are like to expect concerning the first rise of our own Nation, after so many revolutions of Ages, where∣in Truth seems, as it were, more and more to have withdrawn her self from us; which to trace out, we must again return to the Romans, who are the best able to satisfy us in this case, This is most certain, that the account of Times before the Romans, either in Italy, Germany, Old Gallia, or Brittain, is scarce sit to be discoursed of under any other Head, than that of Impostures; not that I think that these Nations had lain in a perpetual sleep till the Romans rous'd them with their Swords, and waken'd them, as I may say, into some kind of Civility; but that they had no certain uniform way of conveying the Transactions of their own, and former times, to the view of Posterity.
On which account we may very justly reject all those pretended Successions of Go∣mer and Brute, as Fabulous; as also that this Island was Inhabited by Giants; with a great many other, I know not what, pretty Stories, adapted to the Ignorance of those times. However, all Historians agree in this, That it is highly probable that the first In∣habitants of this Island were Originally de∣scended from the ancient Gauls, (that part of the World being long Inhabited before this) which is sufficiently apparent from the resemblance of their Government, Manners, Conditions, Buildings, Habits, and the Community of their Language, which is the surest proof a Nations Ori∣ginal. As for its Name, the most probable Con∣jecture is, That it was termed Brittain from Brit, which in the ancient Brittish Language signifies Painted, and the word Tain, which denotes a Nation; agreeable to the Custom of the ancient Brittains, who used to dis∣colour and paint their Bodies, that in their Wars they might seem more Terrible to their Enemies. We are inform'd by Julius Caesar in his Commentaries, That it was Governed at first by several petty Rulers and Princes, of different Interests and Counsels: He Land∣ed
in Brittain, A. M. 3095. or thereabouts, but was repuls'd by Cssibelan, a Bold and Warlike Prince, who was Chosen King, or rather Generalissimo, by the Unanimous Con∣sent of the other Roytelets, to repel the com∣mon Enemy. He afterwards made several Inroads into it, but without any great Success; he in the end being forc'd to leave it to the Go∣vernment of its own Kings. Augustus, Ti∣berius, and Caligula, seemed with good Ad∣vice to have neglected it; but in the Reign of the Emperor Claudius, Plau∣tius the Praetor,A. C. 43. and after him Ostorius, subdued a great part of it. Nero being Emperor, Sueto∣nius his Lieutenant gained a memorable Victory over Bon∣duce,A. C. 57. the Wife of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni: After which time the Romans still gaining ground, the Island was at last totally Conquered in the Reign of the Emperor Domitian,A. C. 82. and by his Command first made a Pro∣vince under Agricola, who much about that time subdu'd Scotland and Ireland. The Romans after they had kept it in Sub∣jection several Hundred Years, were upon the Northern Nations sacking Rome,4. under the Command of Ala∣ricus,
King of the Goths and Vandals, re∣called by the Emperor Honorius; at which time Brittain being left in a manner naked and destitute of help, the Picts and Scots presently invade it: The Brittains after they had repelled them for several Years, being at length much weakned, they Counsel their King Vortigern to call the Saxons to their Assistance; by whose Aid under the Commands of their Captains Hengist and Horsa, they overcame their Enemies in a pitch'd Battel near Stamford in Lincolnshire. They rewarded the Saxons for this Victory, first with the Isle of Thanet, and afterwards with the whole County of Kent; who growing daily more Powerful, dispossessed at length their Benefactors of their Native Habitations;A. C. 689. so that in the Reign of Cadwallader, the last of the Brittish Kings, they were com∣pleat Masters of the whole Island, parcel∣ling it out into seven Kingdoms, generally called the Saxons Heptarchy. The Saxon Kings striving amongst them∣selves for Sovereignty, were at last, after they had Ruled separately 129 Years, reduced under subjection by Egbert King of the West-Saxons, A. C. 818. who caused this Land to be called England, by a Parliament held at Winchester.
From Egbert, England continued under the Government of its own Kings, till the Year 1017, which was 199 Years; about which time Edmund, surnamed Ironside, be∣ing Murther'd, (the Danes having for a long time infessed our Coasts, hoping to succeed as the Saxons before them had done) Canutus King of Denmark seiz'd into his hands the Regal Government. The Danish Kings having Rul'd England 29 Years, Edward the Confessor, the Brother of Edmund Ironside, succeeded in the King∣dom, A. C. 1046. who out of the Saxon, Mercian, and Danish Laws, Compil'd one Universal Body of the Law, from whence our Common Law is thought to have its Original. He Reigned 20 Years, and died A. C. 1066. to whom succeeded Harold; who having Reigned near a Year, was slain in a pitch'd Battel near Hastings in Sussex, A. C. 1067. by William the Conqueror; from whom begins the most exact Compu∣tation of the Kings of England. Thus much I thought necessary to give the Reader some insight into the first Ages of our Nation, which I have endeavoured to perform in as concise a manner as the Sub∣ject could possibly admit of. I shall now proceed in the Description of England, as it stands divided by King Alfred into Shires or Counties; which I have placed in that or∣der
as they are afterwards Treated of; be∣ginning with the Learned Cambden; First, in the furthest Western Parts, and so from thence pass over the other Countries in or∣der; imitating herein (as he judiciously Observes) Strabo, Ptolomy, and others the most ancient Geographers; who always begin their Descriptions in the Western Countries, as being first from the first Me∣ridian. The Shires of England are generally com∣puted to be 39, to which if we add 13 more in Wales, reckoning the Isle of An∣glesey to be one, the whole makes 52. 6 of which were first Ordained in the Reign of Edward the First, A. C. 1280. the rest were constituted in the Reign of Henry the VIIIth by a Parliamentary Authority, An. Dom. 1510.
The Names of the Shires in England. Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hampshire. Barkshire. Surrey. Sussex. Kent. Glocestershire. Oxfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire. Hartfordshire. Middlesex. Essex. Suffolk. Norfolk. Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire. Northamptonshire. Leicestershire. Rutlandshire. Lincolnshire. Nottinghamshire. Darbyshire. Warwickshire. Worcestershire. Staffordshire. Shropshire. Cheshire. Herefordshire. Radnorshire. Brecknockshire. Monmouthshire. Glamorganshire. Caermarthenshire. Pembrokeshire. Cardiganshire. Montgomeryshire. Merionethshire. Carnarvonshire. Isle of Anglesey. Denbighshire. Flintshire. Yorkshire. Bishop. of Durham. Lancashire. Westmorland. Cumberland. Northumberland.
Cornwall, Danmonii. IN Latin Cornubia; it lieth most Westward of all Brittain, and shooteth into the Sea with little Promontories in manner of an Horn; it hath on the North side the Se∣vern Sea; on the West, the Vergivian, or Western Ocean; on the South, the Brittish Channel; and on the East, Devonshire: Both which Counties were in ancient time Inhabited by the Danmonii, which Name is thought to have been given them from the Mines of Tin which abound in this Place. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Pensance, a very pretty Market-Town, near which is that famous Ambrose Stone, which being a great Rock, is advanced up∣on some other of a lesser size with so equal a Counterpoise, that a Child may stir it with a push of a Finger, yet a great num∣ber of Men are not able to remove it from its place. 2. Falmouth, an Haven as noble as Brun∣dusium its self in Italy; 'tis able to receive an Hundred Ships so apart from each other, that neither can see the others Masts; 'tis defended from the violence of the Wind by the many rising Banks with which it is
enclos'd; 'tis fortified on the East with the Castle of St. Maudit, and on the West with the Fort Pendinas. 3. Foy, a Town renown'd in former Ages for the many Sea Engagements which have been fought near it; 'tis pleasantly seat∣ed on the Banks of the River which bears its Name; near the Haven it hath several Bulwarks rais'd for its defence by Edward the IVth. A. D. 1460. 4. Padstow, the Situation of this Town is very commodious for Traffick with Ire∣land, to which Men may easily Sail from hence in 24 Hours. 5. Launston, a proper little Town, Si∣tuate upon the pitch of an Hill; remark∣able upon the account of the Common Goal of the Country, and the Assizes be∣ing kept there. 6. Bodman, a Town of great resort, Si∣tuate between two Hills, and lying out in length East and West; its Inhabitants Po∣pulous, Beautiful in its Buildings; famous in ancient times for the Bishops See being kept there, which in the Danish Wars was remov'd to St. Germans. 7. Leskerd, a Town seated on the top of a very high Hill, much frequented for its Market, and renown'd for an ancient Castle which stands there.
Devonshire. IN Latin Davonia; it hath Cornwall on the West, on the South the Brittish Chan∣nel, on the East it is bounded with Dorset∣shire and Somersetshire, and on the North with the Severn Sea; it is a Country enrich'd with very good Mines, especially towards the West; it hath commodious Harbours on both sides of it; it is adorn'd with pleasant Meadows and great store of Woods; and is throughout replenished with fair Towns and beautiful Buildings. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Plimouth, a Port Town, seated near the Rivers Plime and Tamar, which meet∣ing near this place fall together into the Ocean; of so great a repute, that for the number of its Inhabitants it may be com∣pared with a City; such is the commodi∣ousness of the Haven, that it admitteth in∣to its bosome the greatest Ships without striking Sail; before the midst of its mouth lieth the Isle of St. Nicholas, Fortified both by Art and Nature; the Haven hath like∣wise Fortifications on each side, and is Chained over when there is an occasion; up∣on an Hill near adjoining it hath a fair Castle
for its defence; the Town is divided into Four Wards, over which a Mayor was or∣dain'd by King Henry the VIth. An. Dom. 1430. 2. Dartmouth, a Port Town seated on an Hill near the River Dartmore; it hath two Castles for its defence; and by reason of its commodious Haven is much frequented by Merchants, and furnished with very good Shipping. It hath oftentimes bravely defended it self against the French, but especially in the Reign of Henry the IVth. An. Dom. 1404. 3. Torbay, a safe Road and Harbour for Ships; near it is a little Village called by its Name. 4. Exeter, Exonia, Isca; a City of great Traffick, much frequented by Merchants, situated on the East Bank of the River Ex, upon a little Hill, gently arising by an easy ascent to a pretty heighth, the Pendant whereof lyeth East and West; 'tis en∣viron'd about with Ditches and very strong Walls, having many Turrets orderly inter∣posed; 'tis in Circuit a Mile and an half, having Suburbs running out a great way on each side; it containeth 15 Parishes, hath a Castle called Rugemont, the Seat of the West-Saxon Kings, and afterwards of the Earl of Cornwall, which at this day is commendable for little else but its Anti∣quity
and Situation; 'tis beautified with a stately Cathedral, founded in the Reign of Henry the 1st. An. Dom. 1110. it hath been thrice Besieg'd, but hath always bravely de∣fended its self: First by Hugh Courtney Earl of Devonshire, in the Civil War between the Houses of York and Lancaster; then by Perkin Warbeck, that Young imaginary pre∣tended Prince, who feign'd himself to be Richard Duke of York, Second Son to Ed∣ward the IVth. Thirdly, by seditious Rebels of Cornwal, An. Dom. 1549. at which time the Citizens endured so great a Famine, that for Twelve Days together they were forced to Eat Horses, and to make Bread of coarse Bran moulded in Cloaths, till they were at length reliev'd by my Lord Russel and Gray, who forced the Rebels to raise the Siege; upon which King Edward the VIth for a reward of their Loyalty, gave the Mannor of Evyland to this City; the Civil Government of which is in the Power of Twenty four Persons, out of whom there is from Year to Year a Mayor Elected; who with Four Bailiffs has the sole Com∣mand of the City. 5. Bediford, a Town of good resort, fa∣mous for a Stone Bridge with Arch'd Work, where it windeth its self into the River Taw.
6. Axminster, a Town renown'd in an∣cient History for the Tombs of the Saxon Princes, slain in the Battel of Brunabrug. Dorsetshire, Durotriges. THE Latin Name Dorcestria; it is bounded on the North with Somerset∣shire and Wiltshire, on the West with Devon∣shire, and some part of Somersetshire; on the South it lieth open for 50 Miles to the Brit∣tish Ocean; On the East it hath Hampshire. The Soil of this Country is very fruitful; the North part is overspread with Woods and Forests; and from thence adorn'd with an innumerable many pleasant Pastures and fruitful Vallies. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Burport, a little Town plac'd between two small Rivers, remarkable for its yielding the best Hemp, and for the skill of the In∣habitants in making Ropes and Cables for Ships, those of the Navy being formerly twisted there. 2. Weymouth, a little Town join'd to Kings-Melcomb by a Bridge, famous in re∣gard of its Haven; it is grown of late
much greater than it formerly was by Sea-Adventures. 3. Dorchester, Durnovaria, the Head Town of the whole Shire, yet it is neither great nor beautiful, being despoil'd by Sueno King of Danemark, about the Year of our Lord, 1013. 4. Shirburn, 'tis pleasantly seated on an hanging Hill, and is the most remarkable and best frequented Town in all this Coun∣try; it gaineth exceedingly by Clothing; Anno Dom. 704. an Episcopal Seat was Erected in this place by Aldeme the First Bishop there Consecrated; it was afterwards remov'd to Sarisburg, Shirburn being kept in reserve for a retiring place. 5. Winburn, a fair Town seated on a piece of an Hill between Two Rivers; 'tis large in Compass, replenished with Inhabi∣tants, but few fair Buildings, except that its Church claims our observation, upon the account of the Sepulchre of Ethelred King of the West Saxons who lieth there Interr'd; however it retaineth even to this day divers tokens of the Majesty of the Romans.
Somersetshire, Belgae. COmitatus Somersettensis, is bounded on the North with the Severn Sea; on the West it confineth on Devonshire; on the South it bordereth, first upon Devonshire, and then upon Dorsetshire; on the East it hath Wilt∣shire; and North-East a part of Glocestershire: It is a large and wealthy Region; the Soil of which is very rich, yielding exceeding plenty of Corn and Pasture; 'tis very Po∣pulous, and sufficiently furnished with com∣modious Ports and Havens. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Taunton, a proper Town, pleasantly situated, 'tis reputed to be one of the Eyes of the Shire. 2. Bridgewater, a great and populous Market-Town, agreeably situated near the Banks of the Severn Sea, and is by some thought to have been so called from the Bridge and Water which is near it. 3. Bruiton, a Town memorable for lit∣tle else than that the Noble Family of the Mohuns is here Entomb'd; unless we men∣tion the late extraordinary Processions which the Women of the Town made on the Conclusion of the late Peace.
Near this place was Founded the Abbey of Glastenbury, fetching its original even from Joseph of Arimathea, who Enterr'd the Body of our Saviour: In the first Age of the Primitive Church, very Holy Men applied themselves diligently to the Service of God in this place, who were maintain∣ed by an Allowance from Kings, they In∣structing Youth in Religion and in the Li∣beral Sciences; these Men embrac'd a Soli∣tary Life, that they might the more quiet∣ly study the Scriptures; till at length Dun∣stan, a Man of a subtle Wit, when he had once by an Opinion of his Holiness and Learning, wound himself into an Ac∣quaintance with Princes, he brought in the Benedictine Monks, he being made Abbot of the Convent, after that he had obtain'd from the hands of many good Princes a Royal Revenue. When they had flourished 600 Years, they were dispossessed by King Henry the VIIIth. the Monastry being raz'd even to the ground, nothing now but the Ruines appearing of it. Arthur the Brittish Worthy is thought to have been Buried in this place. 4. St. Philips Norton, a large great Market-Town, so nam'd from a Church Consecra∣ted to St. Philip. 5. Welles, a Town so nam'd from the Springs found in it; like as Susa in Persia,
Croia in Dalmatia, and  in Macedo∣nia; for multitude of Inhabitants, and for stately Buildings, it justly challengeth the Preheminence of this Province: It hath a noble Market-place, sustain'd with Co∣lumns, as also a stately Church and Col∣ledge Endowed with many rich Livings and Revenues; the Church throughout is very beautiful, but especially the Frontespiece thereof at the West end is a Master-piece; the Cloysters adjoining to it are likewise very fair and spacious. 6. Bath, an ancient City, so called from the Baths in it; beautified throughout with very fair and noble Buildings for the re∣ceipt of Strangers; 'tis seated in a low plain, environ'd about with Hills of an equal height, out of which certain pleasant Streams of fresh River Water continually descend into the City, to the advantage and comfort of the Citizens; within the City Three Springs of Hot Water boil up of a Blewish or Sea Colour, sending up from them thin Vapours, and a kind of strong Scent, by reason that the Water is drill'd and strain'd through Veins of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of Earth called Bitu∣men; which Springs are very Medicinable, and of great Virtue to Cure Bodies over∣charg'd with Corrupt Humours; for they open the Pores, resolve, attenuate, digest,
consume, and draw forth Superfluities, and at the same time strongly heal and dry the whole Habit of the Body. In the Reign of Henry the Ist. A. D. 1110. Johannes de Villula being Elected Bishop of this place, translated his See to Bath, since which time the Two Sees growing into one, the Bishop beareth the Title of both, and is called the Bishop of Bath and Wells. 7. Bristol, this City standeth partly in Somersetshire, and partly in Glocestershire; it is sufficiently defended both by Art and Na∣ture, being situated on the meeting of the Frome and Avon, not far from the influx of the Severn into the Ocean; a City exceed∣ing Populous and exceeding Cleanly, there being Sinks made under ground for the conveyance of all the filth and nastiness in∣to the Rivers. It hath Twenty Churches, reckoning the Cathedral and that of Ratliff into the Number; the Cathedral was first Built by Robert Fitz-Harding, Son to one of the Kings of Danemark, An. Dom. 1248. and honoured with a Bishops See by King Henry the VIIIth. Anno Dom. 1542. The principal Building, next the Church, is an ancient Castle, of such great strength, that Maud the Emperess having taken King Ste∣phen Prisoner, thought this the safest place to secure him in; 'tis furnished with all things necessary for Man's Life, that, next
after London and York, of all the Cities of England it may justly challenge the chief place; 'tis so commodiously seated for Trade and Traffick, that the Haven admit∣teth Ships with full Sail into the very bo∣some of the City; which hath drawn Peo∣ple of many Countries thither; the Citizens are for the most part rich Merchants, who Traffick all over Europe, and make Voyages even to the remotest known parts of Ame∣rica. Wiltshire, Belgae. IN Latin Wintonia, is enclos'd with So∣mersetshire on the West, Barkshire and Hampshire on the East, on the North with Glocestershire, and on the South with Dorset∣shire and a part of Hampshire. 'Tis a Mid∣land Region, plentiful in all things, and for its variety, pleasant and delightful. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Malmsbury, a fair Town, famous for Clothing; not far from hence dwelt Aldeme, a very Learned Man; he was the first of the English Nation that wrote in Latin, and
the first that taught Englishmen the measures of a Latin Verse. Primus ego in patriam mecum (modo vita supersit) Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas. Geer. Lib. 3. 2. Chipenham, a large Town of great note for a Market kept there; 'tis pleasantly seated on the River Avon. 3. Edindon, a small Town, remarkable for Clothing; here King Alfred in a me∣morable Battel most fortunately Vanquished the Danes, reducing them to such Extremi∣ties, that they all Swore, in a set form of Oath made for that purpose, immediately to depart from England. 4. Trubridge, a fair Market-Town, of great repute for the great number of Clo∣thiers which Inhabit it; it sheweth the re∣mains of a Castle belonging to the Dutchy of Lancashire. 5. Werminster, a Town very remarkable for a great Corn Market, which is kept Weekly here, and exceedingly much frequented; it being almost incredible to relate what great numbers of people resort to it. 6. Wilton, formerly the head Town of the whole Shire; 'tis a place well watered, but is now fallen to decay through the
Bishop of Salisbury's turning away the pas∣sage that lay through it into the West Country. 7. Salisbury, Sorbiodunum, or Sarum, a City well Inhabited, seated on the River Avon, which watereth every Street of it; 'tis plentiful in all things, but especially in Fish; 'tis adorned with a very stately Market-place, wherein standeth their Com∣mon-Hall, made of Timber, a very Beau∣tiful Building: It is particularly famous for its Minster, which has Three hundred sixty five Windows, Twelve Gates, and as ma∣ny great and small Pillars as there are Hours in a Year; nor is its Cloyster for largeness or Workmanship inferior to any in England. 8. Marlborough, a fair large Town, plea∣santly situated, and well frequented; in this Town King Henry the IIId held a Par∣liament. N. B. Toward the North, about 6 Miles from Salisbury, is to be seen an huge and monstrous piece of work, Insana Substructio; for in the circuit of a Ditch, there are erected in form of a Crown, in three ranks one within another, certain large, mighty, unwrought Stones, whereof some are Twenty eight foot high, and Seven broad, which are so artificially, or rather
wonderfully plac'd one upon another, that the whole frame seemeth to hang; 'tis much wonder'd at, both from whence they were brought (the Country affording none such) as also by what means they were set up: Some have thought them to be no Natural Stones, but Artificially made of pure Sand, and of some unctious matter incorporated together. Pliny tells us, that the Sand of Putcoli covered over with Wa∣ter, becometh forthwith a very Stone; which if true, our Conjecture is the more probable; it seeming to confirm what Hi∣storians tell us, That they were erected by the Britans in Memory of Ambrosius Aurelia∣nus, who was Slain here by the Saxons as he was Fighting manfully for the Defence of his Country. Hampshire. IN Latin Hamptonia, is bounded on the West with Dorsetshire and Wiltshire; on the South with the Brittish Channel; on the East it hath Sussex and Surrey; and on the North Barkshire. 'Tis a small Province, fruitful in Corn, furnished with well grown Woods, abounding
with Pasture, and for Sea Commodities rich and happy. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Ringwood, a Town in ancient times of great Fame, but now little better than other good frequented Market-Towns. 2. Christ-Church, a Town so named from a Church therein Dedicated to Christ; 'tis seated between two Rivers; it was Fortified in old time with a Castle, and Beautified with an ancient Church and Twelve Pre∣bendaries, endowed with considerable▪ Rents and Revenues; which continued in great repute till the time of King Henry the VIIIth. 3. Southampton, a Town so named from its situation; 'tis situated in a very commo∣dious place between two Rivers; for a great number of fair Built Houses much renown'd; for Inhabitants and concourse of Merchants Wealthy; fenced round with a double Ditch, strong Walls, and Turrets standing thick between; for the defence of the Haven, it hath a strong Castle of square Stone, cast up upon a Mount of great heighth; several of the Roman Emperors Coins are now and then digged up here, which sufficiently shew the Antiiquity of this place.
Memorable it is, for that Canutus the Puissant King of England and of Denmark▪ rebuked a Sycophant in this Town, who flattered him, That all things in the Realm were at his Command. He ordered his Chair to be set upon the Shore when the Sea began to flow, and then in the presence of many he said unto the Sea as it flowed, Thou are part of my Dominions, and the ground on which I sit is mine, neither was there ever any that durst Disobey my Commands, and escape Unpunished; wherefore I charge thee, that thou come not upon my Land, neither wet the Cloaths and Body of thy Lord; but the Sea flowing on still without any Reverence of his Person, wet his Feet; then he retiring back said, Let all the Inhabitants of the World know, That vain and frivolous is the Power of Kings, and that none is worthy of so sacred a Name, but He to whose Command the Heaven, Earth, and Sea, by bond of an everlasting Law are Subject and Obedient; after which he ne∣ver put his Crown upon his head. 4. Alrefford, a fair Town, standing on the bank of the River Alre, it hath a very spacious Market-place, built by Lucy Bishop of Winchester, An. Dom. 1220. 5. Winchester, Wintonia, formerly the Seat-Royal of the Kings of the West-Saxons, a City adorn'd with several Magnificent Churches, as also with a Bishop's See; it
hath been oftentimes defaced both by Fire and other Misfortunes, but it seems now perfectly to have recovered its self; Edward the IIId appointed in this place a Mart for Wool and Cloth, which was generally called the Staple; it is well Peopled, hath plenty of Water, and containeth about a Mile and an half in Circuit within the Walls; as concerning the round Table in the Hall of this City, vainly fancied by some to have been King Arthur's, any man that vieweth it well, may easily perceive that it is not so ancient. This City slou∣rished in the time of the Romans, in which the Emperors of Rome seem to have had their Houses of Weaving and Embroider∣ing, peculiar to their own Persons and Uses. 6. Portsmouth, a Port Town strongly Fortified both with a Wall and Block-Houses, a Garison being continually kept in Pay for the defence of it; 'tis situated on the very mouth of the Haven, and is always, but especially in time of War, well frequented, as being more favourable and better affected to Mars and Neptune than to Mercury. 7. Basingstoak, a Market-Town well fre∣quented, situated on the descent of an Hill, on the North side of which standeth a very fair Chappel, Consecrated to the Holy
Ghost, by William the first Lord Sands, who was Buried there. Isle of Wight. VEcta Insula; it belongeth to, and is op∣posite to Southampton; from East to West it stretcheth out near 20 Miles in length, and spreadeth in the midst, where it is broadest, 12 Miles, the place of great∣est repute is 1. Newport, the chief Market-Town of the whole Isle; it hath several Castles and Block-houses for its defence. Barkshire, Attrebates. IN Latin Barcheria; on the North part 'tis sever'd from Oxfordshire, and after∣wards from Buckinghamshire by the River Isis; on the South it beareth towards Hamp∣shire, where the River Kenet cutteth through it, till it runs into the Thames; on the West 'tis bounded by Wiltshire; and on the East by Surrey: On the West part it hath plenty
of Command Fruit; but on the East part, where it consineth with Surrey, the Soil is very barren and unfruitful. 1. Farendon, a Town seated on a rising ground, famous for a Market kept there, but in times past for a certain Fort which Robert Earl of Glocester Built, and defended against King Stephen, who having won it by many bloody Assaults, levelled it to the ground, so that now it is not to be seen. 2. Abington, a Populous Town, pleasant∣ly seated on the plain of an Hill, since the Year 1416. in which King Henry the Vth Built a Bridge over the River, and turned the Kings high-way hither to make a short∣er passage; it began to be so frequented, that it is now the chief Town of the whole Shire; it is famous for its great Trade in Malt. 3. Wallingford, in old time it was com∣pass'd about with Walls, it had a very large Castle situate upon the River, which was thought to be invincible; it was oftentimes Besieged by King Stephen, but all in vain. This Town was so dispeopled by reason of a grievous Pestilence, which happened in the Year 1348, that whereas before it was well Inhabited and had Twelve Churches, it can shew now no more than One or Two.
4. Newbury, a famous Town raised out of the Ruins of Spine, which was former∣ly a place of great repute; it is situated in a champion plain, being watered through∣out with the River Kenet; 'tis well Inhabi∣ted, and is very remarkable for its Trade in Clothing. 5. Reading, a Town famous for fair Streets, well built Houses, as also for the Riches of the Townsmen, and for their Name in making Cloth; it hath lost the greatest Ornaments it had, viz. a beautiful Church, and a most ancient Castle, which was razed by King Henry the IId, because it was a Refuge for King Stephen's fol∣lowers. 6. Maidenhead, a large spacious Town, fill'd with good Inns for the reception of Strangers; it is well frequented. 7. Windsor-Castle, 'tis situated on an Hill that riseth with a gentle Ascent, and en∣joyeth a most delightful Prospect round about; on the front it overlooketh a spaci∣ous Vale; behind it arise Hills every where, neither rough nor high, so that 'tis dedica∣ted, as one would say, to Hunting-Game; it was Built by King Henry the Ist, An. 1100. and enlarg'd by King Edward the IIId, who was Born here; 'tis in bigness equal to a pretty City, Fortified with Ditches and Bulwarks made of Stone; in this place
King Edward the IIId Instituted the Noble Order of the Garter, to increase Virtue and Valour in the Hearts of his Nobility; or, as some report, in honour of the Countess of Salisbury, of which Lady the King had formerly been Enamour'd. The Garter was given to it in Testimony of that Love and affection wherewith the Knights of it were bound one to another, and all of them jointly to the King as Sovereign; there are of it Twenty six Knights, of which the King of England is always Chief; the Ensign is a Blew Garter Buckled on the Left Leg, on which these words are Em∣broider'd, Honi Soit, qui mal y Pense; about their Necks they wear a Blew Ribbond, at the end of which hangeth the Image of St. George; upon whose Day the Installa∣tions of the new Knights are commonly Celebrated. THese Regions which I have hitherto Describ'd, viz. of the Danmonii, Du∣rotriges, Belgae, Attrebatii; when the Saxons Rul'd in Brittain, fell to the Kingdom of the West-Saxons; who under the Command of their King Egbert, United the English Heptarchy into a Monarchy; which after∣wards,
through the Cowardise of their Kings, soon vanished. For after this the Danes brake in upon the Northumbers, and though often Vanquished, yet being as often Victorious, they at last seiz'd on the Mo∣narchy of England; which was sometime held by the Danes, sometimes by the Sax∣ons, till William Duke of Normandy took it from Harold, and established the Monarchy; which hath ever since continued in a Suc∣cession of Twenty eight Princes, down to our Gracious Sovereign King William. REGNI. NEXT unto the Attrebatii Eastward, those Regions which we commonly term Surrey, Sussex, with the Sea-Coast of Hampshire, were Inhabited by the Regni. Surrey. IN Latin Surria; is bounded on the West by Barkshire, and Hampshire; on the South by Sussex; on the East by Kent; on
the North 'tis Water'd by the River Thames, and by it divided from Middlesex. It is a plain and Champion Country, yielding Corn and Forage in abundance, especially towards the South. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Farnham, a Market-Town, so named from the great quantity of Fern growing near it; near this place Hnry of erected a noble Castle, which being after∣wards demolished by Henry the IIId, was again rebuilt by the Bishops of Winchester. 2. Guildford, a Market-Town well fre∣quented, full of fair Inns; in old time it was a Royal Mansion of the English Saxon Kings. 3. Kingston, a Market-Town well Inha∣bited, famous in old time by reason of a Castle therein belonging to the Clares, Earls of Glocester; it took its name from a little Town which stood near it; in which when England was almost ruined by the Danish Wars, Athelstan, Edwin, and Etheldred, were Crowned Kings in the Market-place. 4. Richmond, a Town very beautiful and glorious in respect of its Buildings, famous for the Death of several Kings, but in par∣ticular of that most Mighty Prince King Edward the IIId. Here also Died Ann, Wife
to King Richard the IId, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the IVth, who first taught English Women the manner of sitting on Horseback, which is now in use, whereas before they rode very unseemly astride as Men do. Memorable it is likewise for that King Henry the VIIth, and Queen Elizabeth of glorious Memory, yielded unto Nature in this place. 5. Croidon, a Market-Town well fre∣quented, whose Inhabitants gain to them∣selves great advantages by selling of Char-Coal. 6. Lambeth, a Town famous in former times for the Death of Canutus the Hardy, King of England, who there Revelling with his Lords, amidst his Cups yielded up his Breath; but at this time 'tis much frequent∣ed by reason of the Archbishop of Canter∣bury's Palace which is in this place. 7. Southwark, the most famous Market-Town and place of Trade in all this Shire; 'tis so large and populous, that it gives place to few Cities in England; in the Reign of King Edward the VIth it was annexed to the City of London, and is at this day reckoned as a part of it.
Sussex. IN Latin Sussexia; is bounded on the West by Hampshire; on the North by Sur∣rey and part of Kent; on the East by Kent; on the South it lieth upon the Brittish Oce∣an; on the Sea-Coast it hath many green Hills of an exceeding heighth, called the Downs, which standing on a Chalky sort of Mould, yield great plenty of Corn; the middle part of it is adorn'd with Meadows, Corn-Fields, and Groves, which afford a delightful Prospect. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Chichester, a City well Inhabited, ha∣ving very fair and regular Buildings, the Streets crossing one another exactly in the middle, in which is erected a fair Stone Market-place, supported with Pillars round about; it hath a very stately Cathedral; the Bishop's See is kept here; 'tis encom∣pass'd almost round with the Lavant, which falls not far off into the Sea; it was Built by Cissa King of the South-Saxons, A. C. 514. 2. Arundel, a good frequented Market-Town, memorable for a magnificent strong Castle Built near it, belonging to the Earl of Arundel.
3. Lewis, a fair Town, seated upon a rising Ground, which for its greatness and multitude of Inhabitants, is reputed one of the Chiefest Towns in all this County; famous it is for the bloody Battel between King Henry the IIId and his unruly Barons, An. 1263. in which the King lost the day, upon Prince Edward his Son's pursuing a Troop of the Enemy too far, which he had first routed by his Valour. 4. Hastings, one of the Cinque-Ports, the Landing-place of the Normans, famous for the overthrow of King Harold in the Fields adjoining; 'tis Inhabited by a War-like People, who are Skilful Sailors; 'tis well stor'd with Barks, it serving both the Country and London in Fish, which they have here in great Plenty. 5. Winchelsey, 'tis situated on an high Hill very steep on that side which looketh towards the Sea; it was enclos'd with a Rampier, and afterwards with very strong Walls; but it no sooner began to flourish, but it was unfortunately Sack'd by the French and Spaniards; it beareth now only the countenance of a fair Town, it having lost its chiefest Beauty upon the Seas leav∣ing it. 6. Rhye, it lay for a good while un∣known in former Ages, but upon the de∣cay of Winchelsey it began to flourish; it
was Wall'd about by King Edward the IIId, and had then a very commodious Haven, it being an usual passage from hence to Normandy; it is now in a manner deserted by the Sea, yet notwithstanding it hath ve∣ry many Fishing Vessels, so that it serveth London with variety of Fish. Thus far Sussex, which together with Sur∣rey, was the Habitation of the Regni in the time of the Brittains, and was afterwards the Kingdom of the South-Saxons; but in the 306th Year after the beginning of it, it came under the Dominion of the West-Saxons. Kent, Cangi. IN Latin Cantium; 'tis bounded on the North by Essex; on the East by the Channel; it hath Sussex on the South; and Surrey on the West to confine upon it; 'tis every where full of Meadows, Pastures, and Corn-Fields, abounding wonderfully in Ap∣ple-Trees and Cherry-Trees, which being brought out of Corasus, a City of Tontus, by Lucullus into Italy, in the 608th Year after the Building of Rome, and the 120th
Year after that translated from thence into Brittain, which was 24 Years ante Christum. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Deptford, a Town where the King's Ships are usually Built, and such as are de∣cay'd Repair'd; there is also a Storehouse and College erected here for the use of the Navy; 'tis remarkable for the Monument of Sir Francis Drake's Ship, which by the Com∣mand of Queen Elizabeth was drawn on shore in this place, the Carkass of it is yet to be seen. 2. Greenwich, a very beautiful Town, but especially in respect of the King's House, which Humphrey Duke of Glocester Built and nam'd Placence; 'tis likewise par∣ticularly famous for the Birth of Queen Elizabeth. 3. Eltham, a fair well Built Town, for∣merly the retiring place of the Kings of Kent. 4. Sevenoke, in this place Sir William Se∣venoke, an Alderman of London, being a Foundling and brought up here, and there∣fore so namd, built in grateful remem∣brance an Hospital and School; he liv'd in the Reign of King Henry the Vth.
5. Dartford, a large great Market-Town, well frequented and well Watered; here King Edward the IIId Built a Nunnery, which King Henry the VIIIth converted in∣to a House for himself and his Successors. 6. Gravesend, a Town as well known as any in England for the usual passage by Wa∣ter between it and London; King Henry the VIIIth when he Fortified the Sea-Coast, rais'd two Platforms here, and two other on the side of Essex opposite to it. 7. Tunbridge, a Town well Inhabited, famous in old time for a fair large Castle, fenc'd with a River and deep Ditches, which Richard Lord of Briony Built there; the very Ruins of it at this time manifestly declare the greatness of it. 8. Maidstone, the largest and most beautiful Town in all this Shire, most commodiously seated for publick Business; one of the two common Prisons of all this County is ap∣pointed here; its Inhabitants are parti∣cularly noted for their Manufacture in Thread. 9. Rochester, a City seated on the River Medway, but of no greatness; in former times called Durobrivis, but afterwards Roffa; 'tis honoured with a Bishop's See, and is the Second City for Antiquity in all this Island.
10. Chetham, the Station of the Royal Navy, where our Kings have always one ready for any Service whatever; it was Built with exceeding great Cost by the Command of Queen Elizabeth, who for the defence thereof raised a Castelet by the River side. Our Ships in this place, to the dishonour of our Nation, were burnt by the Dutch, A. C. 1667. 11. Queensborough, a Port-Town well In∣habited; it hath Westward in the Front a very fine strong Castle Built by Edward the IIId. 12. Feversham, a Town very commo∣diously situated, the most plentiful part of all this Country lying round about it; it hath a little Creek sit for bringing in and exporting Commodities; so that at this day it flourisheth among the neighbouring Towns. 13. Canterbury, an ancient City, famous in the time of the Romans; 'tis neither very great nor very small; it has little or nothing in it worth Observation, besides the Cathe∣dral; famous it is in regard of St. Au∣gustine its first Archbishop, who is here Interr'd. 14. Isle of Tanet, a very pleasant fruitful place, its Inhabitants are very Industrious, getting their Living both by Sea and Land;
they being both Fishermen and Plowmen, Husbandmen and Mariners; they are al∣ways ready appointed for both Elements, they in a manner going round, and keep∣ing a circle in these their Labours. 15. Sandwich, one of the Cinque-Ports; 'tis on the North and West sides Fortified with walls, and on the other parts fenc'd with a Rampier, River, and Ditch. The Ha∣ven, upon the account of the Sands choak∣ing it, and a Ship of Burthen's being ac∣cidentally sunk in the Channel, is not deep enough for any Tall Vessels. 16. Sandon, Deal, Walmer, Three neigh∣bouring Castles Built by King Henry VIII; 'tis generally reported that Julius Caesar Landed first at this place. 17. Dover, 'tis seated on the Sea-shore, where the passage is shortest into France, for that cause Fortified with a strong and impregnable Castle; esteemed one of the Keys of England, and the Chief of the Cinque-Ports. Having now described all those Countries that lie between the Brittish Ocean on the one side, and the Severn Sea, and River Thames on the other; passing now over the River, let us return to the Head of Thames, and the Salt Waters of Severn, and there visit the Dobuni, who formerly
Inhabited those Parts which we now term Glocestershire and Oxfordshire. Glocestershire, Dobuni. IN Latin Glocestria; on the West it bor∣dereth on Monmouthshire and Hereford∣shire; on the North on Worcestershire; on the East upon Warwickshire, Oxfordshire, and Barkshire; and on the South upon Wiltshire and Somersetshire. The Country throughout yieldeth plenty of Corn, and abundance of Fruit; the one through the natural Goodness of the ground, the other through the diligent Tillage and Labour of its In∣habitants. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Tewksbury, a large fair Town, having three Bridges to pass over; it standeth be∣tween the Rivers Severn and Avon, and another Brook which cometh from the East; it is famous for making of fine Woollen Cloth, and the best Mustard; but more fa∣mous in times past by reason of an ancient Monastery Founded by Dodo a Man of great Power in Mercia, An. Christ. 715.
Memorable it is for the fatal Battel Fought between the House of York and Lancaster, An. Christ. 1471. wherein Prince Edward, King Henry the VIth's Eldest Son, being taken Prisoner, he was brought be∣fore King Edward the IVth, who was so provoked by his resolute Answers, that he dash'd him on the Mouth with his Gauntlet, and then Richard the Crouchback with his Dagger stabb'd him to the Heart. 2. Glocester, a fair beautiful City, both for number of Churches and for Buildings; 'tis situated upon the Severn, near the Isle Aldney, where was Fought the Combat be∣tween Edmond Ironside, King of the English-Saxons, and Canutus the Dane; in the South part there was a lofty Castle of square Ash∣ler-stone, which is now wholly Ruined; this City gives the Title to the Third Son of Great Brittain: The chiefest Trade of the Citizens is in working on Iron; the City was Built by the Romans, and set, as it were, on the neck of the Silures to keep them in Subjection; there was also a Co∣lony planted to People it, which they call'd Colonia Glevum. It hath a very stately Ca∣thedral Dedicated to St. Peter, in which lie Interr'd King Edward the Second, and Ro∣bert Courthose the Eldest Son of King William the Conqueror, Two Unfortunate Princes. Near this place, An. 1643. was Fought a
Battel between the Forces of King Charles the Ist, and his Rebellious Parliament, in which the famous Lord Falkland was unfor∣tunately slain. 3. Barkley, a small Market-Town, of great repute for a strong Castle, but more famous for that King Edward the Second, who was Deposed from his Kingdom by the ill Practises of his Wife, was made away in this Castle by the subtilty of the Bishop of Hereford, who wrote unto his Keepers these words without Points, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. 4. Camden, a Market-Town, well Peo∣pled, and of good resort; in this place the Saxon Kings Assembled in the Year 689, and Consulted in common about making War upon the Brittains. 5. Winchelcomb, a great Town well Inha∣bited, famous in old time for an Abbey Erected there by Kenulph King of Mercia.
Oxfordshire. IN Latin Oxonium; on the West it hath Glocestershire; on the South it is divided from Barkshire by the River Isis, and Thames; on the East it bordereth upon Buckingham∣shire; and Northward where it pointeth out in manner of a Cone or Pine-Apple; it hath Northamptonshire on one side, and Warwick∣shire on the other. The Air of this Country is Mild and Temperate, the Land is Fertile and De∣lightful, the Hills abound with Woods, and the Valleys are fill'd with Corn and Pasture. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Evenlode, a small Town famous for King Henry the Second's Building a Laby∣rinth in it for the Beautiful Rosamund, the Lord Clifford's Daughter. 2. Banbury, a fair large Town, not far from which Richard Nevill, Earl of War∣wick, taking part with the House of Lan∣caster, gave the House of York a very great overthrow; 'tis a place of great Antiquity, some Roman Coins being oftentimes found near it.
3. Oxford, a fair and beautiful City, both in respect of the Private Buildings, as well as in the stately Magnificence of the Publick; the situation is extreamly pleasant, for the Hills being beset with Woods do so environ the Plain, that as on the one side they exclude the South and West Wind, so on the other they let in the East, and North-East Wind, which frees the City from all Corruption; 'tis particularly famous for its University, which is the most Celebrated in all Europe, it having 16 Colledges and 8 Halls, all adorn'd with most stately Build∣ings, and enrich'd with great Endowments, noble Libraries, and most Learned Gradu∣ates of all Professions. Buckinghamshire, Cattieuchlani. IN Latin Buckinghamia; on the South it looketh on Barkshire; on the West Ox∣fordshire; on the North it hath Northampton∣shire; and from the East, first Bedfordshire, then Hertfordshire, and afterwards Middle∣sex. The Air of this County is Tempe∣rate and Pleasant, the Soil is Rich, Fat, and Fruitful, the Valleys maintain an insi∣nite Number of Sheep, whose soft and
fine Fleeces are in great esteem throughout all Asia. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Marlow, a pretty Town of good cre∣dit and repute; it took its name from a certain Chalk, commonly called Marle, which being spread upon Corn-ground eaten out with long Tillage, doth so quick∣en the same again, that after one Years rest it never lieth fallow, but beareth Corn in great plenty. 2. Wickam, a large Town, equal both in Beauty and Buildings to the best in the Shire. 3. Ailesbury, a fair Market-Town, seated on a rising Hill, and compass'd about with many pleasant Meadows; it hath a great reputation for Grazing and Feeding of Cattel. 4. Buckingham, the Principal Town of this Shire, situated on a low Ground, and encompass'd by the River Ouse; 'twas never of any great repute, yet before the Con∣quest it was Fortified with a Castle and Rampiers against the Invasion of the Danes. 5. Stony-Stratford, a Town of ancient Note, being supposed to be the Romans Lactorodum; it is built of rough Stone upon the ancient Causey-way, which is called
Watling-street; where remains Marks thereof even unto this day. At this place Edward the Elder stopp'd the passage of the Danes, whilst he strenthened Torcester against them; in this place Edward the First rear'd a beau∣tiful Cross in Memory of Eleanor his De∣ceased Queen, as he did in every place where her Corps rested, from Herdby in Lincolnshire, till it was received and Buried at Westminster. Bedfordshire. IN Latin Bedfordia; on the East and South side it joineth to Cambridge and Hertfordshire; on the West to Buckingham∣shire; on the North to Northampton and Hun∣tingtonshire; 'tis divided into two parts by the River Ouse; the Soil is very bountiful, especially towards the North, that being Watered by the River. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Bedford, a Town more famous for its Antiquity than for its. Beauty, it having sustain'd great damages, both in the Wars between King Stephen and Maud the Em∣peress,
as well as in the unhappy Dissenti∣ons between King John and his unruly Barons; the River Ouse divides it into two parts, but it is join'd together by a Stone Bridge. 2. Dunstable, a Town seated in a Chalky Ground, well Inhabited and full of Inns, it hath Tour Streets answering to the Four parts of the World, in every one of which is a Pond of standing Water for the use of the Inhabitants. Hertfordshire. HErtfordia, hath on the West Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire; on the South Middlesex; on the East Essex; and on the North Cambridgeshire. The Air is sweet and healthful, being seated in a Climate neither too Hot, nor too Cold; the Soil is pleasant and delightful, yielding abundance of Corn, Cattel, Wood, and Grass, being destitute of nothing which either affords Profit or Pleasure to Mankind, which are more augmented by the many Rivers which arise in it, and run through it.
The Principal Towns are these. 1. Royston, a Town of late days very famous and much frequented for Malt, as also for a Corn-Market which is Weekly held there. 2. Hatfield, a fair large Town, in the upper part of which stands a pleasant Seat, belonging to the Earl of Salisbury. 3. Hertford, it was formerly the Principal Town of the whole Shire, but is now fal∣len to decay. 4. Ware, a pleasant Town, well Water'd and much frequented, famous in old time for a Tournament instituted there by the Earl of Pembroke, who was un∣fortunately kill'd by a fall from his Horse▪ They were first instituted, A. C. 934. and grew not out of use till the happy days of King James the First. 5. Bishop-Stortford, a large well frequented Town, fenc'd in old times by a Castle. 6. St. Albans, the Verulamium of the Ro∣mans, a very ancient Town and well Peo∣pled; some old Coins are here oftentimes digged up, which are thought by some to be Stamp'd before the coming in of the Ro∣mans. Near this place Ostorius, the Empe∣ror Claudius's Lieutenant, is thought to have subdued the Valiant Briton Caractacus. Fa∣mous
it is likewise for Two Memorable Battels Fought between the House of York and Lancaster; first Richard Duke of York, Anno 1455. gave the Lancastrians a great overthrow, took King Henry the VIth Pri∣soner, and slew a great many Honourable Persons. Four Years after the Lancastrians, under the Conduct of Queen Margaret, won the Field, put the House of York to Flight, and restor'd the King to his former Liberty. 7. Barnet, a fair Market-Town, famous for a great Beast-Market kept there, but more renown'd it is for a memorable Bat∣tel Fought April the 14th An. 1471. be∣tween the Houses of York and Lancaster, wherein the Victory happily fell to King Edward the IVth, Richard Nevill the great Earl of Warwick, being there slain. Middlesex, Trinobantes. MIddlesexia, 'tis sever'd from Bucking∣hamshire on the West by the River ; on the North from Hertfordshire by a known crooked Limit; from Essex on the East by the River Lea; and from Surrey and Kent on the South by the Thames. 'Tis seated
in a pleasant Vale, having some Hills around it of a good ascent, from whose tops the prospect of the whole is seen, like to Zoar in Egypt, or rather like a Paradise and Garden of God. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Uxbridge, a Town of late Years ve∣ry full of Inns, and pleasantly situated. 2. Stanes, a fair beautiful Town, near which the Baronage of England assembled together in great Numbers to exact their Liberties of King John, A. C. 1215. 3. Hampton-Court, a Royal Palace of the Kings, of admirable Magnificence, Built by Cardinal Wolsey; it was enlarg'd and finish'd by King Henry the VIIIth; it containeth within it Five Inner Courts. 4. Fulham, a Town particularly famous for the Palace of the Bishop of London. 5. Chelsey, a Town of very fair Build∣ings, but chiefly remarkable on the account of the College Erected for the Maintenance of ancient Soldiers; it was finished in the Reign of the late King James. 6. LONDON, the Seat of our Brittish Empire, and the Chiefest for Traffick in the World; Seated in an excellent Air upon the River Thames; its Buildings are Fair and Stately, the Streets Spacious; it has scarcely
any Rival in Europe; famous it is for its Magnificent Cathedral, thought to be in former times the Temple of Diana, but it is now Consecrated to St. Paul. London-Stone is thought to have been fix'd for a Mile-Mark, such as was in the Mar∣ket-place of Rome, from which was taken the dimension of all Journeys every way; 'tis thought to be plac'd in the midst of the City. LONDON was formerly Wall'd about by Constantine the Great, at the request of his Mother Helena; but at this time its chief Strength consists, not so much in its Wall, as in the great Number of its Inhabitant. 7. Westminster is a City of its self, and has its peculiar Magistrates and Privileges; it was formerly more than a Mile distant from London, but it is now join'd close to it; famous it is for the Abbey, the Hall of Justice, and the King's Royal Palace. In the place where the Abbey now stand: there was formerly a Temple Consecrated to Apollo, out of the Ruins of which this present Abbey was Built by King Edward the Third; a Work that cost Fifty Years Labour in Building: Which Church the Abbots afterwards very much enlarg'd towards the West end, and King Henry the Seventh adjoin'd thereto at the East end a Chappel of admirable Elegancy, wherein
is to be seen his own most stately Monu∣ment of solid and massy Copper. Essex. ESSEXIA, on the North the River Stour divideth it from Suffolk; on the East it has the Ocean; on the South the Thames separateth it from Kent; on the West the Lea divideth it from Middlesex; and the Stour from Hertfordshire. The Air is tempe∣rate and pleasant, but towards the Waters somewhat Aguish; the Soil is rich and fruitful, being in some parts so very fertile, that after Three Years Glebe of Saffron, the Land for Eighteen more will yield plen∣ty of Barley, without either Dunging or Manuring the Earth. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Leyton, a fair beautiful Market-Town. 2. Chelmsford, a fair large Town, thought to be the old Canonium of the Romans; 'tis situated in the midst of the Shire between two Rivers, which join themselves together near this place; the Assizes of the County are kept here.
3. Maldon, an ancient Town, called formerly Camolodunum, famous for Bonduca, or Boadicias Victory over the Romons, 70000 being slain in this place; its Antiquity is apparent from the Coins, Helmets, and Bones, which were dug up in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, to which we may ap∣apply these Verses of Virgil, Geor. Lib. 1. 493. Scilicet & tempus veniet, cum sinibus illis Agricola incurvo terram molitus aratro, Exesa inveniet Scabrâ rubigine pila; Aut gravibus rassris galeas pulsabit manes, Grandiaque essossis mirabitus ossa Sepulchris. 4. Colchester, a proper fair Town, plea∣santly seated; it is Wall'd about, and Beau∣tified with 15 Churches; the ancient Coins daily dug out here, do shew that it flou∣rished in the time of the Romans. The Trade of the Inhabitants consists chiefly in making of Cloth and Bays, with other sort of Stuff. 5. Harwich, a Port-Town, not very great, but well Peopled, Fortified both by Art and Nature; 'tis Memorable for a Battle at Sea fought between the English and Danes, An. Christ. 884. 6. Saffron-Walden, a fair Market-Town, famous for the great Quantity of Saffron which grows there; which Commodity
was at first brought into England in the Reign of Edward the IIId. Suffolk, Iceni. SUffolcia, hath on the West Cambridge; on the South the Stour divideth it from Essex; on the East it hath the German Sea; and on the North Norfolk. The Air of this place is thought by some Physicians to be the very best in the whole Island; the Soil is fruitful, and replenished with all things. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Bury, a very fair beautiful Town, remarkable for an Abbey Built by Canutus, to Expiate the Sacrilegious Impiety of his Father Suenus against this Church; it appears still beautiful even in its very Ruins. Near this place was fought a great Battel between Robert Bossu, Earl of Leicester, and King Henry the IId, the Victory falling to the King's Party, A. C. 1173. 2. Sudbury, formerly the chief Town of this Shire; 'tis Populous and Wealthy, the Inhabitants making great advantages by Clothing.
3. Ipswich, the principal Town of this Shire, well Peopled, beautiful in its Build∣ings, has 14 Churches, and a very commo∣dious Haven; 'tis fenc'd with a Rampier; it was Sack'd by the Danes, An. 991. and again in the Year 1000; yet it perfectly recovered its former Beauty; and was the finest Town in England, had a very noble Harbour, which was most convenient for the Northern and Eastern parts of the World; in this state it continued, till through the severe Injunctions of Bishop Laud, in the Reign of King Charles the First, concern∣ing matters in Religion, several Thousands of Families were frighted out of Norfolk and Suffolk into New-England. Norfolk. NOrfolcia, it is bounded on the East and North by the German Ocean; on the West the Ouse divideth it from Cambridge; on the South it confineth upon Suffolk. The Air is sharp and piercing, especially in the Champion and near the Sea; upon which account the Spring and Harvest is not so soon here as in other Countries; 'tis a Champion Country large and spacious,
abounding with Rivers, pleasant Springs, good Corn and Pasture. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Thetford, a large Market-Town, but thinly Inhabited; in times past it was very Populous, and besides other tokens of An∣tiquity, it hath still to be seen a great Mount, fenc'd with a double Rampier, and For∣tified in ancient times with Walls; it was formerly the Seat of the Kings of the East-Angles, and known to the Romans by the Name of Sitomagus. 2. Norwich, a famous City, pleasantly situated on the River Yare, which runs thence to Yarmouth, lying out in length from South to North a Mile and an half, and in breadth about half so much, it drawing in it self by little and little at the South end in manner of a Cone; in that Circuit it comprehendeth about Thirty Parishes, well Walled about with many Turrets, and Twelve Gates; but it hath in it much waste ground, the City suffering great loss both in Wealth and Buildings by Ket's Rebelli∣on in the time of King Edward the Sixth; it hath recovered its first blow by the Dutch Manufactures, but of the last it still lan∣guisheth; though at this present it glories in the Beauties of a fair Cathedral, the
Three Palaces, of the Bishops, the Dukes of Norfolk, and the Earls of Surrey, and the ruins of an ancient Castle of the Saxons Building. 3. Yarmouth, a Port-Town, having a very convenient Haven; 'tis beautifully Built, and strongly fenc'd both by Art and Nature; 'tis almost encompassed with Water; on the West side with a River that hath a Draw-bridge over it; on the other parts with the Ocean, unless Northward, where it is firm Land; it is de∣fended by a strong Wall, which together with the River, make a square Form of Four sides somewhat long; upon the Wall towards the East, a great Mount is cast up, on which are planted several pieces of Or∣dinance. 4. Lynn, a large Town, encompass'd with a deep Trench and Walls; for the most part 'tis divided by Two small Rivers, which have Fifteen Bridges over them; 'tis of no great Antiquity, yet by reason of its Havens, Buildings, and Merchants, 'tis the Second Principal Town of this Shire.
Cambridgeshire. CAntabrigia, on the East it lieth on Nor∣folk and Suffolk; on the South on Es∣sex and Hertfordshire; on the West on Bedford and Huntingtonshire; 'tis divided into two parts by the River Ouse or Cam. This Pro∣vince is not so large as some others, nor the Air so temperate and pleasant, it being in∣fected by the Fens; the North part is for the most part Fenny, and surcharg'd with Waters; but the South is Champion, yield∣ing Corn in abundance. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Cambridge, a Town particularly fa∣mous for its University; which, as it is re∣ported, was first begun and Founded by Cantaber a Spaniard, 375 Years ante Chri∣stum; as also that Sigebert, or Sebert, King of the East-Angles, restor'd it again, An. Dom. 630. Being drstroyed afterwards by the Danes, it was for a long time of no ac∣count, until it reviv'd under the Normans Government; at this day it hath Sixteen stately Colleges and Halls, which for Build∣ings, Beauty, Endowments, and Number of Students, are so replenished, that Oxford excepted, the like is hardly to be found in Europe.
2. Ely, a City not so great as ancient, situate in the Isle so nam'd, occasioned by the divided Streams of Ner and Ouse, with the overflowings of other Rivers, turning a great part of this Tract into Fenns and Marshes; remarkable for little else but its Cathedral, which was erected An. Dom. 1110. in the 10th Year of King Henry the First. Huntingtonshire. IN Latin Huntingtonia; is bounded on the South by Bedfordshire; on the West and North by Northamptonshire; and on the East by Cambridgeshire. The Soil is fruitful, yielding Corn in great abundance; towards the East, where it is Fenny, it is very rich and plentiful for the Feeding of Cattel; in all the other parts 'tis extreamly pleasant, on the account of the Woods and Groves with which it aboundeth. The Principal Towns are these. 1. St. Neets, a Market Town, so named of one Neutus a Learned and Holy Man, who Travelled all his Life-time in Pro∣pagating Christianity; his Body was tran∣slated
from Neotstock in Cornwall to this place. 2. Huntington, the principal Town of all this Country; 'tis seated on the River Ouse, somewhat high, stretching its self out in length Northward; it is adorn'd with Four Churches; and by the River near unto the Bridge the Mount and Plot of an ancient Castle is yet to be seen. 3. Godmanchester, a very great ancient Country Town, situate in an open ground, of a light Mould, and bending to the Sun; 'tis reported in former times, that the In∣habitants received King James the First in his Progress this way, with a Hundred and eighty Plows, brought forth in a Rustical kind of Triumph. 4. St. Ives, a fair Town, so named from Ivo a Persian Bishop, who about the Year 600 Travelled through England, Preach'd diligently the Word of God, especially to this Town, wherein he Died. 5. Kimbolton, a fair beautiful Castle, for∣merly the seat of the Mandevils, but now in Possession of the Staffords.
Northamptonshire, Coritani. IN Latin, Northamptonia; 'tis situated in the very midst of England; on the East 'tis bounded by Bedford and Huntingtonshire; on the South by Buckingham and Oxfordshire; on the West it hath Warwickshire; and on the North Rutland and Lincolnshire. The Air is temperate and healthful, the Soil rich and fruitful, and so plenteously Peopled, that from some ascents you may see 30 Churches at the same time. The Prinicipal Towns are these. 1. Northampton, a fair beautiful Town Built for the most part of Stone; 'tis Wall'd about, except on the West, where it is de∣fended with a River; from the Walls you have a goodly prospect every way to a wide and spacious plain Country; it was Forti∣fied heretofore with a very strong Castle, and seated in so excellent an Air, that once the Students of Cambridge purposed to re∣move the University to this place; famous it is for a Battel fought between the House of York and Lancaster, in which the House of York prevailing, King Henry the VIth was taken Prisoner and conveyed to London.
2. Peterborough, a City seated in the very Angle of this Shire; famous in old time for a Monastery, which is since converted into a Cathedral, the Building of which is truly Magnificent, the Forefront carrieth a ma∣jesty with it, and the Cloysters are exceed∣ing large; in the Glass Windows is repre∣sented the History of Wolpher the Founder, who being most averse from Christianity, Murther'd Wolphald and Rufin his own Sons, because they had Devoted themselves to Christ. In the Cathedral lieth Buried Ca∣therine the Repudiated Queen of King Henry the VIIIth. Mary Queen of Scots was also at first Buried here, but was afterwards re∣moved to Westminster by the Command of King James the Ist. 3. Rockingham Castle, it was Built by William the Conqueror, Fortified with a Rampier and Bulwarks, and a double range of Battlements; 'tis situate on the side of an Hill within a Forest.
Leicestershire. IN Latin Leicestria, is bounded on the East by Lincolnshire and Rutlandshire; on the North by Nottinghamshire and Darbyshire; it hath Warwickshire on the West; and on the South Northamptonshire. The Air is gen∣tle, mild, and temperate, giving Appetite both to Rest and Labour; the Commodities of the Soil are Corn, Cattel, and Coals, of which the Inhabitants have great plenty. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Bosworth, an ancient Market-Town, memorable for the Victory which Henry Earl of Richmond, who was afterwards Henry the VIIth, obtained over the Usurper Richard the IIId the Tyrant, and most of his Commanders being there slain. 2. Leicester, a fair Town, beautiful in its Buildings, and of great Antiquity; 'twas fenc'd with a very strong Wall, which was raz'd in the Reign of Henry the IId, it has in it a stately Church and Hospital, Built by Henry the First, Duke of Lancaster.
3. Loughborough, a fair beautiful Town, which for its Buildings and pleasant Woods, challengeth the second place in all this Shire. 4. Dunnington, a fair ancient Castle Built by the Earls of Leicester, it belongs now to the King. Rutlandshire. IN Latin Rutlandia, 'tis environ'd with Leicestershire, unless it be on the South, where it lieth on the River Welland, and on the East where it toucheth on Lincolnshire; the Air is both healthful and delightful, sub∣ject neither to extremity of Heat or Cold; the Soil is so rich, that for Corn and Til∣lage this small County giveth place to none. The Principal Town is▪ Okcham, a Town remarkable only for the Ruins of an old decayed Castle Built in the Normans time, formerly the Seat of the Ferrers, but afterwards it was given by Henry the VIIIth to Thomas
Cromwell, whom he advanced to the highest Dignities. Lincolnshire. IN Latin Lincolnia, is bounded on the West by Rutlandshire and Nottinghamshire; on the North it reacheth to Humber an arm of the Sea; on the East it hath the German Ocean; and on the South it is divided from Northamptonshire by the River Wellnd. The Air upon the East and South part is thick and foggy, by reason of the Fenns, but in other places very moderate and pleasing; the Soil upon the West and North is very Fer∣tile, but towards the East and South, Fenny, Brakish, and Barren; yet for Fowl and Fish it exceeds any other in the Realm. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Crowland, a Town of good Note; it stands amidst most deep Fenns and muddy Waters; it is so shut up, and divided round about from all entrance, that there is no access unto it, unless it be on the North-East side, and that by narrow Cawseys; 'tis seated altogether like Venice; it hath three
Streets divided from each other by Water∣courses between, planted thick with Wil∣lows, and raised upon Posts pitch'd and driven down into the standing Waters, ha∣ving over them a Triangular Bridge of ad∣mirable Workmanship; about the Town the ground is so rotten and moorish, that a Man may thrust a Pole directly down Thirty Foot deep; however the Town is well Inhabited, the Inhabitants making great advantages by taking Fish, and catch∣ing of Water-Fowl, which is so great in the Month of August, that they will spread a Net, and at once draw Three thousand Wild Ducks together. 2. Spalding, a Town situate upon the same River, being enclosed round with Riverets and Drains; yet is infinitely a fairer Town than a Man could possibly expect to find among such Slabs and Water-plashes. 3. Boston, a famous Town, standing on both sides the River Witham; 'tis well fre∣quented upon the account of its commodi∣ous Haven; the Market-place is fair and large, the Church great and beautiful, the Steeple of it rising up to a mighty heighth, doth, as it were, salute all Travellers, and give direction to the Sailors; a Staple
of Wool is settled here, which enriches it very much. 4. Stanford, a Town well Peopled, of good resort, Endowed with several immu∣nities; it was formerly Wall'd about, but is at this day beautified with Seven Church∣es, and a very fair Hospital. 5. Grantham, a Town well frequented, adorn'd with a very fair Church, and a Free School Built by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester. 6. Lincoln, a place in former days of great Strength and Note, being one of the best Peopled Cities in all the Saxon Heptar∣chy, and of great Merchandise and Tras∣sick both by Sea and Land; it had for∣merly Fifty Churches, but is now much de∣cay'd, it having suffered much damage in the Wars of King Stephen, and of Henry the IIId with his Barons, as also both by Fire and Earthquakes; the chief Fame it now hath is for its Minster, one of the stateliest Piles in England, and perhaps in Christendom, high seated on an Hill, and from thence discern'd over all the Country. The City is seated on the side of an Hill, where the River Witham bendeth his course Eastward; famous it is in respect that Vor∣timer
the Warlike Briton, who often dis∣comfited the Saxon Armies, ended his days, and was here, contrary to his Command∣ment, Buried. 7. Wainfleet, a Town deservedly remark∣able, in that it Bred William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester, the Founder of Maudlin Col∣lege in Oxford. Nottinghamshire. IN Latin Nottingamia, hath on the East Lincolnshire; on the North Yorkshire; on the West Derbyshire; and on the South side Leicestershire. The Air is pleasant and health∣ful, the Soil rich and clayey, and for Corn and Grass so fruitful, that it claims the second place before any other in the Realm. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Stoke, a little Village, famous for the Victory obtain'd by King Henry the VIIth against Sir John de la Pool Earl of Lincoln, who being by King Richard the IIId decla∣red Heir apparent to the Crown, Rebelli∣ously
opposed himself against his Sovereign, and in this place sighting Manfully, both he and most of his Followers lost their lives. 2. Nottingham, a fair Town seated on the Trent, but very high upon an Hill which overlooks it; for Buildings, fair Streets, and a spacious Market-place, not giving way to many Cities; but of most fame for a Royal and magnificent Castle, which for Strength, Stateliness, and Prospect, may justly chal∣lenge the Precedency of most in England; it is mounted upon an huge steep work on the West side of the City; it was Built by William the Conqueror to bridle the English▪ David the IId. King of Scots, and Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, were detain'd a long time Prisoners in this Castle. Memorable it is, for that King Charles the Ist, first set up his Standard in this place, occasion'd on the unhappy Differences between him and his Parliament, August 22. 1642. 3. Southwell, it is adorn'd with a very beautiful Church Consecrated to the Virgin Mary; 'tis a Town not very fair to outward view, but strong, ancient, and of great fame; the Archbishop of York has a stately Palace in this place.
Derbyshire. IN Latin Darbia, hath on the East Not∣tinghamshire; on the South Leicestershire; on the West Steffordshire; and on the North-side Yorkshire; it resembles the Form of a Triangle, but not with equal sides. The Air is good and healthful, and the Soil rich and fertile, especially in the South and East Parts. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Derby, a fair Town, well traded and resorted, situated on the River Darwent; which on the East side of it affords to the Eye a pleasant and delightful Prospect, run∣ning down and carrying a full and chearful Stream under a beautiful Stone-Bridge; up∣on which formerly a fair Chappel was Erected, which is now gone to decay; it is adorn'd with Five Churches, the greatest of which named Alhallows, and Dedicated to the Memory of All Saints, is peculiarly remarkable for its lofty Spire, and the Tomb of the Countess of Shrewsbury. 2. Peak, so called from its Hills and Mountains; from this place we have our Lead and Milstones, and the Apothecaries their Antimony.
3. Buxton, a Town memorable for Nine Water-springs which arise out of a Rock within the compass of Eight Yards, Eight of them are Warm, but the Ninth is very Cold; these run under a very fair square Building of Free-stone, and about Sixty Paces off receive another Hot Spring from a Well, inclos'd with Four flat Stones, cal∣led St. Anns; near unto which another very Cold Spring bubbles up: The Inhabitants report that great Cures have been effected by these Waters, and daily experience shew∣eth that they are good for the Stomach and Sinews, and very pleasant to Bathe the Body in. The Town is lately adorn'd with very beautiful Buildings. Having now Describ'd the Regions of the Coritani, we will next survey the Provinces of the Cornavii; who, if we may believe Ptolomy, seem to have Possessed Warwick∣shire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire.
Warwickshire, Cornavii. IN Latin Warwicus, hath on the East Northamptonshire and Leicestershire; on the South Oxfordshire and Glocestershire; on the West Worcestershire; and on the North Staffordshire. Its Air and Soil are equally desirable; the Air is extreamly healthful, and the Soil in the South part yieldeth such a plentiful Harvest, that the Husbandman smiles to behold his pains so well re∣warded. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Warwick; this Town was the ancient Praeciduum of the Romans; it standeth on the River Avon upon a steep and high Rock, and all the Passages to it are wrought out of the very stone; it is yet apparent that it was formerly Fortified with a Wall and Ditches; towards the South-West it sheweth a Castle strongly Fortified both by Art and Nature; 'twas in a good state upon the en∣trance of the Normans, but hath lately suf∣fered much by Fire. 2. Henly, a pretty Market-Town, which had formerly a Castle adjoining to it, be∣longing to the Family of the Montforts.
3. Killingworth, a beautiful strong Castle, encompassed with Parks, given by Queen Elizabeth to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester. 4. Bremicham, a Town full of Inhabi∣tants, resounding always with Hammers and Anvils, they being most of them Smiths. 5. Coventry, a City so called from an old Convent and Religious House which gave Name to it; beautified it is with a well-Built Wall, large Streets, handsome Houses, and two fair Churches, Dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and St. Michael; it was formerly the only Mart and City of Trade in all these Parts, notwithstanding that it is destitute of all the advantages which a Navigable River might afford it. 6. Edgehill, a small Village famous for the Battel fought between the Forces of King Charles the Ist, and those of the Parliament, in which both sides claim'd the Victory.
Worcestershire. IN Latin Wigornia, hath on the East Warwick∣shire; on the South Glocestershire; on the West Herefordshire and Shropshire; and on the North Staffordshire. The Air of this Shire is temperate, and the Soil fertile, abounding with Corn, Woods, Pasture, and every thing that is necessary for the Life of Man. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Kidderminster, a fair Town, hath a great Market, it is well frequented, divided into two parts by the River Stour; it is adorn'd with a very beautiful Church. 2. Worcester, the principal City of this Shire, it being truly admirable both in re∣spect of its Antiquity and Beauty; 'tis situated on the East Bank of the Severn, and from the same is Walled triangu∣larly about, extending in Circuit One thousand six hundred and fifty Paces, in which are made Seven Gates for en∣trance, and Five Watch-Towers for its defence; it hath suffered much damage both by War and Fire, but seems now to have recovered its former Beauty;
it hath a stately Cathedral, in the midst of which lieth Interred the Body of King John, under a Monument of White Marble. The Reputation it now hath ariseth from its Inhabitants, who are both Numerous and Wealthy by their Trade in Clothing. Near this place Cromwell the Usurper, gave King Charles the Second's Forces a terrible overthrow, wherein he slew Three thousand five hundred and fifty, among which were Duke Hamilton and General Forbes, and took Five thousand Prisoners; this hap∣pened June 13, An. 1651.
Staffordshire. IN Latin Staffordia, hath on the East Warwickshire and Derbyshire; on the South Worcestershire; on the West Shropshire; and on the North Cheshire. The Air is Healthful, but very sharp towards the North; in which place the Soil is not so fruitful as in the Southern parts. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Stafford, the principal Town of this County; it was Built by Edward the Con∣fessor, and Incorporated by King John; and upon the East and South part was Walled and Trench'd by the Barons of the place; the rest from the East to North was secured by a large Pool of Water, which now is become fair Meadow Grounds; it hath Four Gates opening to the Four Winds; it is adorn'd with a very beautiful Castle of its Name, which adds not a little to the Beauty of the place. 2. Stone, a fair Market-Town, famous for a Church Consecrated to the Memorial of the Death of Wolfald and Rusin, Sons to Wolfer King of the Mercians, who were
slain by their Father because they had em∣brac'd Christianity. 3. Lichfield, a fair large City, situated in a Plain, divided into two parts by a Pool of Water, which notwithstanding are join'd into one by means of two Bridges made over it, which have sluces to let out the Water; the South part consists of divers Streets, hath in it a School and Hospi∣tal Founded for the Relief of the Poor; the other part is beautified with a stately Cathedral, encompass'd with a strong Wall, adorn'd with the Bishop's Palace, and fair Houses for the Prebendaries, which make together an excellent shew, mounting up on high with Three Spires of Stone; and indeed for elegant and noble Buildings, it giveth place to few Cathedrals. 4. Burton, a Town famous, in regard it yieldeth great store of Alablaster.
Shropshire. IN Latin Salopia, hath on the East Staf∣fordshire; on the South Worcestershire, Herefordshire, and Radnorshire; on the West Montgomery and Denbighshire; and on the North Cheshire. The Air is wholsome, af∣fording health to the Inhabitants in all Sea∣sons of the Year; the Soil is rich, and standeth most upon a reddish Clay, abound∣ing in Wheat, Barley, Coals, Iron, and Woods; it is divided into two parts by the River Severn. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Ludlow, a Town more fair than anci∣ent, encompassed with a Wall reaching about a Mile in circuit; it is defended by a stately strong Castle, Built by Roger Mont∣gomery. King Henry the VIIIth Ordained in this place the Council of the Marches. 2. Bridgnorth, a Town seated upon a Rock, out of which the ways leading to the upper part of the Town are wrought; 'tis Fortified with Walls, a Ditch, a stately
Castle, and the Severn, which between the Rocks runneth down with a very great fall. 3. Shrewsbury, a Town strongly Fortified both by Art and Nature, adorn'd with two fair Churches and other Buildings, both Publick and Private; almost all the Commodities of Wales do flow to this Town, as to a common Mart of both Na∣tions; famous it is for the Battel between divers of the Nobility and King Henry the IVth, they purposing to advance Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, to the Crown, as the undoubted apparent Heir of King Richard the IId: It was taken by the Parlia∣ment Forces raised against King Charles the First, An. 1645. 4. Oswestre, a little Town enclosed with a Ditch and a Wall, and Fortified with a pretty Castle; the Inhabitants Traffick much in Welsh Cottons, whereof great store is bought and sold here every Week.
Cheshire. IN Latin Cestria, hath on the South Shropshire; on the East Staffordshire and Darbyshire; on the North Lancashire, and on the West Denbighshire and Flintshire. For Air and Soil it far exceeds its Neighbouring Counties, being in my opinion equal to the best; the best Cheese in all Europe is made in this place. The Inhabitants of this Shire have never been stain'd with the blot of Rebellion; whose Loyalty King Richard the IId so much esteem'd, that by Authority of Parliament he made the County to be a Principality, Stiling himself the Prince of Chester. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Chester, a City Built in form of a Quadrant; it is enclos'd with a Wall ex∣tending two Miles in compass; it hath a Ele∣ven Parish-Churches, of which that of St. John's by the North Gate is a most state∣ly Building; the Houses are very fair Built, and along the chief Streets are Galleries, or walking-places, having Shops on both sides.
Memorable it is, for that King Edgar sitting in a Barge, Kennady King of Scotland, Mal∣colm King of Cumberland, Macon King of Man and of the Islands, with all the Prin∣ces of Wales, who were come to do him Homage, Working like Watermen at the Oar, Rowed him along the River Dee in a triumphant manner, to his great glory and the joy of the Beholders; this was about the Year 960. 2. Nantwich, a Town reputed to be the greatest and fairest Built of all this Shire, next to Chester; 'tis also very famous for the making of Salt. 3. Macclesfield, a very fair Town, giving Name to a Forest near adjoining, where Thomas Savage, the Archbishop of York, Built a Coll, in which some of the Fa∣mily of the Savages lie Entom'd. We have now Surveyed the Regions of the Cornavii, who with the Coritani, Dobu∣ni, and Cateuchlani, made the Kingdom of the Mercians; all the other Kingdoms of the Saxons Heptarchy confined upon it; it was much larger than any of the rest, but fell at last into the Dominion of the West-Saxons,
An. 826. after that the Danes had wasted it many Years. Herefordshire, Silures. BEfore I treat of the other parts of Eng∣land, give me leave to turn aside and to visit Wales, called in Latin Cambria, or Wallia, where the ancient Brittains had their abode; nor will it be improper, it lying ad∣jacent to the Cornavii, that it should be spo∣ken of in its due place, especially since the Inhabitants are now Incorporated with us into our Commonwealth. Wales comprised in times past before the Conquest the whole Country beyond the Severr, which in the time of the Romans was Inhabited by the Silures, Dimaetae, and Ordovices; for these held not only the Twelve Shires of Wales, but those Two al∣so beyond the Severn, viz. Herefordshire and Monmouthshire, which are now reckoned among the Counties of England; accord∣ing to Ptolomy the Silures inhabited the South part, called by one Name Dehubarth, but now, Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Brecknock∣shire, Monmouthshire, and Glamorganshire.
The Inhabitants are generally impatient of Servitude, very Valiant, and given to War. Herefordia, is bounded on the East with Worcestershire and Glocestershire; on the South with Monmouthshire; on the West with Rad∣nor and Brecknockshires; and on the North with Shropshire. This Counties Climate is healthful and temperate, and the Soil so fertile for Corn and Cattel, that no place in England yieldeth more. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Hereford, the principal City of this Shire, seated on the Banks of the River Wye, in the middle of most flourishing Meadows, and no less plentiful Corn-Fields; it was raised out of the ruins of the ancient Ariconium; 'tis encompass'd almost round with Rivers; it was Walled about in the Reign of Henry the First, who Founded in this place a most beautiful Cathedral Church. 2. Lemster, a Town famous for exceed∣ing fine Wool.
Radnorshire. IN Latin Radnora, hath on the North Montgomeryshire; on the East Hereford∣shire; on the South Brecknockshire; on the West, where  groweth very narrow, Cardi∣ganshire. The Air of this Province is very sharp and Cold, and the Soil lean and bar∣ren; its riches consists chiefly in the brood of Cattel. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Radnor, the principal Town of this Shire, fair Built, after the manner of the Country, with thatch'd Houses; in times past it was fenc'd with a Wall and Castle, which are now grown to decay. 2. Prestan, a Market-Town, so fair and beautiful, that it in a manner putteth down Radnor; it is of late Years wonderfully frequented. 3. Knighton, a Town scarce inferior to Prestian; near this place is King Offa's ad∣mirable Ditch, reaching from Dee Mouth,
up to Wy Mouth, by this Town, for the space of Fourscore and ten Miles, made by him to separate the Brittons from his English∣men. Brecknockshire. IN Latin Brechinia, is bounded on the East with Herefordshire; on the South with Monmouth and Glamorganshires; on the West with Caermardhenshire; and on the North with Radnorshire. The Air is very Tempe∣rate, the whole County is full of Hills, and uneven for Travelling; but the Soil is very fertile, yielding in the Vallies both plenty of Corn and Pasture. The Principal Town is 1. Brecknock, the Shire-Town, seated in the very heart of the Country; its Walls are strong and of good repair, it hath Three Gates for entrance, with Ten Towers for its defence; on the West side it hath a stately Castle; that it was Inhabited in the Romans time, is evident from the Coins of the Roman Emperors oftentimes digged up here.
Monmouthshire. IN Latin Monumethia, is bounded on the North by the River Munow, that sepa∣rateth it from Herefordshire; on the East the River Wye divideth it from Glocestershire; on the West the River Remney severeth it from Glamorganshire; on the South 'tis bounded by the Severn Sea. The Air is healthful and clear; the Soil is Hilly, Woody, Rich, and in all places very Fruitful. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Monmouth, the chief Town of this Province; 'tis encompassed almost round with the Rivers Munow and Wye; on the North side, where it is not defended with Rivers, it was formerly Fortified with a Wall and Ditch. 2. Chepstow, a Town situate on the side of an Hill, rising from the very River, Fortified round about with a Wall of a large Circuit; it hath a very fair Castle situ∣ate over the River Wye; the Town generally speaking is of good resort.
3. Abergevenny, a Town well frequented, Fortified with Walls and a Castle; which of all the Castles in Wales (as Giraldus says) has been most defam'd on the account of Treason. 4. Newport, a Town lately Built, not un∣known upon the account of its Castle, and the Commodiousness of its Harbour.
Glamorganshire. IN Latin Glamorgania; on the South it has the Severn Sea; on the East Monmouth∣shire; on the North Brecknockshire; and on the West Caermardhenshire: The Air is tem∣perate, and giveth more content to the Mind, than the Soil doth fruit or ease to Travellers. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Cardiffe, a proper fair Town, having a commodious Haven, Fortified by a strong Wall and Castle by Fitz-Haimon; memora∣ble it is for that Robert Curthouse, William the Conqueror's Eldest Son, being quite put by his hopes of the Crown of England, and depriv'd of both his Eyes by his Brother King Henry the First, lived until he was an Old Man in this Castle. 2. Cowbridge, a fair Market-Town well frequented. 3. Landaffe, a small City, and of as small reputation, situate somewhat low, but adorn'd
with a Bishops's See, and a Cathedral Con∣secrated to St. Gelean Bishop of the place. West-Wales. Caermardhenshire, Dimetae. IN Latin Maredunum, is limited on the East with Glamorganshire and Brecknock∣shire; on the West with Pembrokeshire; on the North 'tis severed from Cardiganshire by the River Tovy; and on the South it hath the Ocean. The Air is pleasant and de∣lightful, the Soil being not so full of Hills as its neighbouring Counties, is therefore much better for Corn and Pasturage. The Principal Town is Caermardhen, the chief Town of this County, compass'd about with Brick Walls, part of which is yet standing upon the River Tovy; which is able to bear small Ships, although there be now a Bar of Sand cast up against the mouth of it; 'tis plea∣sant for its Woods and Meadows, and vene∣rable for its Antiquity; memorable it is for the Birth of the Sage Merlin.
Pembrokeshire. IN Latin Pembrocia; the Sea presseth up∣on every side of this County, unless it be on the East, where Caermardhenshire, and on the North where a part of Cardigan∣shire boundeth upon it. The Air is passing temperate, and the Soil very fruitful. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Tenby, a fair Town, strongly Walled towards the Land, it looketh into the Sea from a dry Cliff; famous it is for its com∣modious Roads for Ships, and for an abund∣ance of Fish taken there. 2. Milford-Haven, than which there is not another in all Europe either nobler or safer; there are reckoned within it Sixteen Creeks, Five Bays, and Thirteen Roads, known every one by its several name; 'tis particu∣larly famous for the arrival of King Henry the Seventh, who released England from the Domestick Calamities and Civil Miseries it then groan'd under.
3. Pembroke, the principal Town of this Shire; it standeth on the East Creek of Milford-Haven; it was formerly Fortified with Walls and a Castle, which are now decayed. 4. Haverford, situate in the Demy Island of this County, by the Welsh called Ross, by the English, Little England beyond Wales, by reason of the English Tongue there spoken; it is a Town the best Traded and frequented of all South-Wales; it was Fortified with a Rampier and Wall on the North side by the Earls of Clare. 5. St. Davids, a small City, memorable for little else than that it is adorn'd with a Bishop's See, and a fair Church Dedicated to St. Andrew and St. David; from this place in a clear day you may see Ireland. 6. Newport, a Town situate on a steep Cliff, where there is a very commodious Harbour and Road for Ships; 'tis endow'd with several Immunities and Privileges, and defended with a Castle.
Cardiganshire. IN Latin Ceretia, is bounded on the West by the Sea; and on the South by the River Tovy, which Separateth it from Caer∣mardhenshire; the East and North sides are li∣mited by Brecknockshire and Montgomeryshire. The Air is open and somewhat piercing, the Soil is Hilly and uneven, but more plain towards the Sea, than in the East and North parts; it hath very little Corn, few Woods, but Cattel, Fish, and Fowl, in abundance. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Cardigan, the Shire Town, situated on a steep Bank, strongly Fortified with a Wall and Castle by the Earls of Clare. 2. Aberistwith, a most populous and plen∣teous Town, near which are found several Veins of Lead. We have now describ'd the Counties of the Silures and Dimetae; pass we now to the Ordovices, the ancient Inhabitants of North-Wales, which is now divided into the
Counties of Montgomeryshire, Merionethshire, Caernarvonshire, Denbighshire, and Flintshire. North-Wales. Montgomeryshire, Ordovices. IN Latin Mons Gomericus, is bounded on the South with Cardiganshire and Radnor∣shire; on the East with Shropshire; on the North with Denbighshire; and on the West with Merionethshire. The Air is cold and piercing, the Soil fruitful, especially in the East parts, they being watered by the Severn. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Montgomery, a Town seated on the rising of a Rock, having a pleasant Plain under it; it is defended by a very strong Castle, both which were Built by Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury. 2. Plinlimmon-Hill, is particularly famous for its wonderful Heighth, and that on the part where it boundeth one side of this Shire, it poureth forth the Severn, which
next to the Thames, is the greatest River in all Brrittain. Merionethshire. IN Latin Mervinia; on the West the Sea beateth upon it; on the South it is divi∣ded by the River Dovy from Cardiganshire; on the North it is bounded by Caernarvon and Denbighshires; and on the East by part of Denbighshire. The Air of this place is neither pleasant, nor the Soil profitable. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Bala, a little Town endowed with se∣veral Immunities, Peopled with few Inha∣bitants, and very rudely Built; nevertheless it is the chief Market-Town of these Mountainers. 2. Harlech, a Market-Town, situated in a bleak and barren place, it has few Hou∣ses, and those not curiously Built; nor is it famous for any thing, unless we make men∣tion of a strong Castle that stands near it,
commanding the Sea, and passage of such as might seek to invade the Coast. Caernarvonshire. IN Latin Arvonia, the North and West sides lie upon the Irish Sea; the South is enclos'd with Merionethshire; and the East with Denbighshire, from which it is severed by the River Conony. The Air is sharp and piercing, nor is the Soil to be commended much for its fertility. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Caernarvon, a Town so called from its standing over-against the Island Mona; 'tis encompass'd with a small Circuit of Walls about it; but the same is exceed∣ing strong; 'tis also defended by a state∣ly Castle, which takes up the whole West side of it; the Buildings are beau∣tiful, and the Inhabitants much com∣mended for their courtesy; who think it a point of their glory, that King Ed∣ward the First Founded their Town, and that King Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales, was Born there; it
was formerly much resorted to, for the Chancery and Exchequer of the Princes of North-Wales. 2. Bangor, a City seated on the Menai, a branch of the Irish Sea; remarkable for little else than that it is adorn'd with a Bishop's See, and a fair Cathedral Conse∣crated to Daniel, who was sometime Bishop of the place; it was defaced by Owen Glen∣dower, and afterwards re-edified by Henry Dean, An. Dom. 1496.
Isle of Anglesey, or Mona. 'TIS sever'd from Brittain with the small narrow strait of Menai, and on all parts besides it is beaten upon by the Irish Sea; 'tis in length 20 Miles, and in breadth 17. Its Principal Town is, Beaumarish, Built by Edward the First on the East side of the Isle, on a Marish ground, it was so named from the pleasant∣ness of its situation; other Towns there are, such as Newburg, Aberfraw, which have no∣thing in them remarkable. The Druids formerly Inhabited this place; 'twas at∣tempted by Suetonius, and brought under the Power of the Romans by Agricola.
Denbighshire. IN Latin Denbiga; on the North-North-West it has, first the Sea for a small space, and then Flintshire; on the West the Sea; on the South Merionethshire and Mont∣gomeryshire; and on the East Cheshire and Shropshire. The Air is pleasant and whol∣some, the Soil is barren towards the West part; yet in the middle, where it lieth flat with a Valley, it is very fruitful. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Denbigh, the Shire Town, Forti∣fied with a strong Wall and Castle, and strengthned with high Towers by Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln; 'tis well fre∣quented, and is deservedly reputed the most beautiful place in all North-Wales, especially since it was made by King Henry the Eighth the Head Town of a County; before which time it was also of great resort, as being the Head Town of the Barony of Denbigh, conceiv'd to be one of the goodliest Territories in
England, having more Gentlemen holding of it than any other. 2. Ruthin, a very great Market-Town, full of Inhabitants, and well replenished with Buildings, particularly famous not long since for a stately Castle, Built by Roger Grey in the Reign of King Edward the First.
Flintshire. IN Latin Flintum, is bounded on the North with an Arm of the Irish Sea; on the East with Cheshire, and on the other parts with Denbighshire. The Air is health∣ful and temperate, without any Foggy Clouds and Fenny Vapours; the Soil bring∣eth forth plenty of Co and Pasture. The Principal Town is St. Asaph, a very ancient City, but at present it is neither remarkable for its Build∣ings, nor the Church for its Beauty; 'tis honoured with a Bishop's See; it took its name from Asaph, a very devout pious Man, and was Founded in the Year of our Re∣demption 560, by Kentigern Bishop of Glas∣cow, who fled hither out of Scotland.
Yorkshire, Brigantes. IN Latin Eboracum; on the North side it hath the Bishoprick of Durham, which the River Tees with a continued course se∣parateth from it; on the East it is bounded by the German Ocean; on the South it is enclos'd, first with Cheshire and Darbyshire, afterwards with Nottinghamshire, and then with Lincolnshire; on the West it hath Lan∣cashire and Westmorland; the whole Shire is divided into Three parts, which are term'd, The West Riding The East Riding The North Riding
West-Riding. IS compass'd by the River Ouse, with the bound of Lancashire, and South limits of the Shire, and beareth towards the West and South. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Sheffield, a Town of great repute, both for its Inhabitants, who are generally Smiths, as well as for the many Iron Mines which are found thereabouts; 'tis Fortified with a strong and ancient Castle. 2. Halyfax, a famous Town lying from West to East upon the steep descent of an Hill; it is not many Years since it took this Name, it being formerly called Horton; is is so very populous, that it is thought to have 12000 Inhabitants. 3. Wakefield, a great Market-Town well frequented, its Buildings are very beautiful, famous it is for its Inhabitants getting great store of Wealth by making Cloth; nor is it less remarkable for its Bridge, upon which King
Edward the Fourth erected a beautiful Chap∣pel in memory of those who lost their Lives in Battel, his own Father being slain in the Field by those that sided with the House of Lancaster. 4. Leeds, formerly a House of the Kings, but now grown to be a populous rich Town by reason of Clothing. 5. Towton, a little Country Village, which may not be unfitly termed England's Pharsalia; famous it is for the Battel be∣tween the Houses of York and Lancaster, where the Lancastrians received so terrible an overthrow, that they left more than 30000 dead upon the place. 6. York the second City of England, the fairest in all this County, it being a singular safeguard and Ornament to all the Northern parts; a pleasant place, large and stately, well fortified and beau∣tifully adorn'd as well with private as publick Buildings; rich, populous, and to its greater dignity, it hath a stately Ca∣thedral consecrated to St. Peter, and an Archiepiscopal See, which beside Twelve Bishopricks in England, exercised formerly the Power of a Primate over all the
Bishops of Scotland; but it hath now but Four within its Diocese, viz. the Bishoprick of Durham, of Carlisle, of Chester, and of the Isle of Man. Me∣morable it is for the Death of Severus the Emperor, and of Constantine the Father of Constantine the Great.
East-Riding. ON the North and West side 'tis bound∣ed with the River Darwent; on the South with the Salt Water of Humber, and on the East with the German Ocean. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Beverly, a great Town, very popu∣lous and full of Trade; so named from John de Beverly Archbishop of York, a Godly and Learned Man, who after he had given over his Bishoprick as weary of this World, came hither and ended his Life in Contemplation, An. Dom. 721. 2. Hull, a Town Founded by King Edward the First, which by little and little hath rose to that Dignity, that for stately and sumptuous Buildings, for strong Blockhouses, for well-furnished Ships, for store of Merchants, and abund∣ance of all things, it is become now the most famous Town in all these parts; the Inhabitants make a great Trade of Island Fish dried and hardened, which
they term Stock-Fish, whereby they gather a mass of Riches. 3. Patrington, a Town pleasantly seated, having a most delightful Prospect; on one side lieth the main Sea, on the other the Humber, and over-against it the fresh and green Borders of Lincolnshire. The Inhabitants glory much on the ac∣count of their Antiquity and the commo∣diousness of their Haven.
North-Riding. OR the North part of this County, stretcheth it self Westward 60 Miles together, even as far as to Westmorland; 'tis limited on the one side with Dar∣went, and for a while with the River Ure; on the other side with the River Tees running all along by it, which on the North Coast separateth it from the Bishoprick of Durham. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Pickering, a large Town belonging to the Dutchy of Lancaster, situate upon an Hill, and defended by an old Castle, to which a great number of small Villages ly∣ing round about do appertain. 2. Scarborough-Castle, is seed on a Rock of a wonderful heighth and bigness, which by reason of steep Cliffs is almost inaccessi∣ble on every side; it was at first Built by William le Grosse Earl of Albermarle, which being in process of time fallen down, it was afterwards Rebuilt by King Henry the
Second; here the Hollanders Fish for Her∣rings, demanding first License of the Lord of the Castle. 3. Rhidal, a pleasant beautiful Market-Town, adorn'd with Twenty three Parish-Churches, through the midst whereof run∣neth the River Rhy. 4. Malton, a large Market-Town, well frequented for Corn, Horses, Fish, and Implements of Husbandry; here are to be seen the Foundations of an old Castle be∣longing to the Family of the Vescys. 5. Richmond, a fair beautiful Town, seat∣ed on the River Swall; it seems to have been formerly Fortified with a Wall, whose Gates yet stand in the midst of the Town, so that the Suburbs are extended far without the same; it is indifferently populous and well frequented; the People are most em∣ployed in Knitting of Stockings, where∣with even the Decrepit and Children get their own Livings.
Durham. IN Latin Dunelmus, is bounded on the North by Northumberland; on the West, where it is more narrow, by Westmorland and Cumberland; on the South it hath York∣shire; and on the East the German Ocean. The Air is sharp and piercing, and would be more violent were it not for the Vapours of the German Sea, which dissolving the Ice and Snow, make the Air more mild and temperate. As for the Soil the East part is by far the richest. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Hartlepool, a very large Town of good resort, it has a very safe and convenient Harbour for Shipping. 2. Durham, a noble City seated on high, and shap'd in form of an Egg, environ'd on all sides, but on the North, with the Ri∣ver Were; 'tis Fortified with a Wall; its Buildings are beautiful, but especially its Cathedral, which standing on the South side where the River windeth its self about,
maketh a solemn and gallant show, having an high Tower in the midst, an two Spires at the West end. Famous it is likewise for its Castle, which standeth between two stone Bridges over the River; as also for its spacious Market-place, and for St. Nicholas's Church, which is a beautiful Fabrick. Near unto this City, at Nevils Cross, a sore Battel was Fought between the English and Scots, wherein David Bruce, King of Scotland, with many of his Nobility, were taken Prisoners by Queen Philippa, Wife to that glorious Prince King Edward the Third, who in Person was present in the Field.
Lancashire. IN Latin Lancastria, is enclos'd between Yorkshire on the East side, and the Irish Sea on the West; on the South side, where it boundeth on Cheshire, it is broader, and by degrees the more Northward it goeth, where it confineth on Westmorland, it is nar∣rower. The Air is subtle and piercing, not troubled with gross Vapours; but the Soil for the most part is lean and barren, yet it produceth such numbers of Cattel of such large proportion, that even Spain can scarce afford the like. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Manchester, a very beautiful Town, far excelling all others round about it; 'tis of good resort, and is famous for Clothing; the Market-place is large and spacious; 'tis also adorn'd with a very fair Church and College, Founded by Thomas Lord Delaware; it was in former times called Mancunium, and was made a Fort and Station of the Romans.
2. Riblechester, though it be at present but a small Town, yet by Tradition it hath had the repute of the richest Town in Christendom, and is reported to have been the Seat of the Romans, which the many Monuments of their Antiquities, Statues, Pieces of Coin, and other seve∣ral Inscriptions digged up from time to time by the Inhabitants, may give us sufficient persuasion to believe. 3. Warrington, a fair Market-Town, known by reason of the Lords thereof sirnam'd the Butlers, who obtain'd of Edward the First the liberty of a Mar∣ket for it. 4. , a good well frequented Town, famous for it, Antiquity, but more famous for a convenient passage from this place to Ireland. 5. Ormeskirk, a Market-Town, remark∣able for the Sepulchres of the Stanleys, the Earls of Darby. 6. Preston, a Town of good resort, so named from the Religious Men dwelling in it.
7. Lancaster, it was formerly the chief Town of this Shire, but at this day it is neither well peopled nor much frequented; most of its Inhabitants are given to Hus∣bandry, the Territory round about being well Manur'd, lying open, fresh, and fair, and not void of Woods; Roman Coins are often digged up here, and here they say was the plot of ground in which the anci∣ent Town was planted, which was destroy∣ed by the Scots, An. Dom. 12. 'tis suffici∣ently famous in our English Annals for those Noble Persons who have successively born the Title of Earls and Dukes of it, the greatest Princes for Revenues of any Sub∣jects in Christendom.
Westmorland. IN Latin Westmoria, is bounded on the West and North with Cumberland; on the East with Yorkshire and the Bishoprick of Durham; and on the South with Lancashire. The Air is sharp and piercing, purging its self from Mists and Vapours; but the Soil for the generality is so unfertile, that it can hardly be brought to any fruitfulness by the industry and painful labour of the Husbandman. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Appleby, a Town pleasantly seated, encompass'd for the most part with the Ri∣ver Eden; but it is at present so slenderly Inhabited, and the Buildings so rude and simple, that were it not for its Antiquity, it deserveth not to be accounted the Shire-Town, and to have the Assizes kept in the Castle, which is the common Goal for Ma∣lefactors; in short, all the beauty lies in one broad Street, which from North to South ri∣seth with an easy ascent of an Hill, in the upper part standeth the Castle, in the lower
the Church, and by that a very good School Founded by Robert Langton and Miles Spen∣ser, Doctors of Law. 2. Kirkby Lonsdale, a Town situate on the East side of this Shire, the tract of Land lying about it being called Lonsdale; it hath a very good frequented Market; all the People round about repair hither on Sundays to Church. 3. Kirkby Stephen, a fair Market-Town of good resort. 4. Kendall, situate in a Dale on the River Can, from whence it had its Name; it is the chief Town in Westmorland, having two long fair broad Streets crossing one another; it is of great Trade and Resort, and for the diligent and industrious practice of the Inhabitants so excels the rest, that in regard thereof it carrieth a super-eminent Name above them, and hath great Vent and Traf∣fick for her Woollen Cloaths through all the parts of England. Famous it is for giving the Title of Earl to John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France in the time of King Henry the Sixth.
Cumberland. IN Latin Cumbria; on the North bound∣eth on Scotland; on the South and West the Irish Sea beateth upon it; and Eastward, above Westmorlan, it confineth on Northum∣berland. Its ancient Inhabitants, though known to the Romans by the name of Bri∣gantes, were the natural Britons, who cal∣led themselves  The Air is pier∣cing, and of a sharp temperature, and would be more biting, were it not that the high Hills oppose and break off the Northern Storms, and dissolve the falling Snows. The Province is very rich, the Vales smile with Corn, and the Hills with Pasture; the Sea affords plenty of Fish, and the Land is overspread with variety of Fowls. The Principal Towns are these. 1. Keswick, a little Town, seated in a very pleasant Soil, being compass'd about with Hills; King Edward the Third or∣dained a Market in this place by the procurement of Sir Thomas Darwentwater
the Lord of it. Famous it was in times past for its Copper-Mines, it being at this day much Inhabited by Mineral Men, who have here their Smelting house by Darwent-side, which with its foible Stream, and their ingenious Inventions, serveth them in stead for easy Bellows-works, Hammer-works, Forge-works, and Sawing of Boards, not without admiration of such as behold it. 2. Cokermouth, a rich frequented Market-Town, seated in a Valley between two Hills; its Buildings are fair and beauti∣ful; upon one of the Hills standeth the Church, on the other a very strong Ca∣stle, the Gate whereof carrieth in the Front the Arms of the Percus. 3. Papcastle, an ancient Castle, but at this present almost ruinated; however me∣morable it is, in that for a great num∣ber of Monuments it layeth claim to a Roman Antiquity; among which was found a large Vessel of Greenish Stone, engraven with little Images, which ser∣veth now for a Sacrarium Regenerationis in St. Brigids Church hard by. Several Authors tell us, that Fonts were adorn'd with Pictures of Holy Men, to the end that such as were Baptized, might have
before their Eyes the Pictures of those Men whose deeds they were to imitate; so saith Pontius Paulinus: for in the first Plantation of Christianity among the Gen∣tiles, such only as were of full Age, af∣ter they had been Instructed in the Prin∣ciples of the Christian Religion, were ad∣mitted to Baptism; and that but twice in the year, viz. at Easter and Whitsontide, ex∣cept on urgent occasions; at which times they which were to be Baptized were at∣tired in White Garments, Exorcised and Exsuffled with sundry Ceremonies, which I leave to the Learned in Christian Anti∣quities. 4. Solway-Frith; within this very Frith, where the Salt-waters ebb and flow, the English and Scots by report of the Inhabi∣tants, fought with their Fleets at full Sea, and with their Horse and Footmen at the ebb; which seems no less marvellous, than that which Pliny reported, not without won∣der, of the like place in Caramania; this Arm of the Sea is called Solway-Frith, from Solway a Town of Scotland bordering up∣on it. 5. Penrith, a little Town of an indiffe∣rent Trade, Fortified on the West side with a Castle of the Kings, which in the Reign
of King Henry the Sixth, was repaired out of the Ruins of a Roman Fort; 'tis adorn'd with a fair Church, and a beautiful Market-place. 6. Carlisle, a City commodiously and pleasantly seated; 'tis guarded on the North with the Channel of Eden; on the East with Deterill; on the West with Caud; be∣sides these natural Fences, 'tis Fortified with strong Walls of Stone, with a Castle and Cittadel; in fashion it lieth out somewhat long, running out from West to East; on the West side standeth the Castle, repair'd by King Richard the Third; in the midst of the City standeth the Cathedral Church, the upper-part of which being the newer, is very artificially and curiously wrought, but the nether part is much more ancient. That this City flourished in the times of the Romans, divers tokens of Antiquity now and then digged up there, and the famous mention of it in those days do sufficiently prove.
The Picts Wall. THrough the higher part of Cumberland shooteth that famous Wall which was the limit of the Roman Province; for when the Romans had enlarg'd their Em∣pire, even so far beyond their Wishes, that the unwieldiness thereof began to be of its self fearfully suspected, the Emperors thought it the safest way to limit the same with certain bounds; In this Islad therefore the Romans when they perceived that the further parts of Brittain lying Northward were Cold, of a rough and barren Soil, and Inhabited by the Caledonians, Britons, and barbarous Na∣tions, in subduing which they were sure to take much pains, and reap very small Profit; built at several times divers Fen∣ces, as well to bound as to defend the Province; the first Wall or Fence is thought to have been raised by Julius Agricola, it being made of Turfs, be∣tween
Edenborough and Dunbritton Frith; the second Fence was by the River Tine, where a Stone Wall Fight Foot broad, and Twelve Foot high, was Built, be∣ing an Hundred Miles long, reaching from the German Sea to the Irish Ocean. It was begun by the command of Adrian the Emperor, and was finished by Seve∣rus, who hereupon was stiled Britannicus. Some report that this Wall was only of Turfs, and that the Stone Wall was erected afterwards by the Romans when they left Brittain. Lollius Urbicus Lieutenant of Brittain, under the Emperor Antoninus Pius, en∣larged the bounds again as far as to the first Frontier Fence that was raised by Agricola. The first that was ever blamed for neglecting these limits, was Constantine the Great, for he it was that was the first and principal cause that the state of the Empire ran to ruin; however, this admirable work could not divert the tempestuous storms of Foregin Enemies; for when the Romans retired out of Brittain, the Picts and Scots aulting
the Wall, broke down the Fences with their Engines, and over-ran Brittain, be∣ing then disarm'd and shaken with Ci∣vil Broils, and most miserably afflicted with extream Famine.
Northumberland, Ottadini. IN Latin Northumbria; it lieth enclosed in fashion of a Triangle, but not with equal sides; the South side is shut in with Darwent running into Tine, and with the River Tine its self, where it confineth on the Bishoprick of Durham; the German Sea beateth on the East side; on the West it hath Cumberland; on the North it fronteth Scotland with the River Tweed, which was the ancient limit of both Kingdoms. The Air must needs be subtle and piercing, these Northern parts being very much ex∣posed to extremity of Weather. The Soil is neither rich nor fruitful, it having neither fertility of ground for Corn or Cattel, the most part of it being rough, and in every place hard to be Ma∣nured.
The Principal Towns are these. 1. Newcastle, the Principal Town in all these parts, ennobled by a notable Ha∣ven which the River Tine makes, it be∣ing of that depth, that it beareth very Tall Ships; and so defendeth them, that they can neither be easily toss'd with Tempest, nor driven upon the Shelves and Rocks; 'tis situate on the rising of an , very uneven; on the North bank of the River which hath a fair Bridge over it, on the left hand standeth the Castle, and on the right the Market-place, and the better part of the Town; it was Built by Robert the Son of Wil∣liam the Conqueror, and named by him Newcastle; the Buildings are beautiful, it is adorn'd with Five Churches; the In∣habitants are extream Wealthy, partly by intercourse of Traffick with the Germans, and partly by carrying out Seacoals, both into Foreign Countries, and also into other parts of England; it was Fortified with very strong  having Eight Gates, in the Reign of King Edward the First. Before the Conquest it was called Monkchester, it having been in pos∣session of the Monks, and Chester being added, which signifying a Bulwark or
place of defence. Shews that in ancient time it had been a place of Fortificati∣on. It was taken by the Scots, An. 1642. who enter'd England in an Hostile man∣ner, under pretence of delivering a Pe∣tition to King Charles the First. 2. Tinmouth, a very ancient and strong Castle; on the East and Northside 'tis impos∣sible to be enter'd, by reason of a migh∣ty high Rock hanging over the Sea; and in other places such is the heighth of it, that it needs but small defence. 3. Morpeth, a famous little Town, si∣tuate on the North bank of the River Wentsbeck, on the South bank standeth the Church, and the Castle by it, all beset with Trees; this Town, An. Dom. 1215. was set on Fire by its own In∣habitants out of spite and malice to King John. Near this place was Born John Duns, called Scotus, because he was de∣scended of Scottish Blood; who being brought up in Merton College in Oxford, became wonderfully Learned in Logick; and in the intricate Divinity of those times; yet as one still doubtful and un∣resolv'd, he overcast the truth of Reli∣gion with mists of obscurity; and with so profound and admirable Subtilty he
wrote many Books in a dark and rude Stile, that he deserved the title of the Subtle Doctor, and after his own Name he erected a new Sect of Scolists; but he Died pitifully, for being taken with an Apoplexy, and over-hastily Buried for Dead, whilst upon the return of Life Nature was about to discuss the violence of the Disease, he endeavouring in vain by a lamentable noise to call for help, after he had a long time knock'd his Head against the Gravestone, he dash'd out his own Brains, and at last yielded up his vital Breath. 4. Barwick, the utmost Town in Eng∣land, and the strongest Hold in all Brit∣tain; 'tis situated between two most mighty Kingdoms, as Pliny has reported of Pal∣myra in Syria; it was the first thing al∣ways that both Nations took care of whenever they were at discord, it having had different fortunes, being one time under the power of the Scots, and ano∣ther time of the English. Our Kings have oftentimes Fortified and Fenc'd it with new Works, but especially Queen Elizabeth, who enclos'd it about in a narrower compass within the old Wall, with an high Wall of Stone most strange∣ly compacted together, which, she hath
so forewarded again, with a Counter∣scarp, a Bank round about, with Mounts of Earth, and other Terraces above, that the strength thereof may justly cut off all hopes of winning it, if these two so glorious Nations had not been most happily united. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 6. Line 17. after proof add of. P. 39. l. 22. for Corasus read Cerasus. P. 57. l. 12. for raffris read rastris. L. 13. for mirabitus read mirabitur. P. 63. l 20. for Neets read Neots. L. 21. for Neutus read Neotus. P. 76. l 11. for Praeciduum read Praesidium.
A Table of the Ancient Inhabitants of ENGLAND. ATtrebates Page 30 Belgae Page 19 Brigantes Page 105 Cantii vel Cangi Page 39 Cateuchlani Page 48 Coritani Page 65 Cornavii Page 76 Danmonii Page 12 Durotriges Page 17 Dobuni Page 44 Dimaetae Page 93 Iceni Page 58 Ottadini Page 127 Regni Page 34 Silures Page 86 Trinobantes Page 53 A Table of the Counties in England and Wales. BArkshire Page 30 Bedfordshire Page 50 Buckinghamshire Page 48 Cambridgeshire Page 62 Cheshire Page 84 Cornwall Page 12 Cumberland Page 120 Darbyshire Page 74 Devonshire Page 14 Dorsetshire Page 17 Durham Page 113 Essex Page 56 Glocestershire Page 44 Hampshire Page 26
Hartfordshire Page 51 Herefordshire Page 86 Huntingtonshire Page 63 Kent Page 39 Lancashire Page 115 Leicestershire Page 67 Lincolnshire Page 69 Middlesex Page 53 Northamptonshire Page 65 Nottinghamshire Page 72 Norfolk Page 59 Northumberland Page 127 Oxford Page 47 Rutland Page 68 Shropshire Page 82 Somersetshire Page 19 Staffordshire Page 80 Suffolk Page 58 Sussex Page 37 Surrey Page 34 Warwickshire Page 76 Westmorland Page 118 Wiltshire Page 23 Worcestershire Page 78 Yorkshire Page 105 Brecknockshire Page 89 Cardiganshire Page 96 Caermarthenshire Page 93 Caernarvon Page 99 Denbighshire Page 102 Flintshire Page 104 Glamorganshire Page 92 Montgomeryshire Page 97 Monmouthshire Page 90 Merionethshire Page 98 Pembrokeshire Page 94 Radnorshire Page 88
A Table of the Cities and Principal Towns in England and Wales. A ABergevenny Page 91 Aberistwith Page 96 Abington Page 31 St. Albans Page 52 Alresford Page 28 Arundel Page 37 Axminster Page 17 Aylesbury Page 49 Isle of Anglesey Page 101 St. Asaph Page 104 Appleby Page 118 B BArnet Page 53 Barwick Page 130 Basingstoak Page 29 Bath Page 21 Beaumarish Page 101 Bedford Page 50 Bremicham Page 77 Beverly Page 109 Bishop-Stortford Page 52 Boston Page 70 Brecknock Page 89 Bridgnorth Page 82 Bridgewater Page 19 Bristol Page 22 Bruton Page 19 Buckingham Page 49 Burton Page 81 Bury St. Ed. Page 58 Bodnan Page 13 Bediford Page 16 Burport Page 17 Barkly Page 46 Banbury Page 47 Bosworth Page 67 Buxton Page 75 Bala Page 98 Banchor Page 100
C CAmbridge Page 62 Canterbury Page 42 Cardisse Page 92 Carlisle Page 123 Camden Page 46 Carmarthen Page 93 Chatham Page 42 Chelmsford Page 56 Chelsey Page 54 Chester Page 84 Chichester Page 37 Chipenhans Page 24 Colchester Page 57 Coventry Page 77 Cowbridge Page 92 Crowland Page 69 Croidon Page 36 Christ church Page 27 Chepstow Page 90 Cardigan Page 96 Carnarvon Page 99 Cokarmouth Page 121 D DArtford Page 41 St. Davids Page 95 Deal Page 43 Denbigh Page 102 Darby Page 74 Dorchester Page 18 Dover Page 43 Dunstable Page 51 Durham Page 114 Dartmouth Page 15 Deptford Page 40 Dunnington Castle Page 68 E EDghill Page 77 Ely Page 63 Exeter Page 15 Edindon Page 24 Eltham Page 40 Evenlode Page 47
F FArnham Page 35 Farindon Page 31 Foy Page 13 Falmouth Page 12 Feversham Page 42 Fulham Page 54 G GLocester Page 45 Grantham Page 71 Guildford Page 35 Glascon Page 21 Greenwich Page 40 Gravesend Page 41 Godmanchester Page 64 H HArwich Page 57 Hatfield Page 52 Haverford Page 95 Henley Page 76 Hereford Page 87 Hampton-Court Page 54 Hartford Page 52 Hastings Page 38 Huntington Page 64 Harlech Page 98 Halyfax Page 106 Hull Page 109 Hartlepool Page 113 I IPswich Page 59 St. Ives Page 64 K KIngston Page 35 Kimbolton Ca∣stle Page 64 Killingworth Castle Page 77 Kidderminster Page 78 Knighton Page 88 Kirby-Lonsdale Page 119 Kirby-Stephen Page 119 Kendall Page 119 Keswick Page 120 L LEskerd Page 13 Launston Page 13 Lambeth Page 36 Lewis Page 38
London Page 54 Leyton Page 56 Lynn Page 61 Leicester Page 67 Loughborough Page 68 Lincoln Page 71 Lichfield Page 81 Ludlow Page 82 Lemster Page 87 Landaffe Page 92 Leeds Page 107 Leverpool Page 116 Lancaster Page 117 M MAlmsbury Page 23 Marlborough Page 25 Maidenhead Page 32 Maidstone Page 41 Marlow Page 49 Maldon Page 57 Macclesfield Page 85 Monmouth Page 90 Milford Page 94 Montgomery Page 97 Malton Page 112 Manchester Page 115 Morpeth Page 130 N NOrton St. Phil. Page 20 Newport W. Page 30 Newbury Page 32 Norwich Page 60 St. Neots Page 63 Northampton Page 65 Nottingham Page 73 Nantwich Page 85 Newport Page 95 Newcastle Page 128 O OKeham Page 68 Oxford Page 48 Oswestre Page 83 Ormeskirk Page 116 P PEnsance Page 12 Padstow Page 13 Plimouth Page 14 Portsmouth Page 29 Peterborough Page 66 Peak Page 74
Prestain Page 88 Pembroke Page 95 Plinlimmon Hills Page 97 Patrington Page 110 Pickering Page 111 Preston Page 116 Papcastle Page 121 Penrith Page 122 Q QUeensborough Page 42 R RIngwood Page 27 Reading Page 32 Richmond Page 112 Richmond Y Page 35 Rhy Page 38 Rochester Page 41 Roiston Page 52 Rockingham-Castle Page 66 Radnor Page 88 Ruthin Page 103 Rhidal Page 112 Riblechester Page 116 S SHirburn Page 18 Salisbury Page 25 Southampton Page 27 Southwark Page 36 Sevenoke Page 40 Sandwich Page 43 Sandon Page 43 Stony-Stratford Page 49 Stanes Page 54 Saffron-Walden Page 57 Sudbury Page 58 Spalding Page 70 Stamford Page 71 Stoke Page 72 Southwell Page 73 Stafford Page 80 Stone Page 80 Shrewsbury Page 83 Sheffield Page 106 Scarborough-Castle Page 111 Solway-Frith Page 122 T TOrbay Page 15 Taunton Page 19 Trubridge Page 24 Tunbridge Page 41
Isle of Tanet Page 42 Tewksbury Page 44 Thetford Page 60 Tenby Page 94 Towton Page 107 Tinmouth-Castle Page 130 U UXbridge Page 54 W WEymouth Page 17 Winburn Page 18 Wells Page 20 Werminster Page 24 Wilton Page 24 Winchester Page 28 Isle of Wight Page 33 Wallingford Page 30 Windsor Page 32 Winchelsey Page 38 Walmer Page 48 Winchelcomb Page 46 Wickam Page 49 Ware Page 52 Westminster Page 55 Wainfleet Page 72 Warwick Page 76 Worcester Page 78 Wakefield Page 106 Warrington Page 116 Y YArmouth Page 61 York Page 107 FINIS.
Books Printed for Chr. Coningsby. sive quarundam Fabularum Explicatio, Linguae Graecae Tyronibus accomodata; Unà cum Locis Poetarum Fabula∣rumque citatis. In usum Scholae Mercatorum Scissorum Londinensis; Octavo. Pret. 1. s. 6 d. Scarronides; or, Virgile Traverstie: A Mock-Poem on the First and Fourth Books of Virgil's Enaeis, in English Burlesque. Octavo. Price bound 1 s. A new Book of Cyphers: Containing in general all Names interwoven and reversed by Alphabet; being very pleasant for Gentle∣men and Ladies, and useful for all sorts of Ar∣tists, as Painters, Carvers, Engravers, Chasers, Watchmakers, Imbroiderers, &c. With se∣veral other useful and necessary Examples. Composed and Engraven after the newest and true Mode, By Ben. Rhodes. Octavo. Price bound 5 s. The Modish Penman; or, a new Copy-Book, containing variety of all the usual Hands now practised in England, with a cu∣rious Copy of the Greek Alphabets, and Joining-hand: With Directions whereby any Person may attain to write any of those Hands with little practice. Likewise excellent Receipts for making several sorts of Ink, and other Curiosities. By William Elder. In Quarto. Price 1 s.
A new Sett of Round-hand Copies Al∣phabetically composed, which, together with the Alphabets, are curiously Engra∣ven, and Printed on the Tops of 36 Quarto Pages, and Stitch'd up in blew Paper; and will supply the want of a Master. By Wil∣liam Elder. Price 1 s. Likewise the Sett Secretary Hand curi∣ously Engraven in the same manner, where∣by any Person may attain to the Clerk-like Engrossing of any Writings, Deeds, &c. with Expedition. Price 1 s. Also Red Copy-Books, and most other Copy-Books to be sold. An Exact Table of Interest, Simple and Compound, shewing the Interest of any Sum for any Number of Days or Years at the Rate of, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 per Cent. and the amount and present worth of any Sum; and the amount and present Worth and Purchase of Annuities. Curiously En∣graven, and Printed on a large Imperial Sheet of Paper. Price 1 s. England's Record-Ink, which for its Bright∣ness and durable Blackness is fittest for Re∣cords or any other Writings, and far tran∣scends any yet extant. It is Sealed up (with the Maker's Name on't) in Sixpenny strong Bottles fit for Carriage; being made and sold by the Publisher hereof.
Books Printed and Sold by D. Midwinter and T. Leigh, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard. THE Education of Young Gentle∣women, written originally in French and from thence made English and impro∣ved for a Lady of Quality. Twelves. 1699. Advice to Young Gentlemen in their se∣veral conditions of Life; by way of Ad∣dress from a Father to his Children, by the Abbot Goussault; with his Sentiments and Maxims upon what passes in Civil Society. Printed at Paris 1697. and Translated into English. Octavo. A compleat Doctrine of the Bones, ac∣cording to the newest and most refined Notions of Anatomy, shewing their Na∣ture and Substance, &c. By Robert Baker, Chirurgeon. Octavo. 1699. Plain and full Instructions to raise all sorts of Fruit-Trees that prosper in Eng∣land, &c. the Second Edition, with the Addition of Two entire Chapters of Greens
and Greenhouses, by the Author T. Lang∣ford, Gent. Octavo. 1699. The Lives and Characters of the English Drammatick Poets; also an Account of all the Plays that were ever yet Printed in the English Tongue, &c. first begun by Mr. Lang∣bain; improv'd and continued down to this time by a Careful Hand. Octavo. A Voyage to the East-Indies, giving an Account of the Isles of Madagascar, and Mascarene, of Surat, the Coast of Mala∣bar, &c. Written originally in French by Mr. Dellon, M. D. Octavo. The Mystery of Phanaticism, or the Ar∣tifices of Dissenters to support their Schism; together with the Evil and Danger of them, set forth in several Letters, &c. By a Di∣vine of the Church of England. The Se∣cond Edition. Octavo. The Life of our Blessed Saviour, an Heroick Poem, &c. with above Sixty Cuts. The Second Edition. Fol. Resolves, Moral, Divine, and Political. By Owen Feltham, Esquire. Fol. Bishop Burnet's History of the Refor∣mation of the Church of England. In Two Vol. Fol. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. In Two Vol. Fol. Bishop Tillotson's Posthumous Sermons, In Five Vol. Octavo:
