E3646 R1520 13301756 98932
AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE of CONI IN PIEMONT. With an Account of the manner of raising it, by Prince Eugene of Savoy this present year 1691. which has so much mortified the French King, and occasioned the Imprisonment of the Sieur de Bulonde, humbly presented to his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy: By Giovanni Renaldo, Engineer. Sent in a Manuscript from Turin to a Person of Quallity in London. The Famous Branthome in his Memoirs, and especially in the Life of the Marshal de Brissac, Tome 11. says. The Mar∣shal de Brissac, after having a considerable time besieged Coni was at last forced to raise the Siege. It has been twice besieged be fore by the French, but always unsuccessfully; insomuch that after the raising of that Siege by the Marshal de Brissac, Coni was look'd upon in France as a place fatal to the French Arms, &c. Branthome dans la vie du Mareschal de Brissac, Tome 11. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George near St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet. 1691.
TO THE READER. THE Siege of Coni, thô it has not made that noise in the World, as a Siege of Turin would have made, in case the Design laid by the French cun∣ningly enough, had taken its effect, yet it is nevertheless very remarkable in all its Circumstances. Catinat rendred himself Master of Suze, Nice, and Ville Franche, with little or no difficulty, and Carmagnole surrendred at sight of the Ene∣my. The only place left on this side of the Capital City was Coni, the Conquest of which seem'd to the French to be of an absolute necessity, for besides that after the taking of it, they might easily draw all manner of Provisions and Ammuni∣tion out of Nice and Ville Franche for the use of their Ar∣my, and the rest of the Conquered Places in Piemont, and that it secured the passage of the Troops that towards Winter were to enter into Quarters in the County of Nice, to stop the frequent Incursions of the Vaudois, especially of those of the Valley of Barcelonette, it would much have hindred the pas∣sage of the Germans, that were a coming to the Dukes As∣sistance; for which reasons Feuquieres and Bulonde were
sent with a great detachment from the man Army to take the Place (a haughty way of their speaking when they are going to form a Siege.) Coni is a Place but of little strength, most of the Fortifications were half ruin'd, and it was expected they would surrender at the first Summons. But it seem'd this inconsiderable Place was design'd by Providence to stop the fu∣rious Torrent of the French Victories, and to give the first, and the most sensible Affront to the French King's Arms in Piemont. Brave Julien, a born Subject of his Majesty, as Prince of Orange, having thrown himself, with his Ba∣tallion of French Refugees in the King's Service, into the Place; defended it with so much Vigour and Gallantry, that the French were forced, to their everlasting shame, to raise the Slege. It will be no small Pleasure to those that read this Journal, to observe with what Insolency Feuquieres (secure of the Conquest) behav'd himself before the Place; what scorn∣ful Letters he wrote to the Besieged; and how on the contrary his Spirits were oppress'd, when he was forc'd to march off. As to the Journal it self, it is certainly one of the truest and exactest that ever was writ, in consideration of which, and of the remoteness of the Place, the Reader will easily pardon that it comes somewhat late.
A JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE of CONI IN PIEMONT: TOGETHER With the Raising of it; which has so much Mortified the French King, and occasion'd the Imprisonment of the Sieur de Bulonde. Sent in a Manuscript, from Turin, to a Person of Quality in London. THE Town and Cittadel of Nisse were no sooner sur∣rendred to the French, but Count de Rouere Gover∣nor of the Province of Salusses and Coni expected a Siege of the latter. The Friendship he entertained with Lieutenant-Colonel de Julien, a Subject of his Majesty of Great-Britain, being born in the Principality of Orange, who commanded at that time in the Valley of Barcelone, together with the great esteem he had for his Person, grounded on the great Exploits he has made in that Country, with one single Battalion of the Troops of his Majesty of Great-Britain, and 200
Men of the Regiment of the French Refugees, were the motives that persuaded him to communicate his apprehension to him; giving him withal to understand, that he did not despair of main∣taining himself in that place, his R. H. of Savoy had trusted him with, in case that with the New Fortifications he had caused to be raised there, he should be assured of the assistance of his Bat∣talion. Monsieur de Julien, who is of a temper not to let slip the least occasion of signalizing himself, answered the Governor, that he should be exceedingly glad of being serviceable to him in what place soever he would be pleased to call him. This great readiness of his obliged the Governor to sollicite at his R. Highnèss's Court for the Lieutenant Colonel's retreat out of the Valley of Barcelone, and orders being sent accordingly, a great time before the Action of Meironne, (where he with his single Battalion defeated a Body of between 3 and 4000 of the French, killing 4 or 500 of them upon the spot,) he marched towards Coni; and after he had made, for two or three days time, several Marches and Counter-marches round about this place, heat last entered into it, under pretence of refreshing him∣self and his Battalion there, after the great Fatigues they had suffered during the Winter; ten days after it the Garrison marched out of the place, in order to join the Army, with the two hundred Men above-mentioned, and the Guard of it was committed to the single Battalion of de Julien. He had scarce been there one Month, but the Governor was informed, that a detachment of four thousand Men, Horse and Foot, were sent out of Monsieur Catinat's Army, under the command of Monsieur de Feuquieres, Mareschal de Camp of the French King's Forces, to invest Coni, and it was believed the main Army would follow them on their Heels to form the Siege of it; the French flatter∣ing themselves to have as cheap a Bargain of this place, as they had of that of Carmagnole. Upon this advice the Governor divided the Posts amongst his little Garrison, it being composed of Monsieur de Julien's Bat∣talion of 500 Men, of 120 new raised Soldiers, some Militia of the Country, and the Burghers: He gave orders for the
Baking of a great quantity of Bread; and to advance the Fortifi∣cations that were yet unfinished. He formed his Council of War of the Counts of Prouane, Commendant; and de Vibau, Vice-Com∣mendant; of Lievtenant-Colonel de Julien; de Guibert, first En∣gineer of Savoy; Chouet, Captain in the Regiment of Savoy, and Major of the place; and the Engineer Garroue. In fine, he did all that could be expected from a wise and experienced Officer, in order to avoid being either surprized or prevented by the Enemy. June the 11th. The Sieur de Feuquieres, being pussed up with the Success the Arms of France had met with at Carmagnole, and flattering himself with the surrender of Coni without the least resistance, after he had plundered the Church of St. Renin, sent a Letter by a Peasant of Villefalet to the Syndics of the Town, who having delivered the latter without opening it, together with the bearer into the Governor's Hands, he ordered the latter to be secured, and being retired into a private Room with L. Col. de Julien, Guibert, and Chouet, he read the Letter which was written in these following terms: Gentlemen, I Am inform'd that you have in your Place a Battalion of French Heretiks, and some Peasants in Arms, that have abandon'd their Houses on purpose to follow a Trade that does not become them. The quick surrender of Carmagnole gives you no reason to hope for better Terms; and I have sent you this Letter to let you know that the King's Army draws near to your Place, and that in case you do not speedily send to me your Deputies, in order to obtain a good Capitulation, I am resolved, as many Hours there shall pass before their arrival, to burn as many Villages within ten Leagues round your Place. I take no notice at all of the French Hereticks, I am glad to see them shut up in a Dungeon, and Mon∣sieur de Julien shall not be able to prevent your Submission. I am, Gentlemen, Yours Feuquieres From the Camp of Tarantesque, June the 11th. 1691.
After the reading of this Letter, the three Officers that were then with the Governor did agree with him, that before they shew'd it to the Counsel of the Town, it would be necessary to sound their Inclinations, and the Governor having at the same time told L. Col. de Julien, that he should be very glad to know the disposition of the Officers of his Battalion, he did assure him that it was such as ought to be expected from Men of Honour; and having sent for them in the great Court of the Palace, ac∣quainted them with the Threatnings the Sieur de Feuquieres had made them, he told them, That he was resolved to give them a good Example by his Behaviour as he had done formerly, and that he himself had seen the Succours depart from his Royal Highness's Army, on a Journey he had made thither in 36 Hours; in a word, he knew so well how to perswade them, that all his Captains (most of which were much displeased for not having paid them their Arrears) forgot their displeasure answering their Com∣mander, That they would follow him where-ever he should lead them, according to their former behaviour, that they were una∣nimously resolved rather to die upon the spot, than to betray their Trust, or to fail in their Duty. The L. Colonel being ravish'd to find them in so resolute a disposition, conducted them into the Governor's Chamber; telling him, that his whole Bat∣talion was, as well as himself, resolved to do their Duty, and that every one of them was full of Zeal for His Royal Highness's Service; he added, that the Councel of the Town, who in several Sieges had convinced their Sovereign of their Faithfulness and Loyalty, would undoubtedly give yet greater proofs of it on this occasion, seeing themselves encouraged by the French Re∣fugees, who though they were altogether Strangers, were ne∣vertheless willing to Sacrifice themselves out of love to them, The Governor answered, that he was perswaded of the Courage and Zeal of the French Protestants; and having sent for the whole Body of the Councel of the Town, acquainted them with his and the Garrisons resolution, and he heard with joy that their incli∣nations were accordingly: Whereupon he delivered to them the Sieur de Feuquieres's Letter; which by his consent they an∣swered in this following manner:
SIR, WE have received the Letter which your Excellency has done us the Honour to write to us. The Zeal and Eager∣ness, which on all occasions you show for the service of his Most Christian Majesty, sets us so Noble a Pattern, that we cannot chuse but imitate it in this point. Therefore we hope you will not take it ill, that we are resolved to do our Duty, and to be Faithful to our Sovereign. As for the Misfortune we are threatned with, we hope your Excellency's Generosity will divert it from us. We are with respect, SIR, Your Excellency's most Humble and most Obedient Servants. This Answer was sent to the Sieur de Feuquieres by the same Peasant that was the Bearer of his Letter, who was glad of having escaped the Rope, which according to his demerits he had been threatned with. June the 12th. between 14 and 15 a Clock of Italy, or between 10 and 11 in the Morning, the Enemy invested the Town. As soon as their Troops drew near, the Governor gave orders to discharge the Cannons; the first Bullet carried away a whole rank of four Dragoons, according to our own sight, and their own relation afterwards, which obliged them to a little retreat. Towards Night another Letter was sent by the Sieur de Feu∣quieres, in these following terms: Gentlemen, I Did not think fit to Answer your Letter, before I had taken a full view of your Place. It is indeed in too bad a condition to think on defending it. Do not expect an ho∣nourable Capitulation, if you put us to the troubles of discharg∣ing our Cannons, and make a serious reflexion, I beseech you, of what I tell you. Monsieur de Julien's Battalion, if it was much stronger than it is, will not prevent what you are to suffer, and which you may now avoid. It will hereafter be
too late to think on a Capitulation, which you may now expect. I am, Gentlemen, Yours, Feuquieres. From the Camp before Coni,  June 12. 1691. There was sent no Answer to this second Letter. Every Bo∣dy did only think on making a vigorous Defence, and to give the Enemy good Impressions of the strength of the Place, as well as of the Bravery of the Defendents. The Body of the Ʋniver∣sity was very anxious in discovering the Sentiments of the Com∣manders and the Troops; and sinding in them nothing but what was recommendable, were delivered from their panick Fears, and encouraged to forget nothing that might contribute to the Defence of the Place, and their Liberties. The same day the Governor thought fit to divide the Posts, which was done in this manner: To the Count de Provane Com∣mendant was committed the Guard of the Gate of Turin, of the Bastions of Notre Dame, of the Lorme de Carait, with the Gates of Succours that are in this Precinct; as also of the demi-Bastions of l'Orme, that are on the side of the River de Gez: The Vice-Commendant Vibau was to defend the Bastions of de l'Hospi∣tal of St. Francis and St. Ann, with the Gate of Succours, and to him was committed the Care of sending Ammunition to the seve∣ral Magazines: The Commander of the Batallion of the French Refugees had the Guard of the Two half Moons; the Place where the Cittadel was formerly, and where at present there is only a bad Glacis, a Counterscarp, and a Covert-way, that goes from the Gate of Turin as far as to the Bastion of St. James, towards a dead Angle, which is called the Cittatelle, the Gate of Turin, the Bastion of St. James, the Gates of Succours, the Rivas and la Pierre. As for the whole Covert∣way, it was abandoned for want of Troops to guard it; and it was not secured till after the arrival of the Succours, after which this Order was changed. The Engeneer Guibert had the dire∣ction of all the Works that were to be made during the Siege; and he had under him the Engeneer Garroue to assist him in the
Execution of his Designs: All the Commanders were to in∣form him of what did happen in their Posts, and to give im∣mediately notice of it to the Governor, who charged himself with the whole weight of the Affairs in general, retaining near his Person the Major and the Adjutants, in order to carry to every Body his Orders. The Troops were sent each to their Posts, where they continued always, because there were none to relieve them. The Body of the Reserve in the Place was very inconsi∣derable. The Night between the 12th and the 13th was past with∣out Allarm; but our Musqueteers sired continually, to force the Enemy to begin their Approaches from afar off. The 13th. between 10 and 11 a Clock before Noon, we saw the Enemy's Horse March towards us with great haste, followed by some of their Foot, which made us believe that our Succours was a coming. Our Cannons, that were placed on that side playing upon them, made them March yet with greater precipitation, and killed some of their Horse. The Governor sent 200 Refugees, commanded by their Lievtenant-Colonel, out of the Place, to favour the entring of our Suc∣cours, in case they were upon their March; but it was sound a mistake. A little time after it two Deserters came over to us, relating that the Sieur de Feuquieres had at the most but four thousand Men with him, viz. three Regiments of Foot, and the rest of Horse and Dragoons, three pieces of Cannon, but no Mortar-pieces; but that he expected a considerable re-inforcement from Monsieur Catinat's Army, where there were but lately arrived eighteen Mortar-pieces and fifty three of Cannon; and that the Army that was coming to be∣siege us was to consist of between eight and nine thousand Men. The 14th. two hours before Day-break, the Sieur de Feu∣quieres design'd to surprize a Post of the Cittadel; to which purpose he commanded thither two Companies of Grana∣deers, who having made some noise in mounting towards
an old Breach, an Allarm was made, and five Soldiers with their Officer fired upon the Enemy, which they endured without saying one Word. The Engineers and some Officers were immediately called: The Governor ask'd what they had seen? Guibert said they had seen no Body. The Governor answered, some Body must have been there, that it was no illusion, and that he himself had heard a noise: Whereupon the place was re-inforced, and the Soldiers ordered to con∣tinue their firing. In the Morning we discovered that the Enemy had endeavoured to make themselves Masters of this Post, but that the great Fire which was made by our Men had put them into a great confusion, and turn'd several of them down into the River Gez; for we found 12 Musquets, some Hats, a Perriwig, a Sword, and two wounded Sol∣diers, who inform'd us of the Enemies, and that forty Gra∣nadeers had been made useless on this occasion. The same day Pallisadoes were set up on that place where the Enemy had mounted, and this was the only Attack they made during the Siege towards the Cittadel; we pull'd down the Bridge of the Gate of Turin, which was no more opened, and we made use of the Gate of Succours that leads into the Cittadel; some new Works were also ordered to be made that Day, and Lievtenant-Colonel de Julien posted a detachment of the Refugees to cover the Workmen. Towards Night some Volunteers dislodged a Guard of the Enemies Dragoons, that had posted themselves near the Ri∣ver Gez, and the Night was past without Allarm. The Governor was informed that Count de Bernez that con∣ducted our Succours, was departed from Mondovi, and to∣wards five a Clock at Night, having received advice that he was near the Place, he sent out a detachment of three hun∣dred Men, under the command of Monsieur de Julien; and his orders were proclaimed through the whole Town, That all those that were provided with a Horse should mount on Horse-back, with their Arms, in order to meet our Succours; which was punctually executed. The Commendant de
Prouane posted his Men so advantageousiy, that he beat back the Enemy, who press'd our Succours with great vi∣gour. Count Bernez did confess, that without his Sally, the Enemy would have made a great slaughter amongst his Men; we lost only 14 of our Men, a Servant, and a Serjeant, and seven or eight of them were killed by the Refugees, who took them for the Enemy; 'tis true, that the Peasants of Mondovi suffered very much, 40 of them being kill'd upon the spot, and several wounded; which was the reason that the Sieur de Feuquieres bragg'd, that on this occasion he had kill'd 600 Men of our Succours, that the rest had hidden themselves in the Wood, and entered during Night into the City, which is so far from Truth, that between six and seven a Clock at Night their Horse were charged by our detachment, that forced them to repass the River Gez with great precipitation and disorder; and afterwards the Engineer Guibert having given notice to the Commendant, that there was still some Ammunition left upon the Bridge de Sture, he made half a Tour to the Right with his Troop, who took it and carried it into the Place before Night. And in this manner the Count de Bernez entered into Coni with the Succours. It was indeed one of the boldest and happiest Actions we have heard of these many years; and it cannot be denied, but that the Sieur de Feuquieres had mightily forgot himself on this occasion, since there was nothing easier than to destroy this Succour, it being only composed of 280 of the Regi∣ment of Saxe-Coburg, (The Emperors Troops;) 130 Soldiers of the Regiment of Wirtemberg, (The King of Spain's Troops;) 120 Italians of the same Troops; and the Regiment of Sa∣lusses, consisting of 450 Soldiers, commanded by the Mar∣quess de Vauqueres, Son to the Prince de la Cisterne; there were besides 50 Dragoons that were not designed for the Place, but only to Convoy the Count de Bernez, he having order to retreat after he had thrown the Succours into the Place; but besides the difficulty of his retreat this Mareschal de Camp did not think fit to leave a Place that was invested and going to be besieged.
June the 16th. The Garrison not being paid, the Governor, who has behaved himself very prudently during the Siege, and who has always done more than he promised, found some means to pay them; and having afterward taken a full review of all the Garrison, it was found that we had only lost fourteen Soldiers, one Serjeant, and a Valet-de-Chambre to the Lievtenant-Colonel of the Regiment of Salusses. The Governor sent a Tambour into the Enemies Camp to challenge the two last; but he was answered that they had not heard of them. The same day the Guards of the Posts were changed. The Refugees remain'd upon the Post of the Cittadel, the Bastions of St. Anne, St. James, at the Gate of the Succours, and of Nisse, at the dead Angle, and at the Rivas, and possess'd themselves besides of the Bastion de Carail; the Regiment of Salusses possess'd themselves of the Half Moon of Rouere, that was in very good order and lined with Stone, they had also the Guard of the Gate of Nisse, till to the Bastion of L'orme; Saxe-Coburg was posted in the Covert-way from the Place of Arms to the Counterguard of the Half-Moon Balbiane, that is only made of Earth and in a bad condition, they had also one part of the Guard of the Bastion de Ca∣rail and Notre-Dame; the Italians were partly put upon the Bastion de l'Hospital and St. Francois, and partly upon the Counterscarp that regards the River Sture; the new-raised Companies guarded la Pierre and the Environs; the Half-Bastion de L'orme was guarded by the Burghers; and the Surplus with the Militia were posted in the Main Place, in case of an Allarm or Attack: The Governor remained upon the Place of Arms, with the Body of Reserve, in order to send some Succours to the Attacked Posts; the Counts de Prouane and Vibau had also their Posts assign'd them; the Count de Bernez and the Marquess de Vauqueres were near the Half-Moon Rouere; and the Lievtenant-Colonel de Ju∣lien was with his Battalion. These Commanders visited the
Posts from time to time, and the Governor made exactly his round to make every Body mindful of his Duty. The 17th. we were inform'd that Monsieur de Bulonde came to join the Sieur de Feuquieres with a considerable re-inforcement; whereupon the Governor call'd a Counsel of War, wherein it was concluded, that the Germans should be relieved out of the Out-works, as not thinking it con∣venient to expose the best Troops at the very first Attacks; and accordingly they were reliev'd by the Refugees, and the Germans were posted in the Cittadel, and some other places of the City. The Refugees being well pleased with their new Post, remained there during the whole Siege. At Night we were always upon our Guards expecting the Enemy would open their Trenches. June the 18th. The Enemy receiv'd another re-inforce∣ment, and about 2 a Clock the next Morning they opened the Trenches, near an antient Wall that runs along a Cour∣tin, opposite to the Bastions of Notre-Dame and Carail, a∣bout 300 Foot from the Pallisadoes, and the Half-Moon Balbiane, which they advanced strait to the Gallows, about 350 Foot in length, they met in one place with so hard a ground, that we heard it was like to have made them mad: So soon as we perceiv'd it, our Men fired furiously upon them from the Out-works, during the remainder of the Night. Our Gunners discharged unadvertently a Cannon from the Bastion de Carail that kill'd four of the Refugees and two of their Officers that were posted at the Counter∣guard, guarded by their Company of Granadeers, with 60 other Soldiers. The same Night twenty Men made a Sally to retard the Works of the Enemy, and they came back with∣out loss, except that of a Serjeant of the Refugees, who was kill'd by a Musquet-shot from the Bastion of Notre-Dame.
June the 19th. The Enemy advanced their Trenches, to which 300 Workmen were employed instead of 600 that had been busie about it during Night. At Night they continued their approaches, and made a Battery of 6 pieces of Canon, and another of four Mortar∣pieces, with which they play'd upon the City; we found that they had thrown 36 Bombs into the Place and the Out-works, whilst in the mean time they continued their Works under the favour of a Corn-field that covered them, and which has saved them a great many of their Men during the Siege. June the 20th. By break of Day they play'd continually upon us with six pieces of Cannon, and continued to throw their Bombs into the City, during the whole Day; but the little harm they did us gave a fresh courage to the Inha∣bitants. Several of the French Refugees, that had never seen this sort of Engines, were presently used to it, and did not mind them at all, althô their Posts were the most visited by them. The Enemy did not at all endeavour to make a breach with his Cannon, of which some were 24, others 36 Poun∣ders; but they always shot at random, sometimes toward a Steeple, sometimes amongst the Houses, sometimes to∣wards the Bastion of Carail, where we annoy'd them very much with two pieces of Cannon, and sometimes towards the Bastion of Notre-Dame, where we had also planted some Cannons. Some young Men that found some Bul∣lets in the Ditches and the Streets carried them to the Go∣vernor, who at first gave them a French Livre, and after∣wards fifteen pence a piece; but the number of them in∣creasing very much, he gave them at last but five pence a piece. This day was spent in working on both sides. The Ene∣my took Post at a Silk-Mill, situated upon the River Sture, from whence they fired furiously upon those that guarded the Countuergard de Carail.
During Night two Houses were burn'd, either by the neg∣ligency of some particular Persons, or the Bombs of the Enemy. This Fire Allarm'd somewhat the Inhabitants; but they were appeased by the Governors order to remove all Wood, and other combustible things from the top of the Houses. A little Sally was made, but without any effect. Our Musqueteers in the Out-works continued their Firing, as usually, to hinder the approaches of the Enemy, who sur∣rounded the whole Front from the Counterguard de Carail till to the point of the Bastion of Notre-Dame, which com∣prehended exactly the Posts that were guarded by the Re∣fugees. June the 21st. The whole day was spent in Firing on both sides, but the Enemy had the advantage of the Bombs. At night the Counsel of War did assemble, where all the Officers that were design'd to be there were present, ex∣cept Monsieur de Julien. It was there represented by the Engineer Guibert, That besides that our Troops were extreme∣ly harras'd, it was impossible to maintain the Covert way with so few Forces, it being in a bad posture, and every where sur∣rounded by the Enemies Works. That by endeavouring to maintain it, we would run the hazard to lose all the Men that guarded it; especially the French Refugees, who had behav'd themselves so courageously, and who were exactly posted to∣wards the Attack and the Approaches of the Enemy, who un∣doubtedly would in great numbers fall upon them, in order to possess themselves of the Covert-way and the Half-Moon, which they knew to be almost in no posture of defence. That therefore it would be more prudent to keep only the Sallying places of Arms, and to abandon all the rest; especially, when according to the Project that was made, a good Body of Men should be put into the Half-moons and the Counterguard of Carail. This advice seem'd to be very rational, and the Counsel having resolv'd upon't accordingly, the Engineer
went towards Night into the Covert-way, to inform the Com∣mander of the Refugees of it, (who did not stir from that place night and day;) he acquainted him with what he had proposed to the Counsel, and that they all had given him their consent, to which Monsieur de Julien answered, That it was a very wise and recommendable resolution, but since it only aim'd at the preservation of our Men, if they would be∣lieve him, he did not think fit to abandon a place without blows, which he had guarded with so much care from the be∣ginning of the Siege; and since we were in expectation the Ene∣my would possess themselves of it with their Swords in their Hands, he would maintain it as long as it was possible with∣out exposing his Men to be cut in pieces: That he would con∣trive the matter in such a manner, that advice should be given him in what condition each of his Posts were during the Attack, and that as soon he would find one in a condition to be forced, he would save the rest of the Men in the best manner he should be capable of. To which the Engineer replyed: Sir, you have reason not to be willing to abandon a part of your Posts which your Men have guarded till now; but you will certainly be forced to t: Nevertheless, I am going to inform the Regiment of Salusses of your design, and that consequently they are to guard their Out-works as well as you do. At night the Musqueteers continued their Firing, and an hour before day-break a detachment of Dragoons made a false Attack at the Counterguard de Carail; whereupon a de∣tachment was sent thither by the Commendant, de Prouane but afterwards he found it to be only a false Attack. June the 22d. By break of day the Enemy made the true Attack, after a Signal given by eight Bombs and three Cannons: They attack'd one of the most advanced places guarded by the Refugees, who behaved themselves with so much bravery, and made so vigorous an opposition, as could hardly be expected from such a handful of Men, against 500 Granadeers, 500 Fusileers, and 200 Dragoons, seconded by two Regiments of Foot; but whereas they were a little too
eager in some places, we had great paines to save those that were not killed in the Attack. We ought here to render Justice to our Enemy, and confess that they behaved themselves very well, since they made themselves Masters of our Outworks with their Swords in their Hands, forced a way to the Half-moon in three places, and mingled themselves amongst our Men into the Ditch of the place, with an extraordinary Courage and Boldness. One of their Colonels was killed near the Gate of the Succours; and indeed he was not the only Man of their Officers that were left behind in the Ditch. The Refugees having put some of their Men into the Courtine of the Bastion de Carail and Notre-Dame, fired so furiously upon the Enemy, who was al∣ready much weakned, that it was impossible for them to maintain themselves in the Half-moon, nay to lodge them∣selves in the Counterscarp; and they confessed themselves that it had been too hot to remain there. Their Dragoons, who had lost their Officers, were the first that run away; and we ought not to be surpriz'd, that all the rest followed them in great disorder; since we continued to Fire upon them from the Counterguard of the Bastions de Carail and Notre-Dame, and being assisted by those of the Courtine, left the Enemy no time to lodge themselves, except they had been willing to lose their whole Army, which at that time con∣sisted of twelve Regiments of Foot, two of Horse, and two of Dragoons. The Regiment of Salusses annoy'd the Enemy very much with the Cannon from their Posts, that were not attacked by the Enemy, the Cannon of the Bastion of Notre-Dame broke twice their Squadron of Horse, and this attack lasted an hour and a half. Our loss consisted for the greatest part of French Refugees, and of 7 or 8 Germans; three Captains were kill'd upon the spot, besides one who dyed afterwards of his wounds, one Ensign, one Sergeant, and 30 Common Soldiers. Of the number of the wounded were the Lieutenant Colonel, who was wounded in his Hand, one Captain, one Ensign,
two Sergeants, and 55 Soldiers. It would be to no purpose to say with several others, that the Refugees regain'd the Half-Moon with their Swords in their Hands, since the Enemy will certainly deny it, because they retreated without being pur∣sued, and were only forced to leave their Post, by the great Fire that was made upon them from our Bastions. Lieutenant Colonel de Julien, who was the Man in the World that prais'd most this bold Action of theirs, answered to those that com∣plemented him for having regained this Outwork, and driven the Enemy out of the Half-Moon with the Sword in his Hand, and planted the Standard of England upon one point of the Half-Moon, (the latter of which he really did,) Gentle∣men, If you had seen the whole course of this Action, you would not trouble me with such complements; for if I have forced the Enemy to abandon all our Outworks, it was by reason of the great Fire I ordered to be made by our Men, after which, 'tis true, that I went out and conducted them into Half-moon, but I found no Enemy there, no more than in the Covert∣way and upon the Counterguard: Confirming by this Answer of his, that it is very Natural to Men of a Noble and Gene∣rous Mind, to render Justice to all the World, and by no means to accept of praises they have not deserved, neither to hear those but with uneasiness which they have bought with the very hazard of their Lives. The loss of the Enemy was far more considerable than we at first imagined, we talk'd then only of 5 or 6 hundred of their Men kill'd, but afterwards we were informed by the Deserters, as well as the Prisoners of War, (amongst which there were several considerable Officers,) that in this Action a thousand of their Soldiers had been kill'd, the Flower of their Troops, with about seventy Officers kill'd or wounded, and amongst them several that were in great esteem in their Army, we have six of them wounded in our place. The rest of the day we had no disturbance at all given us, the Enemy being almost affraid to show their Faces; they only plaid with their Cannon, and threw some Bombs and Stones into the City.
We buried our Dead, and those of the Enemy that were found in our Outworks: Some fresh Men were put into the Covert-way, and we contented our selves to guard the Places of Arms, upon each of which there were posted ten Soldiers with one Sergeant. The Enemy did not at all desire leave to carry away their Dead, nor did they enquire after a Colonel of theirs, and seve∣ral other Officers of Note, that were left behind upon the place, and indeed we saw several of them that lay upon the Counterscarpe lifting up their Heads, as if they begg'd their Friends assistance, which yet was not granted them till at Night. The Enemy had advanced their Trenches within 20 or 25 yards of the Pallisadoes, and it was from thence they endea∣voured, without pushing more forward, to possess themselves of our Outworks. At Night they endeavoured to draw near to the place of Arms, near the covered way, but were hindred by the conti∣nual firing of our Musqueteers; the Enemy threw some Bombs and Stones into the place, and the former being all spent, they sent for more from Carmagnole. June the 23d. The Enemy continued their Approaches but very slowly, and we saw plainly, that they had no mind to lose more of their Men. At Night they advanced their Batteries, and we repaired the Breaches their Cannon had made into the Courtine, we raised also a Traverse upon the Bastion of Carail, to cover the Houses on that side from the Cannon of the Enemy. Our Musqueteers and Gunners fired as they were used to do. June the 24th. Early in the Morning the Enemy began to play from their new Battery, and were for some Hours taken up to ruine that part of the Courtine that defends the right side of the Half-moon, and the Ditch near it. They threw a power of Stones, but few Bombs, into our place, ex∣pecting without doubt those they had sent for from Carmag∣nole.
They made also frequent discharges of their Cannon charged with Stones; and during this day and the follow∣ing night they advanced Outworks some Foot, but al∣ways very slowly, by reason of the continual Firing of our Men. Our Troops having suffered great Fatigues, and being much weakned by the loss of many Men, and several Offi∣cers and Soldiers wounded, some of them being kill'd every day, the Council of War, having all things well examined and considered, the poor condition of the Half-moon, resolved not to defend it any longer, but negligently, ordering him that was to command in this Outwork, to take great care not to be cut off there, and in case of an Attack, after two or three discharges to withdraw with his Men into the Body of the Place, to put them into the Courtine, and to Fire from thence upon the Half-Moon, that it might cost the enemy very dear to be lodged there, which was the best thing we could do, considering the State of our Affairs, the Counter∣guard being a very hot Post, and easie to be taken from be∣hind, was always left to the Guard of 120 Refugees, and for a Guard of the Half-moon, and of all the Places of Arms, which till that day the Refugees had been trusted with, there was established a Body of Men, drawn proportionably out of all our Troops; insomuch that at Night these 200 men were dispersed in the Half-moon, the Places of Arms, and the Gate of Succours, under the Command of Lievtenant Colonel de Julien, who was reliev'd the next day towards Night by the Lievtenant Colonel of the Regiment of Salusses, and an equal number of Soldiers. And indeed it was very just that since the Enemy made but one Attack, a detachment of all the Bodies should be opposed them, without suffering that the Refugees should be alone sacrificed, and that the rest should remain in such places that were not at all insulted; yet their Commander would not willingly have consented to this change, in case the Council of War had not before re∣solv'd to defend but weakly the Half-moon, and to abandon
it to the Enemy when they should come near it, in order to save our Men that were necessary to defend the Body of the place, till his Royal Highness should be in a condition to raise the Siege. At Night the Enemy advanced their Works within eight Foot of the Pallisadoes, they threw a great quantity of Bombs into the place, and our men fired briskly upon them. June the 25th. This Day was spent in suriously firing from both sides; at Night the Sieur Fichet, Lieutenant Co∣lonel of the Regiment of Sallusses, a brave and Gallant man, and an experienc'd Officer, reliev'd the Commander of the Refugees, who took Post that Night upon the Courtine, where the rest of his Battalion was. The same Night the Enemy lodged themselves upon the Counterscarp, notwith∣standing our Firing, and the Work they made was near the Sallying Angle of the Half-moon. June the 26th. It was resolv'd early in the morning to make a Mine, in order to dislodge the Enemy, and the En∣gineer Guibert had the direction of it; whereupon they went immediately to work about it, but somewhat slowly; the day was spent in Firing on both sides. At Night the Commander of the Refugees reliev'd the Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Salusses. It was re∣solved to leave only some Sentrys upon the Places of Arms, to lessen also the Number of the Guard of the Counter∣scarp, of the Half-moon and the Outworks, and it was this manner; Into the Counterguard were put twenty Refugees under the Command of a Lievtenant and a Ser∣geant, with order to be always upon their Guard, partly not to be surprized, and partly not to be cut off, and to make a great Fire during Night; into the Half-moon there were only put 50 men to Fire all night long, and 50 more were posted into the Ditch before the Half-moon, having the Gate of Suc∣cours behind them, and these fifty should every hour re∣lieve the fifty of the Half-moon; and in case of an Attack,
they had orders, after two or three discharges, to withdraw through the Gate of Succours into the Courtine, from whence a prodigious Fire was to be made at the first Signal that the Half-moon was abandon'd, and after these 50 men should be entred by the assistance of the Fifty that should be in order of Battle in the Ditch; the latter should retreat also, and should be followed by twenty Soldiers that were placed on the Right and the Left of the said Ditch, near a little re∣trenchment. The surplus of the 200 men design'd for the Guard of these Outworks, with a hundred that were drawn out of the Counterguard, were posted twenty of them near the Gate of Succours, under the Command of a Captain, and the rest upon the Courtine in the Face and Left-Flanck of the Bastion of Carail, where the surplus of the Refugees were posted, except 60 that were put to the Left of the Bastion of St. Francis and de l'Hospital, who were by turns relieved by the Regiment of Salusses. During this Night the Enemy lodged themselves upon an Angle of the Counterscarp, at the point of the Bastion of Notre-Dame, we fired suriously upon them, especially the Regiment of Salusses, who had their Post from this Bastion till to that of l'Orme with all the Outworks. The Enemy spared this Night neither Bombs nor Stones, and the Latter were very troublesome to our men. By break of day we saw plainly their Lodgment, on which they were still at work, and it was scarce big enough to cover them by nine a Clock in the Morning. We detach'd ten Granadeers of the Refugees, under the Command of one of their Captains, to slip through the Pallisadoes of the Covert-way, and to throw Fireballs into their Lodgment, which was not only punctually executed by the said Captain, but he did much more; for after he had ordered three or four Fireballs to be thrown into the said Lodgment, he past over the Pallisadoes and leapt into their Lodgment, crying kill, kill; whereupon all the Work∣men ran away with an incredible haste, and there was not one Soul left behind them, neither in the Work nor the Lines of
Communication; and if our Officer had been provided with Workmen, he might have entirely ruined their Work; but having no other orders than to make an attempt he retreated. Afterwards the Counts de Bernez and de Rouere, having dis∣coursed with most of the Principal Officers about this Lodg∣ment, which shew'd plainly that the Enemy had a design to insult the Bastion Notre-Dame, it was resolved that one hun∣dred Fusileers and 60 Workmen should make a Sally to de∣stroy their Work; 50 Fusileers of the Refugees, with some Officers proportionably, were appointed for it, being sustain'd by an equal number of the Regiment of Salusses. Both de∣tachments were ready: yet I do not know why their Sally was put off for four hours; during which time the Enemy worked with great application; at last the Sally was made under the Command of a Captain of the Refugees, and they had admirable Success; the Work was entirely clear'd, and al∣most all the Lines; and if they had not had Orders not to engage themselves too far, the Enemy would certainly have had but an ill time on't, considering the condition of their Affairs: But if they drive the Enemy out of the Lodgment and the Line of Communication, they did not execute the rest, and whether it be for the great Fire the Enemy made, or for some other reason, the Workmen slipt all away, and we were above an hour in possession of the Enemies Works, without hearing of any of our Workmen in order to destroy them. The Enemy did as we had done in the Half-moon, they re∣turned thither as soon as our men had order to retreat; and indeed the Honour of this Action cost us very dear, since the French Protestants had there two of their Captains, two Lieu∣tenants, and two Ensigns wounded, and eight Soldiers killed, and fifteen wounded: Those of the Regiment of Salusses lost two brave and valiant Captains, viz. him that commanded the detachment, and another who was Adjutant, and who turn'd that way, either to carry some Orders, or only out of curiosity. We were informed, that the Enemy was extream∣ly surprized at this Sally, they thought it a very bold Action,
and during it they sent some Foot to re-possess themselves of their Work, but in vain. Some Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, that had a mind to be seen, were welcomed by our Cannon, and sent briskly back behind their Courtains. We fired very furiously towards the Enemies Trenches from all our Posts that look towards them, and some of their Deserters told us that more than three hundred men of theirs had been kill'd and wounded there. We had this day the welcome News of great Succours that was coming towards us. At Night the Lieutenant Colonel of Salusses reliev'd the Lieutenant Colonel de Julien; and whereas a wounded Lieu∣tenant, that was made Prisoner in the Sally of the Morning, gave us notice, that the Enemy made a Mine to blow up the Half-moon, and that it was to be executed this very Night, we employed our utmost endeavours to bring our Mine to a perfection, to be before-hand with the Enemy; but it could not be done that Night. It was resolved not to leave in the Half-moon but some Centries, and ten Sol∣diers upon every Flanck, and to let all the rest March into the place upon the Courtine and the Bastions, which was executed during Night. The Enemy threw a great number of Bombs and Stones into the place; but before Day-break they took the pains to decamp, without either Drum or Trumpet, leaving us as a sign of their retreat one of their Canons upon their Bat∣tery, which without doubt, for want of Horses, they could not carry along with them: Neither had they a mind to charge themselves with a great quantity of Bullets and Fire∣balls, and a little Powder which they left also behind them, in order to serve this Place, whenever they shall be pleased to come again to besiege it. Truly it was a very strange retreat; and if we may believe those that have seen it, their Troops were in the greatest disorder in the World. They left 70 Soldiers and four or five Officers wounded behind them, of which number is the En∣gineer Vasel, and a Captain of the Regiment of Vandome, and
Gentleman to the Prince of that Name. We are assured that besides this number there were more than fifty Soldiers that made a shift to creep away, drawing one another, and Swearing and Cursing against their Officers and Ge∣nerals. June the 28th. By break of Day we received our Delive∣rance, and we went out immediately to see if there was a Mine under the Half-moon; but we did not find but the beginning of a Gallery, and considering the manner they were to approach to the Half-moon, they were in no condi∣tion to be soon Masters of the Place, which indeed seems to be preserved by a particular Favour of God's Provi∣dence. I will not trouble my self to enquire into the Reasons that made the Generals of the Enemy raise the Siege, after a Blockade of seven, and a full Siege of ten days. It is enough that Coni has been saved by the particular assistance of Heaven, and the Courage and Bravery of those that did defend it. Prince Eugene of Savoy, with the Sieurs de Parelle and St. Croix, arrived between nine and ten a Clock in the Morning, with 2300 Horse and Dragoons, and near 300 Mules laden with Ammunition; whilst in the mean time the Sieur de St. Silvestre, with a Body of 2500 Horse, and 500 Grana∣deers, came to join the Sieur de Bulonde, in order to go on with the Siege; but he did not arrive till after the Enemy had abandoned their Trenches, and past the River Sture. It is reported, that he said to the Sieur de Bulonde, What, Sir, have you raised the Siege, you must return again to it; for the Prince of Savoy has no more than 2000 Horse with him? To which he replyed, exceedingly troubled, The Thing is done, the Trenches are abandoned, we have past the River, and I will never return thither. As for the Sieur de Feuquieres we have not been able to know yet what Projects he form'd in his Head; but certain it is, that at his return through Villefalet, he plaid no more the Gallant and the Gascoon, as he had done when he came to Besiege Coni; a little Entertain∣ment
being presented to him in this Place, he refused to Eat, and gave only some few bits to his Dog; and mounting on Horseback said, Although the whole Army of France should perish, we'll return again to Coni and take it: But he might have been answered, That then the Honour of the Action would be Monsieur Catinat's due, and that the Bells of the Place would belong to the General of the Artillery. I say this, because at the beginning of the Siege the Sieur de Feu∣quieres said to the Sieur Ducré, Lieutenant-Genneral of the Ordnance, Morbleu, Sir, make haste to put your Cannons upon the Batteries to play out of them, before they surrender; or else you'll lose the Bells. And indeed if he could but remember all his Gasconnades, which he has been guilty of during this Siege, in his Letters as well as in his Discourse, he would so much the more be mortified by the ill success of his Enter∣prise. The French Brigadeers may very well reproach him with the Troubles he gave them to lie every Night in the Trenches, since all their Watchings and Care has been fruitless. This Governour of Coni, whom he threatned to hang at the Gate, and this Commander of the Refugees, whom he would exterminate before his Eyes, with the whole Body that is un∣der his Command, have indeed great reason to laugh at his folly; and, for all his Calumnies, to comfort themselves with the Glory they have acquired, and the Justice his Royal Highness renders them; having made the Governour, Lieu∣tenant-General of the Marquisate and Province of Salusses; and presented the Lieutenant-Colonel de Julien with a Ring of great value; and besides obtained for him from his Ma∣jesty of Great-Brittain the charge of Colonel of his Troops. The Marquess de Vauqueres, who during the Siege has also done his duty extream well, and who brought the News of the raising of the Siege to his Royal Highness, received also a very considerable present; the Count de Bernez, the first Engineer Guibert, and Lieutenant-Colonel Fichet will not fail to be rewarded also by his Royal Highness, for the Cou∣rage
and Bravery they have show'd during this Siege. In fine all the Troops, Burghers and Militia have exactly done their duty, and it would be too long for me to Name every Body that has signalized himself on this occasion: Yet I can∣not pass over in silence the great faithfulness of the People, and the affection of the good Women, who upon all occasions carried Bread and Wine to the Soldiers, and assisted those that were wounded. The Clergy, who did behave them∣selves very devoutly before and during the Siege, did sing the Te Deum with great solemnity so soon as the Siege was raised. Of the Battalion of Monsieur de Julien there were 12 Officers wounded and 7 killed, 79 Soldiers wounded and 51 killed; in all killed and wounded 149. There are still 25 of them that have not yet recovered of their Wounds, and some are in danger of Life. The whole Battalion consisted of 500 Men. FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS. MR. Fleetwood's Sermon, Preach'd before the Honourable House of Commons, Nov. 5. 1691. Discourses upon Trade, principally directed to the cases of the Interest of Coinage, Clipping, and Encrease of Money. The Monarchs of England, from the Heptarchy to their pre∣sent Majesties King William and Queen Mary, taken from Medals and Original Paintings, with a compendious Histo∣ry of their several Reigns. By Guy Miege, Gent. Regula Placitandi: A Collection of special Rules for pleading from the Declaration to the Issue. Ars Clericalis: The Art of Conveyancing explained: Be∣ing a Collection gathered, with great care and industry, out of the many Books of the Law; wherein the Nature and Effect of such Deeds, and Instruments by which Lands are conveyed from one Man to another are clearly de∣monstrated. Also the forms and orderly parts which ought to be observed in Deeds and Conveyances are laid open and explained.
