13920.5 39960685 150412
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, THE Lord and others of his Maje∣sties most Honourable pritile Councell. Right Honourable, IT is well seene, that all such in this Land as seare not Gods Iudgements, are loath to be judged by your Ho∣nourable it is also very apparent, that were it not but for your Ho∣nours, there would bee no end of oppression and wrong not any liuing in this Land, neither for Poore nor Rith; and that therefore, all the Kings louing and true hearted Subjects, both high and lowe, haue cause continually to pray for your Honours, next to our gracious Xing and his Royall Issue. Giue me (your poote Suppliant) leaue to de∣clare the wrongs vnder which I haue a long time groaned; honing spent many yeares in the seruice of the Summer Ilands Company in much misery
especially, in the two first yeares, wherein I was like to perish through want of food, when the Go∣uernor had not so much meale as would hold our one month, to giue to euery man one pound for a weeke, did (our of his care to saue some aliue) cull out all such as were hartlesse and lazie, and sent them into the maine, to line vpon Berries, or to statue, seeing there was no remedy: I then went to the Gouenor, and told him that it was too much cruelty to let them starue in body and soule toge∣ther, and therefore did desire that I might goe with them. With much importunity he gaue me leaue to stay with them all the time of famine; in which time, I did pine a way to skinne and bone, and be∣came so weake, as they were glad to lead mee to some lowe rocke, on the side of an hill, where they set me downe first, and then sat downe themselues in rowes vpon the ground, to heare the word of God preached vnto them. Their forwardnesse to heare Gods word, and the Gouernors loue in sen∣ding continually to know how I did, did so heare and make glad my heart, as I made no reckning of the misery and want that I liued in. When this Gouernors time was out, he came for England, and left the gouernment in the hands of sixe men to gouern monthly. In the time of the mis-rule of those sixe Gouer∣nors, three of them went out in a little Pinace (to seeke for some reliese) with a promise from the other three to admit of no Gouernor sent from England, vntill sixe month after there arriuall: not long after their departure, one of the other three (named Iohn
Mansfield) became sole Gouernor, and for the strengthening of himselfe against the Gouernor that was expected from England, did drawe a large Pe∣tition as though the People had drawn it to entreat him to keepe the Gouernment in his owne hand; they promising to maintaine him against the Gol∣uernor that was expected from England to which Petition, he and one Iohn Parker, a Black-Smith, drew the people euery where to subscribe. Assoon as I heard thereof, I followed after from Tribe to Tribe preaching, and in my Sermons shewing the vnlawfulnesse and euill that was like to come of the rebellion intended, and so drew the people euery where to renounice the said Petition. The Vsurper hearing that the people had renoun∣ced the Petition, and that I was comming to the Towne, did raise the whole Towne vp in armes, to apprehend me and one Mr. Fosseth, that kept me company; the said Mr. Fosseth being apprehended; they hung him vp on the Wharse by the hands and feere, where he hung is grieuous paine, no man da∣ring to relieue him; but the women, who brought stones in their aprons, and thrust them vnder his body, to heare vp the weight of it. After they had so hung him vp, Parker the Black-Smith, came and with a Crowe of yron brake open my Chamber doore, and drag'd me out to his owne house, where he kept me prisoner, till a tumultuous assembly was called, by the name of an Assizes, and then brought me to the Barre, where I was arraigned and condemned for a contemner of authority: The sentence pronounced against me, was, that I should
be depriued of my ministy; and confined to a little stand; where I should be kept from comming to the people. This sentence did so offend the people, as they would by no meanes yeeld to the execution of it; but told him, that they were starued enough in their bodies, and that he had no reason to starue them in their soules, by depriuing them of my mi∣nistery. By which opposition, I had rest vntill the arriuall of a new Gouernor, one Captaine Tucker. Assoone as the Vsurper heard that a shippe was come into the Harbour with a new Gouernor, and what the new Gouernor had spoken to me, to preach at the reading of his Commission; he the said Vsur∣per, caned the towne people together, and told them, that if they would stand to him like then, he would sticke to them, so long as he had a droppe of blood in his heart; they promising that they would; he charged them to be vp in armes the next day betimes, and told them, he would not haue me to preach, but Mr. Keath: Mr. Keath was no Mi∣nister, but a poore Schollet, that cunningly had got himselfe sent ouer for a Minister) who to further the rebellion intended, had buz'd into the peoples eares, that it was lawfull to resist the Gouernor that was expected from England; and for proose thereof, did alleadge the example of the Israelites, their put∣ting downe of Rehoboam, and setting vp of Ioreboam in his steed. And to stirre vp the Vsurper to shed the blood of such as should dare to oppose him, he did alleadge the example of Athaliah, who to vsurpe the Gouernment, did murther all the
Kingde. Also be (the Vsurper) cold the people, that presently after the Sermon, he would make a short speech to the Gouernor, and that he would haue them (assoone as he had left speaking) to crye a Mansfield, a Mansfield, and then shew them∣selues men. The next meaning, as I was studying for my Sermon, and looking out at a windowe, I saw the people vp in armes, and heard one of them swears that he would sheath his sword in the new Gouer∣nors guts: Whereupon I made haft out of my Chamber, and finding she Ship-boate ready to goe off did enter in, to goe to the new Gouernor, to ac∣quaint him with what was intended; the new Go∣uernor being then on ship-boord: I was no sooner in the Boace, but certaine Muscateres were sent in hast, by the Vsurper to shoote at me, vnlesse I would come out: Whereupon, the Marriners fearing they would shoote, and kill some of them instead of me, did set me on shore againe. The Vsurper seeing me about to land, came with a rusty browne Bill on his backe, as though hee meant to knocke me in the head; telling the people, that they had all of them cause, to curse the time that euer they saw my face; which did put me in some seare, that either he or they would doe mee some mischiefe; therefore I made hast away, and lockt my selfe in my Chamber. About three or soure houres after, the new Gouernor came, and was suffered quietly to goe to the Church; where, assoone as Mr. Keath had made an end of his Sermon, the Vsurper made a
short speech vnto him, and did no sooner make an end of speaking, but Mr. Keath (according as the Vsurper had giuen order) was the first man, that cried a Mansfield, a Mansfield; and so was like to set vs together by the eares, to cut one anothers throat, euen in the Church; had not the new Go∣uernor with speed caused his Commission to be read; the reading whereof, did so daunt the Vsurper, as he came downe and gaue place vnto him. Thus, I haue in part deliuered vnto your Ho∣nours, the sturre (that Sathan in his instruments) did make in the time of the mis-rule of the sixe Gouer∣nors; in hope thereby to bring ruine vpon that poore new planted Vineyard of the Lord Iesus. What he was not able to accomplish then, he was like to effect in the new Gouernors time; who was a fit instrument for him to stirre vp the people to mutany, and so to ouerthrow the Plantation: For he was no sooner established in his place, but hee tooke from euery one of the first Planters, halfe an Acre of ground, that the Company had giuen to them and theirs, which was no small discourage∣ment vnto them; considering the extreame pains that they had taken, in much hunger and nakednes, without any wages, in making 11. Forts. One Richard Sanders, and honest poore man, who had builded vpon his halfe acre a conuenient dwel∣ling house, and had bestowed cost and labor vpon a Garden Plot, where diuerse good hearbs and flowers did growe; and greeuing to haue all ta∣ken from him on the suddaine; before he was prouided of any other place, for himselfe, his poore
wife and children; did but aske if they might not complaine to the King to for asking of that que∣stion, Capt. Tucker did imprison him, and put more Iron vpon him, then no was able to heare, wherein hear lay vpon the ground night and day in grieuous paine. One Paul Deane, being arraigned and condem∣ned, for stealing a peece of cheese, pleaded the be∣nefit of his cleargy (according to the lawes of Eng∣land) was rigorously denied, and so hang'd. The poore man that was put in Irons for asking if they might not complaine to the King (seeing how like a Tyrant Capt. Tucker behaued himself, in cudgelling the poore people, and in arraigning and condemning for small matters, and censuring such to romaine perpetuall slaues vnto the cullony) he and foure more, to free themselues from, his ti∣rannie, did desperately leaue the Ilands and came for England, in a little Boate of two or three tunnes, or thereabout. The feare of his tyranny did reclaime diuerse of the lazy crue, so as they became painfull labourers, for which he was much commended. The wrongs that he did me (your poore Sup∣pliant) were like to tempt me aboue my strength: as first, he tooke my seruant from me, and so con∣strained me to liue comfortlesse alone; and to goe vp and downe the Iland, seeking for fire-wood, and to bring it home on my backe, and then to goe from house to house for fire, and to goe with my Pitcher through the towne, to the Pumpe for wa∣ter; and to doe other base and seruill offices, very
vnbeseeming a Minister of Gods word. Also he tooke from me a peece of blacke stuffe, which St. Thomas Smith had caused to be bought for me. I being then in great want of cloathing, and so poore, as I was constrained to goe almost three yeares in one olde strawe Hatte; and almost two yeares in one olde paire of cobled Shooes, uriuen full of nailes. Also, he tooke from me three acres of chaise ground for Tobacco, and two men that the Com∣pany had giuen me. Also, he did interrupt me in my Sermon, telling me, that I was out of my text, and when the Ser∣mon was ended, he did threaten to clap my neck and heeles together. The matter that did offend him, was this: I seeing (to my griefe) how in his two last yeares, he game ouer all care of the Plantation, to build and plane for himselfe; and did exhaust the store, to build a stately house of Cedar for himself, Gods house all that while, being but a thacht Houell, which was kept so badly, as when it rained, there was almost no place where the people could sit drie: I tooke occasion on a day in my Sermon to shew how the wrath of God came on the Is∣raelites, for the like neglect of Gods house: Whereupon, he stood vp, and with a loud voyce, told me that I was out of my text, and to the euill example of the people, went out of the Church in agreat rage; and assoone as he saw me come out, came to me, and told me, that he would clappe my neck and heeles together: After that time, he
he became an enemy vnto Religion, so as he con∣strained me to giue ouer the Thursday Lecture be∣cause the people could not come to heare me, hee did so employ them about his owne businesse; he spared not the Sabboth day, but sent the people a∣broad, so as I was much discouraged from prea∣ching in the after noones. In the time of his Gouernment God did bring a great Iudgement vpon the Ilands,There are almost a 100 little Ilands, the biggest is but 18. miles long and almost two miles broad. in that he caused Rats to abound, so as no Hand was free but were all like so many Conney-warrens of Rattes. The Rattes were a grieuous plague vnto the People, both within doors and without; Within, they deuoured all prouision of food, cloathes, and shooes: Without, they deuoured the Come, by scraping it out of the ground when it was new set; the graines that were thrust in so deepe as they could not scrape vp, they deuoured in the blade, as∣soone as it appeared aboue ground: Where some escaped them in the blade, they deuoured in the eare. They deuoured all other fruit of the earth, which serued for foode; and did kill and deuoure almost all the young Birds, and Chickens, & suckt, their egges. I am not able to expresse the seare that was in the people, that they should be starued, when they saw that nothing that serued for foode, could be kept from the Rattes. The people did spend their whole time, night, and day, in keeping the Rattes vnder, by hunting them with dogges; setting of traps, and poison; & burning the Ilands twice ouer, whereby much tim∣ber
and fire-wood was consumed. Then, euen then, when they endeuoured by all meanes to destroy the Rattes, they encreased the more; till God in mercy, hearing our praiers, did take them away on the suddaine, in three or soure daies, so as no man could tell how. Assoone as the Rattes were gone, the people with glad hearts did betake themselues to plant Come, and by the blessing of God, had a plentifull haruest: Whereupon Capt. Tucker being minded to come for England, caused euery man to bring a certaine quantity of corne into the Forts, to be kept there in store, and handled the matter so (after he was come ouer) as he drew all the company to beleeue, that by meanes of his industry and care, the Ilands were so well furnished with corne, and the Ratts destroyed: Wherevpon, to require his care, they did bestowe vpon him, the stately house that he had built, and three shares of the best land in all the Ilands. At his comming away, he left the Gouernment in the hands of one Captaine Kendall; who through pouerty, was constrained to take out of the Forts, the corne that Capt. Tucker and caused to bee brought in. After Capt. Kendall, succeded Capt. Nathaniel Butler, a man well qualified euery way for such employment. He no sooner saw how God had done his part, to make those Ilands strong, and safe from all for∣raine inuasion, by fortifying them round about with fearefull rockes and shoules, so as there is no com∣ming
neare with shippes to inuade them, but in two narowe and durious channels, which doe lead into two goodly and large Harbours; and how the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, had done them best endeauours in the matter, of artificiall for∣tifications. as, On the channell that leadeth into the west har∣bour, they had builded a strong Fort, and a Castle, which they called the Kings Castle, where they had mounted 18. great Pieces, on carriages sent from England; which through the negligence of suc∣ceeding Gouernors, were gone to decay. Capt. Butler tooke small rest, till he had repaired such as could be repaired, and made new cariages of ce∣dar for the rest: so now those 18. great Peices are very seruiceably mounted; so also are all the o∣ther great Peices in the rest of the Forts. As, not farre from that channell, towards the south, is a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, called Charies Fort, where are two great Peices. On the North side of the Channell Capt. Butler bath built a strong Fort to slanker the Kings Castie, which he called Southampton Fort, where are fiue great Peices, seruiceablely mounted by Cap. Butler on carriages of cedar: Which Fort doth make a great showe to the sea, as though it were a Castle. To the Northward of that Fort, the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, built a Fort, which they called Pembrooke Fort, where are two great Peices.
The other Channell that leadeth into the Fast Harbour, commonly called the Towne Harbour hath on the one side, towards the North, a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time; called Rogers Fort, where are 7. great Pieces. On the other side, towards the South, is a Fort called Smiths Fort, built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, where are 5, great Peices. Not farre from that Channell, towards the north, is a Fort called Penistons Fort, built by the first planters in Capt. Mores time, where is one great Piece. A little from that Fort, is a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, called Sands Fort, where are 2. great Pieces. On a Hill neare the Harbour, is a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, called Warwicke Fort, where are 3. great Pieces to com∣mand the Harbour. On a Hill neare the Towne was a high Mount, (built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores time) blowne downe with a terrible gust of winde, & is now built vp againe higher and stronger, by Capt. Butler: where is also one great piece, mounted by Capt. Butler to gine warning. In the Towne, vpon the Wharfe are 7. great Pieces, mounted by Capt. Butler, to command the Harbour; which great Pieces he recouered out of certaine Wrackes. Captaine Butler hath built in the Towne a faire towne Hall of stone, and a faire strong Prison of cedar.
In the Maine he hath built throe faire long Bridges of cedar, like Kingston Bridge. In his time, the Kings I awes were established in the Ilands, and the Assites kept orderly, as they are in England, Before his time, ever since Capt. Mores time, the Gouernors will went for lawe, and some of the Kings Subiects were hanged contrary to the Kings law, and some condemned and censured to per∣petuall slauery. Captaine Butler did ordaine sort euery Tribe a Iustice of the Peace, a Constable, Chuh war∣dens, Side-men, and Waywards; and did cause Cages, Stockes, and Cucking-stooles to be made in euery Tribe. Notwithstanding, the great care that he had to suppresse since, it did abound euery day more and more, through the want of Gods Word, the Ilands being pestered with leud Persons, taken vp out of the Ses, out of Newgate and Bridewell. In his time I came to England, to seed I could perswade some Ministers to goe ouer, and to de∣quaint the Company with the weake estate of the Ilands, and gruances of the people, which were ready to mutany. When I came into the Barmude Court to present the grieuances of the People, and weake estate of the Ilands, St. Edwas Sand; (misinforthed by Capt. Tucker) did stand vp in the face of the Court, to accuse me of many soule crimes; saying vnto me, Mr. Lewes, you doe vse in your Sermons to speake against the Church of England, to raile vpon
Bishops, and to say that the Booke of Common Praier is but in dide Wises tale; and you will not Baptize Children, vnlesse their Parents doe first make confession of their Faith. To his first accusation, I answered; that the Church of England was my Mother, and that al the knowledge, all the faith and hope of saluation that I haue, I had it in the Church of England, which I take to be the true Church of God; and that therefore, my tongue shall be cut out of my mouth, before it shall speake against the Church of En∣gland, as some doe: To his second, concerning tailing vpon Bi∣shops, I tolde him, that it were too much peeuish∣nesse for me, to meddle with the Bishops there, where they could not meddle with me: The truth is, that preaching vpon the suffering of our Sauiour Christ, I shewed how the high Priests, were the greatest enemies that our Sausour had: and from them I gathered, that the grace of God and lear∣ning dee not alway goe together; and for proofe of my doctrine, I shewed how the Romish Lord Bishops are the greatest supplanters of Christian Religion, and shedders of Christian blood; and did nominate bloody Bonner, Bishop of London, and Gardner Bishop of Winchester: Not speaking a word of the reuerend Fathers, the Bishops of the Church of England, as it now stands, whom I ho∣nour from my heart, for the good that I haue and dayly doe receaue out of their godly and learned Works. To his third accusation, concerning the Booke
of Common Praier: I answered, that I was so farre, from speaking, as I neuer had, and hoped neuer should haue a thought in my heart, tending to that way: wherevpon, Sr. Edwin did produce mine Enemie Capt. Tucker, for his Informer. Capt. Tucker did produce Capt. Kendall., who testified, that he had heard me say that the Booke of Common Praier was good for olde men and wo∣wen to read at home, when they were not able to goe to Church. The Court taking notice how they differed in their testimony, some said, Make how these men cannot agree in their testimonies, faine they would doe the poore man some harme, but they haue not agreed vpon the matter. Captaine Kendall was one of the three Gouer∣nors that promised to admit of no Gouernor sent from England, he became mine enemy because I had acquainted the Company with the wrongs that he had done the Ilands in the time of his Gouern∣ment, in taking the corne out of the Forts, and dis∣furnishing the Ilands of certaine murthering Pieces, and other necessaries, which he sould to a Pirat. I did acquaint the Company with nothing but what Capt. Butler (then Gouernor) did aduise me, and what I was bound by mine oath to declare, as I was one of the Priuie Counsell in the Summer Ilands. To his fourth accusation, concerning the Bap∣tising of children, I answered, that many poore boyes and girles, (taken vp, out of the streetes,
out of New gate and Bride well and the Hospitals) were sent to the Sommers Ilands, where they were brought vp in ignorance like Heathen, so as, when they became men and women, and were married, and had children, they were not able to bring vp their children in the Christian Faith: therefore, to bring such to haue some care of themselues and of their children, I gaue out, that I would not baptise their children, vnlesse the parents were able to yeeld some reckoning of their Faith, or at least, rehearse the Articles without booke; and to encourage them thereunto, I drewe some of the better sort, (for example sake) to rehearse the Articles, before their children were baptised. After I had thus answered to his accusations, I desired the Court not to passe ouer sleightly; the things whereof I was accused but, take some paines to examine and finde out the truth: them, Sin Edwin (as though hee had bene satisfied) did stand vp, saying vnto me, Well, well; Master Lewes, it is enough for you, that we knowe you to be an honest man, and that you haue done much good in the Plantation; as for these things, let them dye, stirre in them as further. Though Sir Edwin made a showe as though her were satisfied, and to haue a good opinion of nee yet, such of the Company as are couete ously min∣ded, and do aime altogether at their own end were so against me, as they denyed to giue any thing to wards my charges in crossing the seas in lying sick
& weake at Falmouth, and in trauelling from thence to London by land, bring eleauen soore miles, with horse and guide, not able some daye to trauell about tenmyles; yea they were so against me as they refused to relecue me with my wages, and so constrained me, (for the bearing of my charges backe againe to the Sommer Ilands) to take from my poore wife all that I could, and to leaue her in great want, which was no small griefe vnto me. Within few monthes after my arriuall, a newe Gouernour, (one Captaine Bernard) was sent to succeede Captaine Butler, and with him foure Mi∣nisters. One of the Ministers named Master Wright, was no sooner landed, but went about the Ilands in∣uaighing against me, almost three weekes before I could finde him out: at length, when I came where he was he tould me that he tooke me to be a disho∣nour to the, Ministery and a shame to all Ministers, and that Sir Edwin Sands had tould him that I was a man not fit to liue in a Common-wealth: which opprobrious speeches, I tooke patiently, because the standers by did cleare me of those things where∣of he had accused me; so as he seemed to be satis∣fied, and went about the Ilands, speaking well of me where he had spoken euill, and dyed within sixe or seauen dayes after. The new Gouernour then lying vpon his death bed, and hearing that I did grieue and pine away, because he and the Ministers had an euill opinion of
me, did send an honest man, one Willam More to comfort me, willing him to tell me, that he found no truth in the reports that were made vnto him of me by some of the Company, and that if I would stay in the Ilands, I should finde his loue: within foure dayes after this, It pleased God that he also dyed. After the death of the Gouenour, diuers of the dishonest and vnruly sort, (taking notice how the Ministers and the new Officers that were sent ouer with the new Gouernour, had an euil opinion of me) did so wrong and insult ouer me, as was like to breake my heart, and hauing receaued a lamen∣mentable letter from my wife, signifying that the Company did refuse to pay the mony that I did allow her, out of my wages, and that she was in great want, I resolued to come for England. At my returne backe againe? Sir Edwin Sands and Deputie Ferrar who then were the chiefe ma∣nagers of the affaires of the Sommer Ilands, had got a new matter against me, which being openly reade in the Court behind my backe, did confirme diuerse of the Aduenturers in the euill opinion that they had of me their new matter was, certaine false notes, collected out of a Sermon, that I made before diuers that were inclined to mutiny, by meanes of which false notes, the hearts of such as with their multiplicitie of voyces beare most sway, are so set against me, as I am like to lose the greatest part of my wages to my vtter vndoing.
Being aduised by my friends to petition his Ma∣jesties Commissioners for Virginea and Sommers Ilands, my petition was sent by them to the Com∣pany for an answer; whereupon Master Nicholas Ferrar, then Deputie, came to the Commissioners and tould them, that there was nothing due vn∣to me, and that if there were, he would pay euery penny himselfe. Sir Edwin alone, did take vpon him to answer my Petition in writing, and did so wrong me, as one of the Commissioners tould me, that there was such matters against me, as they must turne me to a higher authority: whereupon I did petition your Honours aboue twelue monthes since, and had an order to enioyne the Company to giue present sa∣tisfaction of what was due: whereupon Master Iohn Ferrar late Deputie came into the Court and openly in the face of the Court did affirme, that there was nothing due vnto me, vnto whose testi∣mony, the multitude (who with their multiplicity of voyces doe beare all the sway) haue giuen such credit, as I haue no hope to recouer my wages. The Gouernour Sir Thomas Smith, and others that are honourable and Christianly minded, though they be willing, yet are not able to helpe me, because of the multiplicity of voyces that are against me: therefore I am constrained to appeare from the multiplicity of voyces to your Honours for Iustice.
The Demandes of me Lewes Hughes for the time that I haue spent in the seruice of the Sommer Ilands Company and in suing for my wages. I Did Contract with the Company but for three yeares after 50, pounds per annum, as appea∣reth by their Order of Court made the 18. of March 1613. for which I acknowledge my selfe to be satisfied. The Copy of the Order. TAking in consideration, the necessitie of sending ouer sufficient Ministers, they were giuen to vn∣derstand of one Master Lewes Hughes, who pro∣sereth him selfe to be imployed for three yeares, and referred the determination to a priuate meeting, which was held the 26. of this present, where they agreed: viz. Master Gouernour, Master Deputie, &c. That be should, if he could not enioye his health returne with the first shipping, and to haue for the time he stayes 50. pounds per annum, viz. 10. pounds to himselfe, and 40. pounds to his wife or to his Atturney. Those three yeares being expired, I wrote to the Company for more Ministers, that I might come home, they sending none, I was constrained to stay: For the next yeare after the expiration of the Contract, viz. 1617. Wherein I was kept there in
much misery against my will, the people being in∣creased, and dispersed vp and downe the Maine in∣to eight seuerall Congregations, besides the Colo∣ny, hauing no Minister but my selfe to looke to them all, liuing more like a slaue then a Minister of Gods word, my seruant being detained from mee by the Gouernour, so as I was constrained to liue comfortlesse alone, and to goe vp & down the Iland for fire wood, and to bring it home vpon my backe, and then to goe from house to house for fire, and to goe with my pitcher through the Towne to the Pumpe for water, and to doe other base and seruile offices, very vnbeseeming a Minister of Gods word: notwithstanding all these discouragements, I did (through the helpe of God) preach constantly euery Thursday once, and euery Saboth twise, be∣sides Cathechising: therefore I hope that the Com∣pany being Honorable, will not offer lesse then 100. pounds for that yeare, considering that out of my loue to the Plantation, I did goe for 50. pounds per annum, when they were willing and did offer to giue to another 100. pounds who would not goe vnder 200. For the yeare 1618. I require 100. pounds be∣cause the Company by an Order of Court held the 24. of Iune did allowe for foure Ministers for each of them 100. pounds per annum, and notwithstan∣ding did leaue me there alone to beare the burthen of that yeare, without the helpe of any Minister, the people still encreasing, and the Ilands pestered
with lewde disordered persons taken, vp out of the streetes, out of New-gate and Bridewell. Some of the company doe say, that I was not alone, but had one Mr. Keath to helpe me: The truth is, that Mr. Keath was no Minister, neither was he any helpe but a great plague vnto me, and was like to be the ruine of vs all; when taking part with Mans∣field the Vsurper against the lawfull Gouernor', he was the first man that out of the Pulpit cried a Mansfield, a Mansfield, and so was like to set vs together by the eares, to cut one anothers throate, euen in the Church. The Copie of the order. THe Ministers shall be chosen here in a quarter Court, and the prouision for them there, is to bee made on this sort: There shall be erected 4. Churobes, and 4. Parsonages belonging to them, and shall haue 50. acres for each Parsonage, and vpon each of those Parsonage Gleabs, there shall be placed 4. men; taken off from the comon land, to occupie the same to halfes, for the behoofe of the Minister, and for the yearely maintenance of the Ministers. Ouer and aboue the houses and gleabs, it is ordered, that there shall bea apportioned to them out of the fruites of the earth, (growing and accruing out of their seuerall Parishes) a certaine portion, by way of charge vpon euery share or Farme, so as to make each Ministers allowance in that kinde, to the value of 100. pounds.
For the yeare 1619. I require 100. pounds per annum, because the Company in a Court held the 25, of February, agreed & order, that the said order touching the Minister, should be prosecuted: and for the payment of the Ministers wages, they layed 3. pence the pound on the Tobacco, and left me alone to beare the burthen of that yeare also, till the latter end of it, that one Mr. Lang was sent to assist me, who dyed there; vnto whose Widow, the Company haue paid after a 100. pounds per annum, according to the order. The Copie of the order. TAking into consideration, the defect of the Mi∣nistery in the Summer Ilands, hauing at this present but onely two, viz. Mr. Lewes and Mr. Bridges: and vnderstading that the said Mr, Bridges is not sufficient to execute his function, as they de∣sire: It was thought conuenient, for the educating the Inhabitants in the feare of God, that two able Ministers shall presently be sent to assist Mr. Lewes, whom they wish may bee desired to stay: And the said two Ministers, to bee seated and imployed vpon the Tribes; and for their maintenance, it is agreede that the former order shall bee prosecuted touching the Ministery, and what shall faile in that, of making
good to each of them 100. pounds per ann. that then there shall be an imposition of 3. pence the pound) and not aboue) laid there vpon the Tobacco, which shall returne, the occupiers being willing to beare halfe with the owners in the contribution: And touching Mr. Bridges, it is thought fit to send for him home vnlesse he please to stay as a priuate man, without sa∣lary from the Company. My Aduersaries doe say, that the Company, since my comming for England, haue paid their Moitye, and that I was to receaue the other in the Ilands; and that therefore the Company are not to pay it. To them I answere, that I neuer could haue foure men to manage the Gleabe-land accor∣ding to the order; and therefore, the people did not contribute there, but haue paid their Moitye in money heare, according to the imposition layed on their Tobacco. For the yeare 1620. wherein (finding my selfe to faint vnder the intollerable butthen with I was constrained to vndergoe) I came to England, to see if I could perswade some Ministers to goe ouer, and also to acquaint the Company with the grieuances of the people, which were ready to mutany: And also to acquaint them with the weake estate of the Ilands, most needfull to bee lookt into in time: I require a 100. pounds, ac∣cording
to their law. Because it was neuer heard, that a Minister in England, comming to London about the Important affaires of the Common∣wealth, had his liuing sequestted from him for that time. For the yeare 1621. Wherein I did returne to the Summer Ilands, the Company then in their generall Letters did desire the Gouernor to prouide for me, according to their orders; which he could not doe, because the Tobacco Haruest was past before their letters came; Therefore, I desire that the 100 pounds due for that yeare may bee made good some other way the poor people there hauing paid their moity in money here, according to the im∣position that was layed vpon their Tobacco. For the yeare 1622. I am satisfied because the Gouernor (according to the order) did leauie 600. weight of Tobacco, to make vp the Tobacco which was made that yeare on the gleabe land to the value of a 100. pounds starling. For the yeares 1623. & 1624. wherein the Company haue not as yet discharged me of my Cure, neither by order of Court, nor by warning, nor by any satisfaction; but haue kept me in sus∣pence, suing for my wages with much griese of heart, being much indepted, hauing no meanes to pay my depts, nor to relieue my selfe, my poore
Wife and Family, but by borrowing and going on the soore, so as my deptes are increased: The lease of my house which cost me 30. pounds, laied in pawne for 12. pounds, is forfeited: It is also forfeited to the Landlord for not paying the last quarters rent: a Bond of 60. pounds is forfeited for non paiment of 27. pounds. My poore aged wife whose heart is almost broke with grieuing, is mi∣serable weake and sicke, I hauing not a penny to buy her a loase of bread but as I borrow or begge; For these two yeares that haue beene so grieuous and chargeable vnto me, I will thankfully accept of what your Honours shall think fit, either by way of salary, because I am not as yet discharged of my Cure; or by way of dammage, in regard of my losses and hindrances. Concerning the agreement, which (as they say) was made at my returned to the Summer Ilands, viz. That if the Company would pay vnto my Wife 95. pounds, and giue me the transportation of two men, I would be therewith satisfied, and put the Company to no more charges: which agreement the Company did breake first, in refu∣sing to pay the said 90. pounds to my wife, which hath brought her to such want and griefe, as is like to cost her her life, and therefore I am not bound to stand to it, considering they brake it first.
Thus I haue deliuered vnto your Ho∣nours, the iust cause of my complaints, which in the bowels of CHRIST LESVS I commend vnto your honours charitable consideration, for speedy redresse of my wrongs. In Witnesse of the truth of all the premises, I haue hereunto sub∣scribed my name. LEVVES HVGHES.
