18507.207 48258125 173640
Nouember 18. Numb. 17. The Continuation of our Newes, from the 4▪ to the 17. of this instant: Containing amongst other things, these particulars. A great ouerthrow giuen to the King of Persia by the Turkes. A Letter written by the King of Sweden, being a second manifestation of his proceeding, & the reasons thereof, with seuerall passages concerning Germany, and of the Administrator of Hall, his preparation and successe in, and neere Magdenburg. The valour and courage of the Protestants in Bohemia, in resisting the tyranny of the Imperialists ouer their conscience. Some late passages of the King of Denmarke, and those of Hamborough, and of his good successe against the Hamburgers, and others. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1630.
THE CONTINVATION OF OVR WEEKELY NEWES. A Proclamation published by the King of Sweden, in the Dukedome of Meckelburg. GƲSTAƲVS ADOL∣PHVS by the grace of God, King of Sweden, &c. Be it knowne to all and euery one the Subiects, Inhabitants, Spirituall and Temporall Lords, Gentle∣men, Citizens and Countrey∣men, of what condition soeuer, none except, of the Dukedome of Meckelburg, that we haue vnderstood with extreme ad∣miration, and almost seene with astonishment, how, not a few of you haue most shamefully forsaken the Magistrates by God appointed ouer you, being your most ancient Princes, and lawfull hereditary Lords and Masters, Our deare Cousins, and Brothers, the Excellent, High, and Illu∣strious Princes, Adolph Frederic, and Iohn Albrecht, Brothers, Dukes of Meckelburg, &c, as soone as Generall Walstein assaulted them, with an Army against the lawes both of God and of Nations, against naturall right, and the Imperiall constitutions, and especially against the sworne ancient peace of Germany, without any iust cause, not con∣sidering,
no withstanding the expresse commandement of God, and your Oath and duty to the contrary, which did bind, (and should haue kept you for euer trusty) vnto your said Princes, and your owne Countrey: but more particu∣larly, to the blessed Euangelicall Communion of Germany: whereby you haue most vilely offended others, and giuen them occasion to doe the like: Yea, some of you haue en∣tred into the seruice of the said Walstein, most forgetfull, and disrespecting of your said Oath and duty, whereof your said naturall and lawfull Princes neuer did dismisse, nor acquit you. Now, for as much as we doe finde our selues bound and obliged by many reasons, both to commi∣serate, and to helpe the said Princes, that are so neere in blood vnto vs, against so detestable and damnable vniust oppressions and violences, by the vndoubted assistance of Almighty God, and to extend our Christian zeale so farre vnto them, that they may forthwith recouer fully what be∣longs vnto them: And whereas we, as a member of the E∣uangelicall Church, doe esteeme it our duty to haue a watchfull eye for the preseruation of the true sauing Reli∣gion, besides many other causes which are knowne to the world to moue vs to arme: and are now already (seeing we could obtaine no peace, nay no hope of any amiable accommodation from our enemies, vpon our manifold en∣deauours) here arriued in Meckelburg, by the happy get∣ting of the passage of Rubnitz, with a strong Army both of Horse and Foote: Therefore we doe by vertue of these our Royall Letters, and with all gracious earnestnesse ex∣hort you, and euery one of you, according to the duty of true, Christian, honest, worthy, and valorous Subiects, presently, and vpon sight hereof, to returne vnto the party of your Princes, the said Dukes of Meckelburg, as your Magistrates & Masters appointed and set ouer you by God and Nature, and being well armed (according to your abi∣lity and duty) to appeare and come in our Campe, or to other our Troopes, where they are most commodious for
you, either within, or neere this Dukedome, and withall, & likewise to persecute, imprison, bring to vs, assault, kill, or expell all such as haue, or pretend any command, title, or office vnder Walstein, or assist him and his in any manner, and vnder what colour soeuer: and to deale with them as with enemies and robbers of God, of his Church, and of your Country; omitting nothing what you owe by your duty. And whosoeuer of you shall not obey herein, but esteeme better, or preferre his life, goods and pleasures before his duty, honour, and saluation, those we intend to persecute & to punish without misse, with fire and sword, and to vse them worse then the said enemies, as faithlesse, periurous, and most disloyall Traytors, who are desertors of their Princes, & the greatest enemies to God, his Word, and Church: But to the obedient, we doe hereby royally and graciously offer our Royall protection, fauour, and grace. Giuen in our Royall Campe, in the chiefe quarter at Rubnitz, the 28. of September, Anno. Dom. 1630. Extract of a Letter from Hamburg, the 22. of October, Stilo veteri. 1630. The King of Sweden hath already taken diuers good places in Meckelburg, and lyeth now neere Rostock, but the Imperialists are very strong within. The Forces of the said King, which he left at the siege of Colberg, in Pomera∣nia, shew great courage, and are in hope to get the said Towne shortly. There marched lately 8. strong Compa∣nies of Crabats, intending to relieue that place as they were commanded, but comming neere, before they were awares of it, they were so welcommed by the Swedish, that the most part was slaine, and the rest forced to saue themselues by flight. The Imperiall Forces doe much encrease about the Country of Magdenburg, whereby the Administrators his Troopes are no more at such liberty to run the Country as they were before.
And cancerning the Duke Francis Charles of Low-Saxony (that was last winter here in London) hauing taken three or foure Townes of no great strength, and inten∣ding to take the Castle at Ratzenburg from the Imperia∣lists that lay in it, he was betrayed by his owne elder Bro∣ther Augustus, that was in the same Towne, who letting in secretly at night some Imperiall Forces, caused thereby all his Brothers men to be taken and vnarmed, and his brother the said Duke Francis Charles endeuouring to saue him∣selfe by flight, went in a Boate vpon the Elb: But the Impe∣rialists hauing planted some Ordnance to hinder the going away of any Boate, gaue fire, and shot off the head of the Dukes Pilote, whereby the Duke was staid, and (as we are informed) taken prisoner, and so carried vp in the Country towards the Emperour. The Imperiallists doe also daily encrease about Stoade, and in the Bishopricke Bremen, where they haue gathered all the Boates, to hinder any body to passe, and themselues haue past ouer the Riuer of Elb about 4000. men, intending (as we are informed) to fortifie and keepe all the passages that are betwixt Lubeck and Hamburg, whereby there is threatned a great dearth in those parts. From Rome the 14. of September. We learne from Spaine, that the same King hath caused the President of Mantua to vnderstand, that hee must depart thence, for there was no need of his presence any longer. The King also hath sent the West India President into Si∣uil, to see the vnlading of the Siluer Fleet: Some suppose it is by reason of some suspition concerning the distribution: other thinke, because the King intends to reserue the whole for himselfe, by reason of his extreme and vrgent present necessity. From Ʋenice the 17. of September. It is confirmed from Constantinople that the Turke hath obtained victory against the Persians, and slaine of them a∣bout 30000. and taken prisoners 3000. of the same a∣mongst
them their Lieutenant Generall. The Persian King can neither be found aliue nor dead. Hereupon the Persi∣ans, to draw the Turke to yeeld to a peace, doe proffer him the Citty Babylonia, and abundance of Silke. As yet is no∣thing concluded. From Millan the 17. of September. It is verified from Constantinople that the Iesuites haue a long time importuned the Grand Lord, to grant a slaugh∣ter, and vtter extirpation of all the Greeke Christians. The same was consented by him the said Great Turke, but there was no prefixed time prescribed for the execution of the same. Wherefore these bloodthirsty wretches were at a certaine time and place assembled together, to resolue when, and how this wicked enterprize should be put in practice. When they were sate in Counsell in this nature; such terrible Thunder-claps, and dreadfull Lightnings fell from Heauen, that their mischieuous intention was there∣by frustrated. The Thunder and Lightning did cast them downe one after another to the very ground, did fire and burne the very Cushions whereon they sate, & put them all into no small perplexity, feare, and astonishment. The Great Turke (who formerly had not willingly condescen∣ded to the cruell and bloody desseine) did openly professe, that he did palpably perceiue that such inhumane cruelty plotted against such innocent harmelesse people, was alto∣gether odious, abominable, & displeasing to the Almighty. Whereupon he consulted what ought to be done to the first brochers and inuentors of such villany; and at last concluded and resolued vpon, That such Miscreants should be punished with Lex talionis, that is, be serued with the same sawce. It was so effected: for all those persons, that had a hand in this businesse, as many as could be found out afterwards (being dispersed) were beheaded and put to death. From the Bishopricke of Minden the 29. of September. That which formerly you haue heard concerning the
Maiden, and desire to be resolued therein: it is most cer∣taine and true. The fourth day she lost her speech againe. She then receiued the holy Sacrament, and wept most bit∣terly: afterward she went from one roome and place to another, and did shew with signes vpon her fingers, that she should dye within 14. dayes. Which is verified from Wulffenbuttel to haue falne out according to her demon∣stration. She hath spoken most strange things, inditing and exhorting the people earnestly to serious repentance, to prayer, Christian duties, generally to the seruice and feare of God, for she said that great misery should befall those parts: Insomuch, that betweene Augusto and Galle, in the Country of Brunswick, vpon the Long Wiese, neere vnto Pethmar, should be seene a terrible fight held, that men should goe vp to the very knees in blood. After this should come a great mortality, and at last a peaceable and prosperous yeere. Which things, with many more she spake so elegantly, pathetically, and with such grace, that each one thought she was from her very Childhood brought vp vnto Eloquence; she was of about the age, be∣tweene 17. and 18. yeeres. From Regensburgh the 26. of September. His Maiesty of Hungaria and Bohemia, within few daies arriued here with certaine Lords and other Attendants: all his seruants werre arriued in most sumptuous manner, as also his Coachman. It is reported, he doth intend to goe to Memminger, and other Citties to view them, and then re∣turne backe againe hither. It is now certaine that the Prince Elector of Saxony (but without the consent and approbation of his Imperiall Ma∣iestie) doth set himselfe in open Armes, for the defence of his Country. All things here doe foretell and presage no∣thing but fearefull times of Warre and Combustion. From Regensburgh the 6. of October. Last Saturday did the Duke Augustus Paltzgraue by the Rhyne arriue here, and hath had audience with the Em∣perour.
We shall now shortly learne who shall be Gene∣rall for the ensuing War, as yet they are not agreed. It seemes there be diuers Competitors that stand for it. Another from Regenburgh, concerning the resolution of the Prince Elector of Saxony. Whereas his Imperiall Maiesty, and the Princes of the Dyet haue sent a speedy Messenger againe to the Duke of Saxony, summoning him to appeare himselfe in person, and so to yeeld his verdict and opinion for the resoluing what course to take against the King of Sweden and other Ene∣mies of the Empire, for the establishing and furtherance of the publicke good: This Messenger is returned backe with Letters to his Imperiall Maiesty from the said Elector, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh, wherein they doe heauily complaine, that Germany within these 12. yeeres is so spoyled and destroyed, the Constitutions of the Empire weakned, the Peeres impouerished and abused, the Liberties suppressed, that iust occasion and cause was offered to forraigne Prin∣ces and Potentates to haue an insight in the affaires of the Empire. Wherefore they for their parts doe desire the a∣bolishing of those Edicts and Proclamations concerning matters of Religion: Otherwise if his Imperiall Maiesty, and the Princes and Peeres of the Dyet and Vnion did not cease treating concerning matters of Religion, that they must not suppose that he and his adherents, and those that are ioyned with him in Religion, will take in hand to de∣fend and ensure them against all forraigne power and inua∣sion. From Old-Stattyn the 4. of October. Notwithstanding, the Peeres and Inhabitants haue very importunately desired his Maiesty of Sweden to besiege, and labour to incorporate both the passages of Gartz, and Griffenhagen: Their request was thus earnest in this be∣halfe, to the end that the Country might be freed from the excessiue tyranny, burning, and pillaging▪ &c. The reason why his Maiesty hath not yeelded to their desire as yet is,
because he hath another weighty Enterprize in hand, to the which end he hath arrested and stayed many Ships, and laden the same with Men, Munition, Victuals, Ordnance, and all necessaries. With this Fleet and Army he sailed very lately hence (the wind being fauourable) he passed by Wolgast, and went to Straelzondt, where he will land his Army, and march to Mechlenburgh. Before the departure of his Maiesty, came Letters to him from the 6. Electors, which Letters did answer vnto what his Maiesty formerly had written vnto them: whereupon they required his Maiesty to depart the Confines of the Empire, promising that they would vse all meanes possible to obtaine a Peace: But his Maiesty not regarding, but altogether slighting their propositions, did notwithstanding proceed, to prosecute his designe and enterprize, vnto which the Lord giue a blessed successe. The Imperialists being aduertised of the departure of his Maiesty of Sweden, fell vpon this Citty with all their possible force and might, and vpon the Sconces and other Forts, shouting, and crying, and making a fearefull noyse: but they were so receiued at their comming, that they were commpelled to retire with the losse of many men. This last weeke past, the Imperialists came with some Forces before Posewaldt, which the King of Swedens For∣ces had taken and besconced but 4. dayes before; they strongly assaulted this place, and at last set the same on fire, insomuch that those within were not able to abide the heate, and therefore not sufficiently defend themselues, in∣somuch that the Imperialists mastered the same, and haue miserably and cruely slaine Souldiers, Citizens, men, wo∣men, and children: they found in the same 14. Peeces of Ordnance, and other good commodities. By reason that the pestilence raignes hotly in Gartz a∣mong the Emperours Forces, they flye apace out of the Imperiall Army, vnto the Bishop of Hall. The Generall Field-marshall, Count Torqualto, the Generall Cordacke,
and the Lord Morando are all of them lately deceased. The Boores in Bohemia continue still in their rebellion, and will not agree to any composition, nor be brought vn∣to any reformation. Those that went to oppose and re∣sist them, are returned backe, by reason they found them so strong and well ordered, armed, and vnited together. Contents of a Letter written from the chiefe Quarter of the Administrator, at Ouerfurt. Nicholas Becke chiefe Lieutenant of the Administrator of Hall, hath incorporated the whole Earldome of Ouer∣furt againe, and brought the same into state as formerly, and beset the same with very able Horse, and Footmen. The Administrator himselfe is daily expected. Our Horse∣men haue earnestly laid in waite for Captaine Hans van Casselen, who went to leuy some Forces against vs; he had great quantity of moneys with him, also 10. Patents to leauy some other Companies, for the Commander, Gene∣rall Becker. They met with him at Artem, at the Dam, and there assaulted him; and since he would accept of no Quar∣ter, they shot him, and kild him, with two other Comman∣ders. They haue also taken the Bagage and goods of the Ge∣nerall Olueltz, which formerly were reserued in the Fort Mansvelt. Also, the Ritmaster Enhuysen was taken lately (accompanied with certaine braue Horsemen) by the Re∣giment of Holok, in which exploit they obtained very great booty, and haue kept him and his Company priso∣ners. From Straesburgh the 4. of October. In the Dukedome of Wurtenburgh are already taken aboue 8. Monasteries and Cloisters, the rest will also shortly be dispatched. There is no great strength vsed, neither doe they meet with any great resistance. All the moueables are taken away, and the buildings left empty; Men doe resort hither and thither into diuers Bisho∣pricks.
From Haluerstadt the 29. of September. The Bishop of Halls Souldiers, as also those of the City Maeghdenburgh commit great insolencies, fly out day and night, fetch all things vnto them by hooke and crooke; Hereupon the Regiment of Generall Hulikens, with some other Forces, hath commanded to haue an eye to them. Last Wednesday they encountred with them neere vnto Germers-leuco: on Hulikens side was slaine one Captaine, one Lieutenant, one Ritmaster, and diuers o∣ther Officers, amongst the rest one Ripensteyn, with many men more. Those of Maghdenburgh had some men in Ambush, so that they did greatly endamage the Imperialists. The Maeghdenburgers came not off without sustaining great losse. Among those that were slaine on this Bishops side, were found 15. Citizens of Egelen. The Frontiers there∣abouts betake themselues to the Bishops Forces, as also most of the Inhabitants thereabouts, doe flye with all their goods and Moueables into Maeghdenburgh. The Forces about Wulffenbuttel doe begin to stay the Corne-waggons, which trauell toward Brunswick. Now also comes tydings, that those of Maeghdenburgh haue defeated and slaine the Crabates which were come into Wandsleuen. From Brunswicke the 4. of October. The Imperialists in Wulffenbuttel doe begin to come vpon this City with great threatnings. They conuey away all the Corne which is in this Citty. The Commander himselfe lately came hither, and requires a plaine Catago∣ricall answer, whether or no this Citty is resolued to ad∣uenture body and goods for the Emperour? he demaunds of them an act of assurance of their hand-writing, for con∣firmation of the same. Furthermore, that this Magistracy shall not suffer any Souldiers to be leauied for the Admi∣nistrator and Bishop of Hall. They therefore doe imprison all those Commanders that come hither for that purpose.
For the first point, it is resolued to make knowne the Proposition of the Emperours demaund vnto all Officers and Companies, and all manner of Trades. For the latter we did excuse our selues, insomuch as we could not as yet heare of any Forces were to be leuied. From Hamb. the 5. of October. Our Legate, who was dispatched to the Emperour is not as yet returned, so that we cannot tell whether his Im∣periall Maiesty will vndertake the affaires of this Citty, yea, or no. In the meane time his Maiesty of Denmarke is Master of the Riuer Elue, he suffers all manner of Ships and Barkes to passe to and fro, but those that ascend the Riuer must pay toll, as much as the Hollandish Conuoy doth amount vnto. His Maiesty of Denmarke hath markt the Beacons with his owne marke, and set them vpon the drought. He causeth great paines to be taken about the Blockhouse which is raised in the Hauen S. Margarita, betweene the Steur and Gheluckstadt, where he will com∣mand the Riuer Elue. As soone as this worke is ended, his Maiesties great Ships will againe goe downe to Cop∣penhagen. The Magistracy of this Citty finding the char∣ges excessiue and intolerable, haue cashierd most of their Ships and Men; neither will the Commonalty yeeld any more Contribution. It seemes that our (formerly stout) Mariners haue now lost their courage; for a while since, 5. of our Ships fled from two of the Kings Ships, not da∣ring to resist them, or make shot against them. This day came tydings that his Maiesty is gone towards Rensburgh, to what end we doe not yet know. We vnderstand that a Dyet is to be kept there, to consult concerning the affaires betweene his Maiesty and this Citty. It should seeme that the Duke of Holsteyn is very diligent to further this place. From Hamburgh the 10. of October. Since his Maiesty of Sweden his departure from Stat∣tyn, we haue not heard much newes: Onely we doe in∣stantly receiue tydings, that his Maiesty of Swedens For∣ces
which were leuied hereabouts, haue taken Lauwen∣bergh, Winsen, and Boitsenbergh, and that all the Imperi∣alists haue yeelded themselues into the seruice of the King of Sweden. It is without question that Rostick and Wis∣mar will be besieged, for his Maiesty hath taken with him all the Shallops that were at Straelsondt. The Alliance betweene Sweden and Pomerania is now effected: Stattyn is to contribute very shortly 50000. Ryxdollers, and the wole Country 50000. more. They haue consented to yeeld the King for water, poundage 3. and a helfe per Centum. From Leypsich the 5. of October. We vnderstand from Berlyn, that certaine Physicians are to goe to the Emperours Army neere vnto Gartz, to cure the Field-marshall Torqualto, who lyes deadly sicke. We are certified that his Maiesty of Sweden is gone to Mechelenburgh with those Forces, which from Stattyn he conducted with them, to besiege the passages to Triptau, in that Dukedome. Newly comes tydings that his Maiesty hath taken Colburgh. From the Emperours Army is written, that certaine 100. Crabates roamd before the Swedish Army, 1000. of the Swedish Forces drew forth vpon them, the Cra∣bates made shew as if they would flie, whereupon the Swedish did prosecute them the more earnestly: but they were so surprized by the Crabates, and other of the Imperiall Forces which lay in Ambush, that they were constrained to retire with great losse, of 500. Horse, and two Ritmasters, and the chiefe Lieutenant imprisonned. From Bergen ap Zoom the 5. of October. By reason the Dunkerkes are very strong at Sea, being 27. of them in number, those of Sealand haue sent di∣uers men of Warre against them. The Dunkerkes daily doe much hurt at Sea, they haue lately taken a Ship comming from Saint Malo, richly laden, and well mounted with 10. Peeces of Ordnance,
and 4. or 5. more they tooke in the Maza going from Eng∣land. One Dunkerke among the rest did a notable exploit, he met with one sayling to Nantes with great store of Aqua vitae. This Dunkerker proffered to conuoy him thither, being (as he counterfeited) a States Man of War, he put forth a Flag of Rotterdam: hauing sailed with him one whole day, he inuited the Shipper aboord the next day, and feasted him. This Master of the Ship presented vnto the Dunkerke a Rundlet of Aqua vitae, and whilest they were making merry together, the Dunkerke tooke him prisoner, and caused him to write to the Pilot for more Aqua vitae with the Boat which was full of men. So they tooke occasion to boord the Ship, and brought the same into Dunkerke. We vnderstand that the Princesse of Orange hath in some measure recouered her health at Spa: she is now at the Bath at Aken; she is not long to remaine there, but is very shortly expected in the Hage. The Dunkerkes thought to haue made a snatch at the Muscouian Ships, but fell short: betweene 40. and 50. of the same were lately safely brought into Enchuysen. This weeke were two prisoners apprehended at Rot∣terdam, which were false Coiners, a man and a woman. The Coine which they counterfeited was Scottish nine pences. English sixe pences, and halfe Spanish Reals, of 24 Stiuers. The Pastor Iohn Otten of the vpper Church at Em∣brike hath lately beene examined: he hath confessed his treason plotted against Schenck-fconce, and what he had written to Graue Hendricke vanden Bergh to that pur∣pose. At first he would not confesse or produce any of his Confederates: but afterwards being rackt, he named diuers, and demonstrated how this exploit should haue beene put in execution. A certaine Ship belonging to the West-India Com∣pany, met with a Spanish Carauell, and brought the same
into Holland, the same was laden with these Commo∣dities. 18000. Buck-hides. 5. Elephants teeth, 2. Pound and one hallfe Ambigrise. 1. Great siluer platter. 207. Spanish Reals of 8. 2600. Pounds Talck. 750. Oxe hides. 94. Spanish leather hides drest. 1. Bag of vnknowne goods. 2. Barrels of Sugar. 136. Testoens. There is a Conspiracy discoued at Bommell, one of the Traytors is taken prisoner, who hath confessed that he had sounded the Moat, and giuen intelligence thereof vnto the Enemy. Letters of Liccorne make mention that those of Ar∣giers, and Tunis will not enter fartheer into Alliance with the States, nor make peace with them. Their Forts made shot at Captaine Cleuter, who rode vpon those Coasts, who answered them againe, which being heard in Argiers, they presently ranne out into the Sea after Captaine Cleu∣ter at last, 30. Ships of them in number, insomuch that he had much adoe to escape. FINIS.
