B4332 E455_9 R205015 99864461 116690
THE SMOAK OF THE Temple Cleared, through the LIGHT OF THE SCRIPTURE. By the unworthiest of al the Ministers of Christ Jo. Brayne. JAMES 4.5. Do ye think the Scripture saith in vain, the Spirit that dwel∣leth in us, lusteth enviously? CHAP. 1.21. Wherefore lay aside all filthiness and superfluitie of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingraffed word, which is able to save your souls. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Vere, at the upper end of the Old Bayley. MDCXLVIII.
The Epistle Dedicatory. TO the Saints of God in all the world, especially the Godly Ma∣gistrates and Ministers of this Land, and the Kingdom of Scotland: To you do I earnest∣ly desire of God grace and Peace may be day∣ly multiplyed; beseeching each of you in your severall places, to have especially care of preser∣ving the peace of the people of God, knowing how easie a matter it is to occasion a War, Re∣ligion being made the ground thereof: How were the Heathens stirred up to fight for their Idol-gods; how did Papists fight for Popery? And its not long since we had a War for Epis∣copacie; the Lord grant our War end not in a War for Presbyterie or Independencie. I have written this ensuing Tract without leaning to any partee, desiring a friendly acceptation of al; desiring, if possibly, to have here by the truth discovered, which is onely able to unite us in
Iudgement, and make us one, which War can never do, but rather bring us all to nothing; and remember Christ dyed to prevent the death and destruction of Saints, and God is stiled the preserver of men, whom we ought in this to imitate: let us lay aside all affected∣ness to any way of our own, and diligently search after truth, though never so much con∣trary to our selves, our way and practise sub∣mitting to the way of God in the Scriptures, as that onely is to be walked in, though never so difficult to be erected, in which onely is peace and Righteousness to be found; and if there be any thing contained in the ensuing Tract, that may farther the ends proposed in the Church of God, I shall greatly rejoyce, for which I shal earnestly seek the Lord night and day, as in du∣ty I am bound to do, and rest, A most unworthy servant, yet glad to do any service in the Church for Jesus sake and the Gospel. J. Brayne.
To the Reader. BEloved Friend, the desire of the Saints Peace and Love to the truth, especially moved me to write of that Subject that follows, which as Johns Doctrine seems to be new to the world, which I suppose on tryall thou wilt finde to be that truth, which was from the beginning, which though not so cleer at present, yet by this, God may be pleased to raise up some more learned godly and Judicious man to write more fully and cleerly, of the Comfort and consolation of all Saints: I desire thee not to carp at the imperfectness of the Cop∣pie, it is very rude and indigested; having other affaires I could not attend the reading of the Copy after written, being written in much haste, nor was there any at the presse able to correct the faults committed in the writing, most of which shall be in some kind amended in the Errata; thus desiring thy favour, thy in∣crease of grace, and knowledge, with thy prayer for me and the whole Church of God, I rest, Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ to do thee all service alwayes, J. Brayne.
The Principall things Contained in the ensuing Treatise are, 1 THat there is a Church Ministry pertaining thereunto onely. 2. This Ministry consists of Apostles, Pro∣phets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers. 3. Three of these onely are to be a continuing stand∣ing Ministry in the Church, to the end of the World. 4. There is a Ministry which is to be officiated out of the Church, and prepares for the Church Mini∣stry. 5. This is proved by the practise of the Church of Corinth, by the Epistles written to Rome, Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse. 6. By the Church at Jerusalem, which was the mother Church, and pattern of Churches, the rest for the most part being imperfect, and, as the Apostle saith, wanting things to be put in Order. 7. Of the compleat Government left by Christ to be exercised in the Church, representing Monarchy, which Bishops took up; Aristocracie, which Pres∣byterians took up; Democracie, which Indepen∣dents took up. 8. The opening of severall Scriptures, as the Parables
of the Tares, and of the Fish, usually applyed to maintain mixt Congregations, which rightly ap∣plyed make much against them, and that of Acts 15. usually brought to prove and maintain the Depen∣dency of Churches. 9. That there is to be a combination of teaching and Ruling Elders, but these to consist onely of the Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher, with their other helps in Government. 10. That these onely are sufficient for the whole work of the Church-Ministry, the edifying of the body, and the perfecting of the Saints, is proved. 11. This is illustrated by the Vision of Ezechiel, con∣cerning the Temple, which is not yet fulfilled, but now neer to be erected, in a spirituall way. 12. Something is spoken concerning the places of administrating the publick administrations in the distinct societies of the Saints, as spoken of in the Gospel.
ERRATA. PAge 2. line 2. subjecting one. P. 3. l. 21. officiated. P. 5. l. 3. for these, r. their ministry. P. 6. l. 2. r. , l. 31. . P. 8. l. 18. , l. 22; . P. 9. l. 10. I shal leave. l. 30. immediate. P. 10. l. 6. private. P. 12. l. 1. as E∣vangelist. P. 19. l. 24.  l. 6. the manner. P. 22. l. 14. how they ought to be diversly. P. 23. l. 24. and in. P. 25. l. 13. the work l, 27. but pulled. l. 37. three admininistrations. P. 28, l, 6. baptism l. 14. Apostle, l, 29, though he. P, 32, l, 2, if he, l, 14, thy ministry. P, 33, l, 7, (publike) is to be left out, l, 33, are not exercised. P, 35, l, 8, by all means. P, 36, l, 36, priority. P, 37, l, 15, many scores. P, 41, l, 9, a threefold cord. P, 43, l, 35, confirm as some say P, 44, l, 8, rent, l, 37, on Christ as on. P, 46, l, 16, things which may be done successively may easily be granted. P, 47, l, 3, (of and in) are not to be read.
THE Smoak of the Temple EXPEL'D By the Light of the Scriptures. GOD above all blessings blessed the World in the Gospel, to which was added the Ministry of it, the exercise whereof the chief Founder of the Gen∣tile Churches hath written unto us, Eph. 3.9. say∣ing, That to him grace was given, to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which hath been hid in God from the beginning of the world: In which are intimated; 1. That the fellowship of the mystery was a hidden thing, and not the mystery only, which is the Salvation it self, but the means of it; and the manner how the fellowship of this mystery is to be injoyed by the Saints in the Church, is a great mystery. 2. That the discovery of this mystery was, and is, only from, and by, the Apostles. 3. That none can see, until they are made to see. 4. That it is so discovered in the Word, when God shall re∣veal it, it shall be plain for all to see that have eyes to see, or shall be made to see. 5. The truth of this is clearly manifested in respect of the irre∣concilablenes that at the present is between men of differing judg∣ments, which evidence, that the light is not so clear nor con∣vincing
of either party, as to prevail with the spirits even of spiri∣tual men to a subjection to the other; which here the Apostle shews, in the light revealed by him in the Scriptures, shall be such, that all men shall see it, yea and though they do not see it, they shal be made to see; so that there is a very commanding power, in the light to be revealed, to reveal the way of Jesus Christ to the Church. An Objection hence may be made, that it is true indeed it was hid from the world in the Ages past, but revealed now. Answer. It was indeed revealed by the Apostles, and practised by them in the then Churches; but when God hid the Church in the wilderness, then the fellowship of the mystery came to be hid with it; for in the hiding of the one the other came to be hid, which is to continue so hid 1260 years. Now, as God hid Moses body, no man could possibly find it ever after: And as God himself is said to dwel in inapproachable light, so the way of God, in the Church, is in the Scriptures hid as in inapproachable light which cannot be approached unto until God give a man the sight thereof. First, it was said to be hid in God before revelation; now it may be said to be hid in the Word, to which we are to apply our selves for direction and discovery. Now the chief way, as I apprehend, for the discovery of the fellowship of this mystery by us, will be by a finding out of the clearest & most apparent means of publick communion in Church-dispensations, which is that I shall, by Gods assistance, endevor to manifest in the ensuing tract. The ground whereof I take from Ephesians 4.11, 12. where it is written, Christ ascended up on high, and gave some, Apostles; some, Prophets; some, Evangelists; some, Pastors, and Teachers. 1. This clearly shews, that to the right constituting of every true Church there ought to be set up these several Administrations therein. 2. The words of the 12. verse prove the necessity and end of it. 1. They are for the perfecting of the Saints, without which the Saints cannot be perfected, but are left to continue in imper∣fection.
2. They are for the work of the Ministry, so that the Ministry cannot be performed by any in the Church, but by these. 3. They only, without any other added to them, serve suffici∣ently for the work which Christ left to be done in the Church by the Ministry. 4. Without all these the work of the Ministry cannot be done, but will be imperfectly administred in the Church. 5. The failing of these Administrations prove to become failings in the Church, among whom these Administrations ought to be exercised; so that the Church cannot be without them, no more then a ship without a Pilot, or a Child without a Nurse to feed it; now that we may see how the Church hath been, or ought to be provided for, is to be judged hence. 1. As under Episcopacy, it is wel known to all, there ere abun∣dance of supernumerary Officers and Offices pertaining to Eccle∣siastical affairs, whose names were not written in the Gospel-Calender, which gave just occasion to the adversary to except against them. 2. I suppose Presbytery to be as far too short; the whole frame of the Ministerial Government being swallowed up in one office, and officiated by one person: Here I desire my Brethren, the Ministers, that differ in judgment from me, and occasioned the writing of this rude and indigested thing, to consider of; 1. Where one man may lawfully excercise the several Admini∣strations, before specified, to be in the Church by an ordinary Call. 2. How necessary it is the Church should injoy her differing Administrations and Administrators, and what enemies they were who took them down in the Church. 3. How unwarrantable a thing it is, to set up that in the Church for a Church-Ministry, which God hath not set up to rule by Au∣thority, not derived from Jesus Christ over the family of God. I know many of you may say to me, as the Pharisees to the blind man, Wilt thou teach us? Brethren, I gladly acknowledg my unworthiness, weakness, wickedness, and will be yet more and more vile, then man can make me, for the Gospels sake and Church of Christ, whose servant I have made my self to be in the Ministry of the Gospel, though every way unworthy, and thence account my
self engaged to witness to the truth, and plead her cause, though my sufferings abound thereby, Jesus Christ witnessing with my own conscience, my purposes are not but for the discovery of the truth, and the knowledg of the way of Christ in the Churches. 3. In the true Church are found all these and no other Admi∣nistrations then are mentioned by the Apostle in the Scripture be∣foresaid. Quest. What, shal we have no Church nor Church-Ministry, until we have new Apostles? Ans. New Apostles there are never to be. Quest. How shall these then be in our Churches? Resp. These being ordained by Jesus Christ to be in the Church, for the ends and purposes before proposed, must be in it some way to do this, though not personally, either ordinarily or extra∣ordinarily. 2. That way which Moses and the Prophets were in the Jews Church under the Law, that way are the Apostles and Prophets in the Gospel Church under the Administrations thereof, Luk. 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; so it is plainly proved, though the Jews had them not with them per∣sonally, yet they had them with them ministerially. 3. Hence is it said, Moses was preached in their Synagogues every Sabbath; so is Pauls doctrine taught by faithful Teachers, as if Paul taught it in the Church. 4. Things being fully considered, we may conceive the Apostles to be more fully with us then any before, in some kind. 1. The Epistles not being written to any one Church, nor all written until after Pauls time. 2. After they were written, they were not suddenly collected for the publick use of the Church. The second Church-Administration is that of Prophets. 1. By Prophets, here I understand not those that wrote before Christs time only, but those since also, as the Revelations written by John, and Pauls Prophesies and Peters; these all were for the edifying of the Church, and without whom the Church could not be: Now as Christ said to the Church, before the Gospel-Ministry, concerning Moses and the Prophets, so the Apostle
saith of Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians 2.20. We are, saith the Apostle, builded on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; so that these are in and to the Church as a foundation to a house. 2. If the Apostles and Prophets were not in the Church, what means of Ministry were there left unto the Church to edifie it in the world by? 3. Is there not their work in our Ministry working with us now still as heretofore? 4. Are not these the ground of all other publick Church-Admi∣nistrations? so that this being pul'd down all the rest comes down after. Hence I may say of these as the Spirit of God on another occa∣sion said, They being dead, yet speak; they are not silent now they are dead. The third Administration is an Evangelist. 1. Some think this office ceased in those that wrote the Go∣spels; but that is clearly evinced by the Scriptures before men∣tioned, Eph. 2.20. We are builded on the Apostles and Prophets, but not on the Evangelists: Now were those to be builded on, would the Apostle not have set them out unto us to be so, or should those be left out in the building? 2. Mark and Luke are no where called Evangelists in Scrip∣ture, which did write the Gospels, and those which wrote them not are called Evangelists, as Philip, Acts 21.8. Titus and Timothy. 3. The work of an Evangelist is a preaching work, 2 Tim. 4.5. Do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry; and differs from that which Mark and Luke did, as is thought, concerning the Gospels, who only wrote them as dictated by the Apostles. Now this work being not extraordinarily in the Church, as can be made to appear by any work remaining in the Church, for its publick edification; it remains that it ought to be in the Church ordinarily for the Churches edification. 2. That it is an ordinary work pertaining to an ordinary stand∣ing office in the Church to remain to the worlds end, ap∣pears;
1. From Rom. 10.5. How beautiful are the feet of  those that Evan∣gelize peace, that Evangelize good things, which without questi∣on is no other but the ordinary office of that part of Ministry in the Church, thus in 1 Pet. 1.12. those things are now reported to you, by them which have Evangelized; which Evangelizing was no other then what is proper to the ordinary Ministry; for it was no other then the applying of the grace prophesied of, to be under the Gospel-Ministry, to the then times in which it was administred. Object. Were not Timothy and Titus Evangelists, and have we not their Epistles? Resp. The Epistles written to them were the Apostle Pauls Epistles, not theirs; so that they left nothing thereby to the Church as theirs. 2. They left in their name of Evangelist this unto the Church, that there was such on office pertaining to the Church-Mini∣stry in the primitive times, and that that office ought to be still in the Church for edification. Chrysostom, on the words aforesaid, Ephes. 4.11. tels us of walking Evangelists, and after of others; Qui occupabantur cir∣ca unum duntaxat locum, ut Timoth. & Titus; alias, ex hoc loco subiectio & praelatura colligi non potest; which is, that other E∣vangelists were imployed about one only place, as Timothy and Titus; or hence subjection and prelature cannot be gathered. For the walking Evangelist, I suppose, there were none in the Church Authoritatively, but as Acts 14.7. some men Evange∣lized, being by persecution dispersed, did where ever they came, out of the gracious apprehensions they had in their hearts of the excellency of Christ, exalt him to others, by which they may be said to Evangelize, Mat. 11.5. , the poor are Evangelized. So that, I suppose, there is much difference be∣tween one speaking, as Evangelized, or taught by an Evangelist, and an Evangelist teaching one to be Evangelized. The Conclusion hence concerning the Evangelists Ministry may be this: 1. That that Church which is without the ordinary admini∣stration of an Evangelist, is an imperfect Church, and imper∣fect Church-Ministry.
2. That if Moses were careful to do all things according to the pattern in the Mount, concerning the shadows of the Gospel∣grace, then there ought to be much more respect had by us now concering the dispensation of the word contained in the Gos∣pel: Moses left not out a ring or an ouch, but made all accord∣ing to the pattern; for which faithfulness of his God left him commendations in the word, to be preacht in the Church to the end of the world; and why? but that his fidelity may make us faithful, and shew how God accepts it in whomsoever he finds it; now of what concernment this is to Magistrate and Mini∣ster, may appear to all, in these times especially. 3. I cannot but conceive, that when the way of God comes clearly to be revealed, God will gather up the Spirits of his Saints into a gracious union again, though now divided: When the controversie about a right Ministry, about making Members, and seperation, and combination in the Ministry, will be taken all up and ended. The fourth Officer in the Church is the Pastor. 1. That this Office ought to be in the Church, is confessed; but what it is, and how to be imployed in the Church, that is not agreed on. 2. If this be not known to us, no wonder then if not the E∣vangelists, which was an office tending more fully to perfecti∣on. Some say the Pastors Office is to expound Scriptures, others to exhort; this is no distinct Office in our meetings, every one doing the same in his dayly Ministry; so that this part of Mi∣nistry we have not in the Church, or at least, not distinctly, as in the Ministry in the Apostles times used in the Church. 3. I suppose, that both Evangelists and Pastors lost their place with the Churches losing her visibility, & ever since have been in that lost estate. Cant. 5.7. it is said, the watchmen beat her and wounded her, and those that kept the walls took away her vayl, which signified, as some conceive, that persecution the Church should undergo under the Gospel by persecutors, and then how Antichrist should take away her vail, depriving her of her Ornaments, which Christ had left her to be adorned with in the world; then the restoring of which there cannot be a
work more admirable to be done by Angels or men, by the godly Magistrate or Minister. The fifth Officer, is the Doctor or Teacher, which office is not now so executed amongst us, as under the first Institution, it being not done in a Church way. Object. Then it may seem hence we have no Ministry. Resp. I say not, we have no Ministry, but no Church-Mini∣stry; for besides these, there was a Ministry which prepared for the Church, but was not of the Church-Ministry. 1. It went before the Collection of Churches; as John the Baptist, who went before to prepare for Christs Ministry, and to this it is Christ alludes; saying, that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the least ministerial Officer in the Kingdom of Heaven, was greater then he; which implies Johns Ministry was not of the Kingdoms Ministry. 2. Christ himself, before the calling of his Disciples, and the constituting of his Church, did officiate this Ministry, Mat. 4.17. He is said , to preach or to commend the King∣dom of God to men, which was to prepare for a Church, and after that was gathered, then he Teacheth and Evangelizeth, Acts ult. 31. Paul was said to be  preaching, sc. to prepare the people, and then being prepared, he is said also  to teach them; these two are distinct things, and are to be performed by divers administrations. 3. Christ did, as I may so say, this part of Ministry in refer∣ence to his Disciples Ministry, which was to succeed him, who were indeed to erect the Kingdom State to the world, which before Christs death was not to be set up; his death putting an end to the other administration: hence our Saviour speaks, as unto a people out of Church-Society, Mat, 12. the whole Chapter. 4. In the Scripture, the order observed by the Holy Ghost in the expression is to be observed, the Lord placing preaching before teaching, the one being a Ministry to be communicated to all, the other only to those that are in Church-fellowship, and of the communion of Saints, and always followeth the other.
Now for this Ministry, as well as the other, ought to be con∣tained in the world still, for though the Apostle tells us, that the other of Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers belong only to the Church for the edifying of the Church; yet he saith not, this ought not to be exercised for the preparing men for that other Ministry of the Saints, as the Temple stones squared before brought to the Temple to be layd on the building. Quest. If our Ministry established amongst us at present be a Church-Ministry? Resp. I shall speak this to all that are godly and wise to judg of by what hath been said: I do not deny God hath a Church by this Ministry, that now is in this Kingdom, but is an invisible one only. Quest. What our Ministry hath done then amongst us? Resp. It hath only prepared for a Church. Object. It may be, some will say, the Ministers now do all these in their places. Resp. But by what warrant we do these things, were very good for us all to consider of. 2. How, or to whom to apply the words of James, I know not, unless in this kind, that some men, then as we now did un∣dertake the dispensations of divers administrations among the Jews, James 3.1. be ye not  many teachers, (consider the Reason rendred that seems to clear it) knowing we shall receive the greater condemnation, and ye know Timo∣thy a man highly commended for gifts and grace, yet undertakes it not until he be called thereto by Paul; he bidding him do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Tim. 4. Object. But it may be said, Paul executeth all these. Resp. 1. That which the Apostle did by Inardiat call and war∣rant from Christ is one thing, we of the contrary are forbid∣den it. 2. The Apostles were to do all, to teach others to do it when others were fit to do it, then they put them to do it also. That Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers are three distinct pub∣like offices, and are executed in every Church, is proved by the Epistles written to the Churches.
1. Rome, a Church constituted according to the Gospel frame, Chap. 12. ver. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us; where prophesie, let us prophesie, or Ministry, let us wait on Ministry, or exhortation, let us wait on exortation, or he that teacheth, on teaching: It is without all question, the Apostle speaks here of publike Ministry, and of pri∣vate Christian duty, and only of Church-Ministry. 1. They are joyned subordinately to prophesie a publike duty. 2. They are commanded to wait on them. 3. Each man is injoyned a waiting on his own work only, and not others. 4. The Apostle saith they are differing gifts. 5. Ruling, a publike office follows them, and then private du∣ties after that again; and whereas the Apostle saith, they are di∣verse gifts: I cannot but think, that if ever there were a Church rightly constituted in this Kingdom, greater gifts would be be∣stowed on men, then any have been since the Apostles time, whence once they came to be imployed to that end which the Lord or∣dained them. I grant indeed, that in the Scripture all the Church-Ministry is set out oft times by one word in Scripture, as  and the like, but the Scriptures are not then wanting to prove the truth of this doctrine, for these are in the plural num∣ber, signifying, God had respect to more then one Teacher in a Church. 2. That the three are but one compleat Ministry. 3. That they all belong but to one Church. 4. That what the one doth the other doth, but in a different kind. 5. That superiority, was not to be sought for of them, nor to be amongst them. Object. This is a way never to be errected; in these times we have not one Minister for a Church, you say we should have three. Resp. What may the world have said, when there were but twelve Apostles only, yet they set up many Churches in a little time against many enemies, and in the time of Heathenish darkness.
1. God will not be wanting to his own Ordinance. 2. Five men, in this way, may do more in a City, then fifteen now do. 3. Though this was scarce done in the Country villages, in the Apostles time, yet now in many places, the Ministry having pre∣vailed so with the people, they are far more meet hereto now, then otherwise they could have been, or the villagers were, in Pauls time; for the Apostles at first erected the Churches in the chief Cities of the world, as appears by their Epistles, being places in which the greatest confluence of people were; and hence the villagers were called Pagani quasi ex pagis, the villages of many Continents being a long time ignorant of the Gospel after it had been preached in the Cities thereof. The third Church I shall now speak of is that of Corinth. 1 Cor. 12.4. The Apostle tells us that there are diversities of gifts; and after tells what these gifts are, in these words, To one is given the word of knowledg, to another the word of wisdom. 2. Lest any should appropriate these to one individual person, ordinarily he distinguished them, and saith, to one, and to another, and therefore not to the same man. 3. Lest any should think these were meant of gifts given to private men only, he saith, That these divers gifts have also divers administrations added to them, which is properly applyed to pla∣ces of office and trust. 4. In Vers. 7. the Apostle saith, The Spirits manifestation is given to every man to profit withall: shewing that the Church by the help of the Spirit, had the benefit of all these gifts in the several Administrations of the Gospel. 4. To these several Churches add the course of our Saviour, who gave us an example herein, Mark 6.7. When he did send forth his Disciples he sends them forth two by two to preach the Gospel, which proves the work of the Ministry not to be a single work. Object, Christ sends forth two only, you say there should be three.
Resp. 1. None was fit to officiate the Evangelists while that Christ was alive, and this he was , I remember not that ever the Apostles, during Christs being on earth, were ever said to Evangelize: Christ was that to them they are now to us; they teaching what they received from him, as we teach what we received from them. 2. The time of gathering Churches was not yet come; they, during Christs being on earth, said only as John, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. 3. They were but to prepare for the Kingdom, until, upon the Lords Ascension, they should have sent down on them the Spirit of grace to inable them thereunto. 4. The compleat Church was not to be, until the world, or time to come, so called among the Jews, which was that time which was to succeed Moses Ministry, and therefore as the Church was not to be compleat so was not the Ministry. And here I cannot pass by the common acceptation of the word Church; it was gross when only taken for the places of Assembly, and indeed it is but little better as taken for our mixt assemblies. Again others they prove their Church to be a true Church from the right Administration of Sacraments, and true preaching of the Word: but where, or in what society, this is done, as yet I am altogether ignorant of. But that the Scripture holds out is clear. 1. Three distinct persons to be teachers in the Church. 2. Distinguished by distinct Appellations, as Evangelist, Pastors and Teacher. 3. Qualified with differing gifts. 4. Have several Administrations committed to them to exercise their gifts in. 5. That all these are but one compleat Ministry, belonging to one Church only. Question is, How all these can be exercised in one Church? Resol. The Church of the Jews, being the Mother Church, and above all most excellently constituted; I shall propose that for a further example to clear up this mystery, to help us whereunto, it
is necessary we make use of those words in Galat. 2.9. where it is agreed amongst the Apostles that James, Cephas and John be Mi∣nisters to the Jews, set out by the Circumcision, and Paul and Baritabas for the Gentiles. James is here placed for Evangelist, Peter for Pastor, John for the Teacher of the Jews Church. James, who was the Evangelist, whose work it was to lay the foundation of the Church among the Jews, as Paul among the Gentiles, writes his Epistles to such as were without the Church to prepare for it in the first place. 1. As appears by the word Synagogue, where the Gospel was not preached but as to a mixt multitude, as appears in all the teach∣ings of the Apostles mentioned in the Acts, and is spoken of in Scripture in opposition to Church-society, Acts 13.43.  the Congregation be dismissed. 2. As by the nature of the doctrine appears, he calls upon some to wash their hands and cleanse their hearts, to put away out∣ward and inward corruptions with which they were defiled: In the 5. Chap. he threats wo against them for oppressing the labor∣ers: James 5.19, 20. he writes to unconverted persons. 3. As appears by the dedicating his Epistie, he writes it not to any by the name of a Church, as men called out of the world, in communion with Christ; not to such as were Saints, nor to such as were called of God, nor to those that were apprehended to pertain to Gods Election; only he adds the word Brother to it, a word of common relation, when used singly, and without other expression thereto. Que. Why James had not rather written as an Evangelist to his own Charge? 1. This was part of his own Ministry, he being to begin the work among the Jews as well as to perfect; and to this I con∣ceive our Saviour may allude, when he saith, That he that would be greatest should be their servant; which in this work he did, as it were, serve in his Ministry to the Doctor and Pastor, though af∣ter they did again, as it were, serve to him in the other part of his Ministry.
The second part of Ministry, that attended next the preparatory Ministry, was that of the Doctor; for though the Apostle, in de∣scending, begins with the Apostles, the most eminent in the Church, and ends with the lowest; so, if we ascend, we must begin at the lowest and end in the chiefest, and this was Johns work. 1. How clearly this appears in the Epistle from the difference of the matter and maner of teaching of that that is written in the E∣pistle of James, That the one was of the Church Ministry, the other to mixt Societies; this of Johns is full of sweetness, the other of terror; to one he tells them You are beloved, you are sanctified, you are called the sons of God, you have passed from death to life: James cals those he writes unto Adulterers and Adulteresses, and tells them their tongues are set on fire of hell. 2. How clearly it appears that John was Doctor or Teacher of the babes in the Church of Jerusalem, is evident; 1. In that he directs it to the little children, 1 John 2.1. and these he names before either fathers or young men. 2. He calls them My little children; he doth not appropriate any such interest to himself, either in the young men, when he speaks of them, or the fathers. 3. 1 Iohn 2.18, 19. He comforts the whole Congregation of chil∣dren against the apostacy of some, saying, They went out from us; mark the emphasis of the expression in the Apostles stile joyn∣ing him to the society of the Infants. 4. The whole doctrine is doctrine for babes; speaking of the new birth, of passing from death to life, of being anointed, and being called the sons of God; and many other signs only to set forth and to discover the state of regeneracy from unregeneracy. The third part of Ministry, or second of the Church-Ministry, and that is the Pastors office, and this was done by Peter: Now that his Ministry was to the young men, which Iohn had before mentioned in his Epistle, appears from his second Epistle, which, it is like, was written to his particular charge in Ierusalem, he being, as it should seem by the postscript, absent from thence.
2. In the Introduction he calls them Elect, and looks on them as such as had received like precious faith, which in the other E∣pistle he writes to the dispersed only. 3. The doctrine proves it, in that the whole Epistle doth con∣cern such only as are exercised in the understanding of the Scrip∣tures, Chap. 1. he calls on them to add vertue to vertue; and tells them ver. 11. so an entrance shall be ministred to them abun∣dantly into the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; its not to be questioned but they were entred; but the Apostle speaks of a more further degree obtainable, which they were to strive to enter into in this life. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. If, after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, by the knowledg of our Lord, they are again intangled, the latter end of them is worse then the beginning: And again, It had been better they had not known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it to turn away. It is clear hence, the A∣postle here speaks only to such as had their sences exercised in the knowledg of the Gospel, as in the last words of the Epistle, Grow in grace, and in the knowledg of our Lord and Saviour. 3. This agreeth to the name given to him that exerciseth this part of the Ministry, which is Exhorter, he exhorting to perfection. The fourth part of Church-Ministry, which is the Evangelists part, that the Church of the Jews may be a perfect pattern to all others, the supply hereof was done by the Apostle Paul in his E∣pistle to the Hebrews. 1. That this was written to the strong Christians, is clear from Heb. 6.1. Not laying again the beginnings of Christ, repentance from dead works, but let us go on to perfection. 2. He saith of those he wrote to, they might have been teachers of others, who have now need to be taught again the first prin∣ciples. 3. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 15. gives it this stile, that it was written according to the wisdom given to beloved Paul: It is very observable, that it was said to be done accord∣ing to his wisdom, that is, according to the excellency and depth of that that was given to him.
Hence, I suppose, may be given the true and only Reason of the Apostle Pauls not prefixing his name to the Epistle of the He∣brews. 1. Because he was not the Apostle of the Jews, therefore he writes not himself Apostle, and then because, if he had write himself otherways to the Church, it had been, as it were, a diminishing his Authority, in which he was not inferior to any of the Apostles. 2. Hence James writes not himself Apostle in the Epistle writ∣ten by him, because written to strangers, and such as were not in the fellowship of Saints. 3. It is clear, the Apostle conceals not his name in the Epistle of the Hebrews, because of the Jews, being offended at his writing or doctrine for his sake, as some suppose. 1. Peter, in his Epistle to the Church, shews that Paul had written an Epistle to them which, could be no other then that we had, unless any other be writ ten or lost. 2. Peter cals him there, beloved Brother Paul. 3. In the last Chapter of the Hebrews, the Auther saith, that if Timothy came shortly, he would come with him: Now Timothy was Pauls companion, and fellow-labouror in the Gospel, and he was known to the Church, and acceptable to them, or he had not said he would come to them. 4. He had been at Jerusalem many times, as appears in the Scriptures, and was received of the Church, and had the right hand of fellowship from the Apostles and Elders of the Church given him. 5. An example of this is also to be seen in the Church of Colloss, Chap. 3.10. Put off the old man, and put on the new man, which is the first work of Christianity, containing the doctrine of repen∣tance. 2. ver. 12. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercies; here is a∣nother putting on for the exercise of Christianity. 3. To all these they were to put on charity, the bond of perfe∣ction; And after, Verse 15. he speake of peace which is the do∣ctrine of the Evangelical preacher, which holds out a three-sold e∣state to be aimed at by the Apostle to be in the Church of Coloss.
First, Hence note that the Apostles never did the work of the Ministry alone by themselves, Phil. 2.22. Timothy was said to serve with Paul in the Gospel, as being done con∣junctively by them in the same Church, to the same end, and the same Ministry, and the same times, though in a differing way of Administration. Secondly, Hence in no Church, unless on extraordinary occasions, were there more then three teaching Ministers; a clear evidence that three were a compleat Ministry at the di∣visions of the Church of Antioch, Acts 15. It is true, there were many teachers, but they were such as came from Ieru∣salem to establish the brethren, who when they saw the Church established left them and departed: And again, they were not there as Pastors to the Church. Thirdly, They went no where to the work, but two or three went together, Acts 15.36, 37. Acts 19.22. He sent two of them that ministred to him: Here it may seem the Apostle had more then two helpers: It is true, he may have three, as Apostle, to minister to him, his office being to prepare for the Church as wel as to edifie those that were in society, which he may for a time commit to some faithful man. Fourthly, In all the Epistles the Apostle never writes to any Church in which he acknowledgeth not others to have joyned with him, in the work of the Ministry to the consti∣tuting of the Church he wrote unto, 1 Thes. 2.1. Ye know our: enterance to you, which shews Paul came not alone, when he came to do the work of the Gospel at Thessalonica: thus 2 Tim. 4.11. Only Luke is with me, take Mark and bring himwith thee, for he is profitable to me in the Ministry. First, Paul had not need of Mark to instruct him in any thing concerning the Ministry, nor was he a lazy Pastor to sit still while Mark preached. Secondly, He had Luke with him, yet he must have Mark brought also, seeing there was work for more then two, where Paul was ministring. Thirdly, He saith all were gone from him, which shews
that he had helps with him before, and this was for the dis∣pensations of the Word, and not as any helps in government of the Church by lay Elders, as we say. Application: Hence may we not conclude, that there is a threefold Administration of the Ministry in the Church to be used, which the Apostles themselves did not exercise alone in the Church without the help of others. Secondly, If any could do it, or should have done it, the Apostles should. Thirdly, If they did it not, then we ought not to do it; for who is sufficient for these things? If the Apostles were not, how shall we think our selves to be? Fourthly, Hence it is clear, the work of the Ministry is not now rightly done amongst us, and the greatest Reformation that ever was made in Ecclesiastical things, is to be made, we being all as yet without Church and Church-Ministry, and yet also confident of their way & judgment, as that theywil fight to uphold it, and dye for it; O what comfort will proceed from hence to us! Let us first know the truth, and then stand and strive together for it. Quest. Whether these differing Administrations differ not in degrees? Resp. Yea, more is required in the Ministry of the Apostle and Prophet, then in the Evangelist, more in the Pastor then in the Teacher; so the Apostle 1 Cor. 12.5. There are differ∣ing Administrations. First, The Administration is according to those to whom it is administred unto: Now the Doctors administred to babes only, the Evangelists to men, the Apostles to Evangelists, Christ to the Apostles; thus John writ to his children, young men and fathers. Secondly, The Church of God is called the house of God, and a great house in the Scripture, n which are infants, young
men, fathers, and yet all but one Family, so these divided Con∣gregations make but one Church. Consider but the Agreement of these: 1. In their number; an Evangelist, Pastor, Teacher, for men, young men and babes. 2. In the constitution; one Ministry, one Church, all three one, both in the Ministry, and in those that are to be ministred unto, it is but to perfect the same man. 3. The Constitutors only are differed in their gifts by a majus and a minus; so the constituted are the same, only dif∣ferenced by the degrees of stature and perfection, that is ob∣tained under the dispensations of the Ministry. 4. The ones Ministry ends in the other, the Doctors in the Pastors, the Pastors in the Evangelists; to those it is ministred unto; the childhood is swallowed up in youth, the youth in manhood, as the lesser is swallowed up in the greater light. David Evangelically spake hereof, Psal. 84.7. They shall go from strength to strength, until they appear perfect before God in Sion: The Apostle alludes here to the Gospel state, as in 1 Pet. 1.12. They did minister these things to us, not to themselves, that are reported to us: they not having the grace we have in the fellowship of the Gospel under their Mosaical Ministry; the words in the Original seem more fully and clearly to aim at such a thing, , which, as in the ordinary marginal notes is read, they shal go from com∣pany to company; and so Kerkeras of the word , saepis∣sime collective pro cietu usurpatur; oft times the word is used collectively for accompany. Again a Gospel testimony seems to be of this thing, in 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as of the Lord the Spirit.
1. Generally, the Apostle shews the work is the Spirits that is here spoken of. 2. The first part of it is an unvailing the face, which must be done and is done in all, which is the first degree of grace, having in it the discovery of Jesus Christ. 3. Upon this discovery he is by sanctification of the Spirit said to be changed in his life and in himself to a glorious e∣state. 4. This glory hath yet another change to glory, that is to a greater measure of sanctification and grace. Some understand these words, from glory to glory, to have respect to grace here and glory hereafter, but the words be∣fore make it plain, that here is understood none else but the work of the Gospel-Ministry officiated in the Church by the appointment of Christ 2. If we look on the words themselves, they prove as much unto us, for this is to be done by looking on Christ in the word as in a glass, a clear distinction used by the Apostle to distinguish the estate of Saints here, and that in heaven hereafter, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see darkly through a glass, then face to face; hear now, and then distinguish the times present and that to come, the glass and the face distinguish, the manner of the discovery of God here, and that which is to be hereafter. The Lord speaks not of the first change, because in that the soul is not come to be made like to the Lord, nor to have put on his glory; but when he is come to be made like Christ, and put on his image, then he is said to be carryed from glory to glory, which shews that the work of the Ministry is to be a work which worketh these things by degrees in the Saints, and shew forth to us the footsteps of God, having on it the i∣mage and superscription of God, commending to us his wis∣dom and prudence, who far herein exceeds the principles of humane policy and wisdom.
To this also sweetly agreeth the charge of Christ to Peter, John ult. 15.16.17. in which Christ commands Peter to feed his lambs, his sheep, his sheep. There are in these words of Christ closely and mysteriously meant three sorts per∣sons, though but two at first seem to be only named lambs and sheep; but he manner of feeding them clearly distiugnish∣eth them. First, The Lord saith  feed my lambs. Secondly, The other two are indeed  sheep, which seems to make them the same, but not without some eminent cause; the Lord hath clearly distinguished them, so as that they may be, and are to be understood of two sorts, and this distinction is not in themselves, but the feeding them. First, He gives the younger sheep the name of the elder, and makes them one with them in that. Secondly, in their feeding, distinguishing them, signified to Peter, that in the Ministry there was to be exercised a dif∣fering administration, even unto sheep and sheep, and not to be taught the same doctrines; this appears; to the first sheep, it is said  the word here for feeding, is the same before for the feeding of the lambs, though they are sheep. Now, of the other sheep, which were sheep indeed, he saith,  these are sheep; and fed as sheep; the others are sheep, and fed as lambs, and may be considered as of a differing growth, nor lambs, nor sheep, but between both. Object. Peter grieved, it is said, to hear Christ speak thus three times to him; he understood no such thing, and therefore sure there is no such thing intended in the word. Resp. Many things were hid as yet from the Disciples, and likely this, not any Churches being as yet gathered, nor had they yet instruction to gather them, Acts 1.30. Christ was with his Disciples 40 days, instructing them in the things per∣taining to the Kingdom of God, which were especially, doubtless, concerning the way God would have taken in the Church for the edification of it.
Secondly, Nor were the gifts given thereunto, until after Christs Resurrection, as appears by the words of the Apostle mentioned in the Ephesians, where it is said, Christ ascended, and gave gifts unto men. Thirdly, This clearly proves the Apostles had a call to officiate this three-fold office in the Church from Christ immediatly, and not only Peter, but all the other Apostles. Fourthly, That first the Saints are to be sed as lambs, then as younger sheep, then as elder sheep; a clearer proof, I think, there needs none, to shew the diversity of gifts and administrations in the Church ought thus to these to be diversly admini∣stred. Thus the Apostle (from 2 Cor. 6.1. where it is written, we then as workers together with God,) Mini∣sters these conclusions to be deduced thence. First, That the Ministry of the Gospel is not one single work, or the work of one only man, as now amongst us it is done. Secondly, That in the primitive times, there were in every Church, that was constituting, two at the least, and in every Church that was constituted three. These Ministers do not teach distinctively, but are co ordinate in the work one to the other, and are one for the other, and cannot be one without the other in a constituted Church. Tourthly, This Ministry in the Church is but
one Ministry, 1 Cor. 3.8. He that plants, and he that waters, are one; that is, they are one Ministry, not one man, which was spoken of the Doctors and the Pa∣stors work in the Ministry. Fifthly, In no constituted Church we read of more then three in fellowship for the ordinary work of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 1.15. Paul, Sylvanus and Timothy are these before spoken of, and said to work together. Sixthly, Hence it was, I suppose, the Apostle condemns the practise of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.12. for saying, one was of Paul, anothers of Apollo, ano∣ther of Cephas; These did, or others by these intend∣ed, did work together in the Ministry. Now it seems the infants boasted themselves against those that were not in Church-Society; the young men boasted themselves against the children, &c. Now compare the 4 Chap. ver. 6.7. the Scriptures clear it, they were puffed up one against another; and after saith to them, who made thee to differ? which shew∣eth, that there was not only a difference in the Teacher, but also there was a difference made a∣mongst those that were taught in themselves with∣in, in their condition without. We of the Ministry now that bear the whole burden of the work alone, without question do that that never Apostle did, or ought not to be done in the Church: It may be said to us, we take too much upon us, what wisdom were it if we did submit to the Gospel rule, and think of a means how in Cities
to joyn together to the Work of the Lord, as it is commanded. Object. The 1 Cor. 4.15, Though you have ten thou∣sand instructors, yet have ye not many fathers. Hence it should seem the Church of Corinth had many more Teachers then three in it. Secondly, Compare 1 Cor. 3.12. with it, there are several builders brought in by the Apostles, as some building gold, silver, and precious stones, o∣thers are said to build of hay, wood, and stubble. Resp. 1. That the true Church then must have suc∣cessively more true Teachers then three, because the Apostle could not stay long with them, but having planted the Church here, goeth to some other place, but before his departure he ordained others to sup∣ply his place in his absence; and of those that went with him to the work elsewhere, and in this kind they must have many Teachers, Acts 14.23. When they had oadained Elders in every City, they depar∣ted, which shews, they departed not until they had ordained Elders. Secondly, The words are a Hyperbolical expres∣sion, and prove nothing in particular; only they had many, and that if they had never so many more, he was he that begat them in Christ.
Now for the second part of the objection taken out of 1 Cor 3.12. 1 Note here are two sorts of teachers distingished, the one true, the other false, the faithfull teachers are three, the cor∣rupt are the same number. The true are distingisht in the difference of the materials set down; all are precious, but not all alike precious; it clearly shews there was to be a difference in the ministry, a difference in gifts, and difference in doctrine; the one inricheth men with silver of the Gospell, the other with the gold of the Gospell, the other with the precious stones of it. 2 Now the false ministry counterfeits the true. 1 They will have three in their worke of their ministry, as the Apostle had in his: 2 They differ in the doctrine also among themselves, as hay, wood and stubble doe. 3 Becaue the Apostle was he which laid the foundation of the Church of Corinth, and was the glory of the ministry; they will also themselves take on themselves to be Apostles also. 4 The Apostles build immediatly on Christ, we on the A∣postles, they build on Christ immediately not on the Apostles; they of say Paul his speach is contemtible 1 Cor. 3.10. And here I suppose was the first corruption or counterfeiting of the Church and Church despensations, which was not like that mad of Rome, in which not onely things were counter∣feied to pull down, and other set up in their steed, that for twelve hundred yeeers it hath not been known what the Church was governed by nor how. 1 This confirmes there were many teachers in Corinth indeed. 2 But no more but three only in Church fellowship to∣gether. 3 In that there were but three in the corrupt society no more nor lesse then in the true Church, it much consirmes the truth of the doctrine that in the true Church, which these did counterfeit, there were onley threefold administrations in the Church then in use at Coriuth.
4 It shews that the corrupt teachers did retaine the same form of government in their Ghurch, as the Apostles had set up in the true: for otherwise they hed not been able to draw men away so easily from the truth. 5 Paul saith, that he transferred the things he spake of the false teachers to the true, who were only three, Paul, Apollo, Cephas: it is like if they differed in the outward form, the A∣postle would have reproved it in them. 1 Cor. 1.12. com∣pared with 1 Cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 11.13. he calls them false Apostles. Secondly, he calls them deceitfull workers: now in that what they did against the truth was done by deceit, it sheweth that they did as much as possibly they could to coun∣terfeit the truth, and the true way practised by the Apostles in the Churches. A shadow of these things are also set out on the Mosaicall service: Aaron and his sons signifie Christ and his two disci∣ples, or rather in the Priests and the Levites which were added to them as helpers in the same work. First, the one was to help kill, the other to help wash, and then then the Priest offered up the sacrifice; so the Apostle desired to offer up the— a chaste Virgine to Jesus Christ. Ezek. 47.3. the Prophet prophetically shewes what was to be after the Gospell-institution took place, signified in the waters run out of the temple. 1 The Lord measures the waters, and brings him through thrice, which signified as he was a Prophet, and did signifie publick ministery to be under the Gospell, that there was, to be a three-fold administration of the Gospell: the first is but to his Anckles, the beginnings of Christ; the next higher, the next higher then that, and these are not in the same place, but one thousand reeds from the other; which shews that this ministery is not to be executed by one, nor preached at once to the same people. 2 This directs us in ordaining ministers; they are to pro∣ceed by degrees, first preaching without for tryall, then ad∣mitted within to the Doctors ministry, then the Pastors, and lastly the Evangelists; this way Timotheus proceeded in the ministry.
Now that we may more clearly see that it was the Teach∣ers Office to teach Babes, Rom. 2.20. and art, saith the Apostle there , a Teacher of Babes, which shewes, who are Teachers, Congregation, and what is to be taught in that Congregation, they being to be taught according to their capacitie. 1. The Scriptures clearly shew what the Babe is, and who, and when to be admitted to Church-societie. 2. The Scriptures shew abundantly concerning that estate, and God hath therein provided abundantly for it. 1. The Scriptures shew who the Babe is, John 3.3. 2. Of what he is to be borne and where, verse 5. 3. The necessitie of this new Birth, without which a man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. 4. What is required of Babes, 1 Peter 2.1. to lay aside ma∣lice, hypocrisie, evil-speaking, and to desire the sincere milke of the Word that we may grow thereby. 5. The Doctrine is set down, Hebr. 6.1. to be laying the foundation of repentance from dead Workes faith towards God, the Resurrection of the dead. Shall God have Angels, heavenly Spirits, to attend the least of Saints, and shall he not allow many a Church-minister by whom her portion in the Word may be divided rightly to them? 2. The Euangelists Office is distinguisht from the Teachers by the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 1.17. where the Apostle tels us that he was not sent , to baptize, which was the worke and the Doctrine of the Doctour, as must clearly ap∣peares, Hebr. 6.1. but , which was to do the worke of an Euangelist, as cocerning a man called to a di∣stinct worke from that of Baptizing, which if so spoken of in the person of the Apostle, who had an extraordinary cal∣ling, to all; How then of those that have but an ordinary call, to one? And the words of Christ in Matthew to his Apostles, shew that Baptizing is joyned to the first worke of the Ministerie following the making of Disciples, now if those God hath joyned together are not to be separated by man, How shall we dare to feparate them, and as it were be∣stow them on others.
2. The Apostle implieth, in saying he was not sent to bap∣tize, that some are sent to baptize, and that men not sent are not to baptize, it being a part of the publique ministerial Dutie. 3. He shewes that they differ in the call to what they are to do, and that they have not baptized in commission equally, and so consequently for other of the Gospel Administrations, that that is proper to one is not to be done by another. 4. He was sent to euangelize, which shewes that the Apo∣stle did prove his calling to do what he did do. Object. What is that to us? the Apostle was an extraordinary person. Resp. We are to consider him as in his ordinary and extra-ordinary capacitie; in his extraordinary as a Prophet, and then he saith: that on him lieth the care of all the Churches; but if in his ordinary capacitie, then we consider him as one using the Euangelists Office, to performe the which he took helpers with him, for the worke of the Ministerie joyning himselfe to them, It is granted indeed that he did take on him the whole worke of the Ministerie. 1. Being extraordinarily called. 2. Extraordinarily gifted. 3. Others being at that time not to be had to supply it for him; but in this case he is no president for us to do the like, especially seeing he was sent to do the Euangelists Office, though in the absence of other, or in the first laying the foun∣dation of the Church, he may begin the workes, as in Corinth, he is sent to euangelize. 1. It being next in place to his extraordinary Offices. 2. As being more fully instructed to that Dutie than any other. 3. The Euangelists place requiring greatest abilities in him that doth administer the same both in regard of the Ministerie it selfe and those to whom it is to be ministered unto. 3. The Euangelists Office is of the most sublime admini∣stration, it dispencing the highest things of God in its Mini∣sterie, that are communicated to the Saints by ordinary means in this World.
1. Christ teaching Nicodemus the Doctrine of Repentance and New Birth, cals these things , earthly things, things taught to men of the World. 2. He cals the more spiritual part of Doctrine to be mini∣stred , heavenly things, which sheweth that there is a wide difference between the subject, matter, or way of dispensing the Doctrines pertaining to these two Administra∣tions. 3. To this agreeth that of the Apostle, Rom. 10.15. How beautifull are the feet of those that euangelize good things and that euangelize peace, which shews that the subject, matter of the Euangelists Ministerie, to those under his charge, is gene∣rally contained under those two Heads of peace and good things, holding out the glorie followes the revelation of Jesus Christ to the Soul, and the good that belongs unto him; yea, this requires the greatest experience, the most heavenly sense, and nearest enjoyment of communion with God; for he must come first to know these things in himselfe before he can teach them to others. 4. The Euangelists Office is the chief in the worke of the Ministerie, as appeares in that after Timothie had made use of the publique Ministerie, Paul in his 2 Tim 4 5, bids Timothie do the worke of an Euangelist, and make full proof in the Ministerie. 1. Signifying that in other administrations, there is not a perfect worke of the Ministerie. 2. That the Euangelists Office is that that perfects the Mi∣nisterie, both in respect of the Minister and People. Not that the Euangelists Office is a full Ministerie without the other, or the other without that, but that the Ministerie ends in this and tends thereunto. Again a Congregation under the Ministerie of a Doctour called out from the World and united to Christ, having the administration of Gods Ordinance among them, are a Church, though in its infacie and childhood lying under imperfecti∣ons. 1. As not perfected in themselves. 2. Not in their Ministerie.
3. Not in their societie, the strong being commanded to bear with the weak. 5. The Apostle proves 6. Hebr. 1. both that the Euangelists Office is the highest and a distinct Office from the Doctours; where he sheweth, that under that administration the Do∣ctrine of Repentance fromidead Workes, is to be left, and of the beginnings of Christ under this administration; and in saying Let us go to perfection, he sheweth that under the for∣mer administration these Doctrines which he was now about to teach them, had not been taught. 1. If their Congregations were according to the Papal congregational wayes, and not divided, there were no leaving the first Principles, because daily some being to be added to the Church, and in infancie, would then be left to perish for the lacke of meanes, of meanes of grace. And here fitly may I speak a word of this lack of this di∣viding the Ministerie to the worke, How it is savoured by godly men in the Land. 1. A man preaching that Doctrine is preparatory to fit for the Church, is not so acceptable to men called and sanctified, and this is cried out as a Legal Ministerie; others they preach the Go∣spel grace to men in a natural estate, and do apply it in a gene∣ral way; they are hardened by it, and these are called Antino∣mists, though not approving the error; but how to remedy this that is not apprehended, nor indeed can it be but by dividing People, and then dividing the Ministerie, before which it is nothing but confusion in all that we do. Object. It is very strange that men in the Euangelical Mini∣sterie must not preach the Doctrine of repentance, but leave that. Must not repentance be preached to the higher and the lower con∣gregations? Resp. The Apostles Answer is not sutable for any estate, but that of euangelized Christians, which live under the highest dispensations of Gospel mercie, as appeares verse 4. chap. 6. where he sheweth what these are that are thus to be lead to perfection, they must be men illightened, men that have tasted the heavenly gift, and are made partakers of the holy Ghost and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
powers of the World to come; if these fall away there is no preaching repentance to them, it is impossible to renew them again thereby, and on this ground the Doctrine preach∣ed in the first congregation is left in the last. 1. Hence see what degrees of common gifts is required of men before they be admitted to be of this fellowship. 2. See to what perfection the Saints were brought who lived under this government; it is not the governments that are erected by men can have that in it, nor that from God which he communicates to his own Church. 3. It sheweth that there may be hypocrites, men that fall away in the chiefest Societies. 4. See the ground of this Gospel dispensation. 1. It is to carry men onwards to perfection, What a lack do all the Saints of God lack of this helpe from the Ministerie here and in all the World? 2. How are the Saints gifts left to wither in them by rea∣son that meanes which should stir up their affections, and en∣large their hearts, is wanting to them; they are onely shut up to lesser and lower things, below that measure of manifesta∣tion the Spirit hath given to them to apprehend God in and by; as the Jewes were under Pedagogues, so these are straitned in the present Ministerie. 3. Those that fail under this dispensation cannot be resto∣red, and therefore no need of the Doctrine of Repentance, they being as the Salt which hath lost its savour and cannot be seasoned. I know this Doctrine will be mightily distasted of us Mini∣sters, we having desires naturally in us, as we have heard to be in the Apostles, every one desiring to be chief, and few con∣tent to deny himselfe, so as to serve with others in the Go∣spel. 1. Brethren, let us consider, Do we Christs worke or do we our own? if Christs, let us take a care and do it as he will have it done. 2. As it is said of Christ when he washt his Disciples feet, he said, he did this for example; so Christs Ministerie, being at first but preparatory, sheweth us that he was content to do
any thing for his Church, and shews how we should follow his example herein, and he presseth Peter, yet he loved him, he should feed his lambs as well as his sheep. 3 Consider our parts, they are not sufficient for the dis∣pencing of the lowest administration; for saith the Apostle, we are the savour of life to life in those that are saved, and of death to death in those that perish, and who is sufficient for these things? here he saith, we joyning as fellow workers; in their other part of work with himself and for all or any, he implyeth none is worthy, no not man nor Angel; the lowest place will take up all thy gifts, knowledge wis∣dom, love, mercy, heavenly mindednesse, and finde thy heart much wanting to God in the execution of it both to thy self, this ministry, God and his flock. 4 We had rather teach in a confused way to the multi∣tude, in an unprofitable way, then in Gods way to doe good among them; our very naturall opposition to this worke and way proves the divinenesse and excellency of it. 5 God saith, 1 Tim. 3.14. if a man have obtained the office of a Deacon, he hath obtained a good degree in the house of God, and David he esteems highly of a door keepers place in the house of God. 6 If God hath gifted us for the more eminent places, he will in his time call us thereunto; before which it is not good for us to seek any or exercise any. 1 By this means men in the ministry, that is without the Church ministry, will come to have their gifts known and parts exercised. 2 The Church ministry to be sound and incorrupt, that the Chuch come not to be corrup by false teachers. 3 Mens gifts for teaching highly improved. 4 Mens abilities to the uttermost manifested. Apl. Let us take heed of that of James 4.5. the spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy; marke your own spirit how it is with God when God requires thee to part with any thing for the Gospell, how apt it is to swell against it, and argue against it, denie it, condemn it, and also speake hard∣ly of it; as you know the Scribes and Pharises did to Paul
concerning the way of God. I can the more freely speake of this, because mine own heart abundanly abounds with these dayly in me, being indeed a fruit more bitter then death. 2 Cor. 1.5. We have made our selves your servants for Christs sake; remember this, and we cannot refuse any place we shall be imployed in the Church at all, unlesse publik; we say so Complementally onely to God and the Church. Again hath not Christ said, he that will be greatest let him be your servant? yea and did not the Evangelist in the Church, lay the foundation of the Church, in which he served to the rest of the ministry, preparing for them in this, as they prepared for him after: the greatest office is for service in the Church, in which to place any is the worke of the Lord Je∣sus Christ, who tryeth the spirits, and knoweth the gifts of all better then they that have them, and from whom they have them. The last office we are to speake of, is the Pastors distin∣guisht in the Gospell. 1 His ministry is contained in those parts of Scripture in which the Saints are stirred up to duty. 2 In those that invite to perfection. 3 In those that exercise the Saints Iudgment in the know∣ledge of the word and the work of righteousnesse; hence is he called the exhorter, and doctrine exhortation: Noting unto us what Judgement, wisdome, experience and Under∣standing is required to be in the man that officiats this part of ministry in the Church. Heb. 5.12. All their Doctrine is spoken of together distinctly; 1 milke for babes. 2. Ver. 13. the skilfulnesse in the word of Righteousnesse was for the young man, in which he differs from the babe; and the Apostle shews it, that he that useth milk is unskilfull in the word of Righteousnesse; this is for the Pastor. 3. Ver. 14. the Apostle saith, concerning the growne Christians, he should have strong meat. Now I come to shew how all these Ministers are but one compleat ministry in the Church of God. 1 They preach the same Gospell, doing the same work.
2 Its the same faith in the beleever, as a child, and a strong-man, onely it is to be perfected in him by degrees, according to that way God hath ordained in his word there∣fore. 3 They are all for the same end, which is for edification of the whole body. 4 They respect the same persons only, consisting in govern∣ment, Liberty, peace, and purity. Heb. 13.17. submit your selves to your leaders; that is meant of the ministring officers mentioned before; and not governing Elders, as ap∣pears from verse. 7. which words will hardly be applyed rightly to the Episcopall, Presbyterian, or Independent way, they having but one Minister in a Church as they call it; here are many, and in their relation so they are said to be joyned to the flock, as no Pastor can be more neerly joyned. 1 They watch for their souls. 2 They must give an account for them. Now I suppose under these two words are comprehended the whole of the ministerial duty, together with that in ver. 7. where it is said that they have spoken to them the word of God: here is both ministry and government, but no govern∣ment is here allowed to any other, but those that ministed, nor subjection required of the Church to any other; which proves that the Church ministery, was not a single ministry, nor were they governed by an externall power. Now where any of these are wanting in a Church. 1 There is a deficiency in officers. 2 Thence a deficiency in the office. 3 Thence a deficiency in the end for which this office was ordained in the Church, which is the edifying of the Church, and constituting of it. 4 A deficiency in the Church it self. 1 Where the Church ministry and ordinances are exer∣cised, there cannot properly be said to be a Church visible; nor can I conceive but that as yet the Church remaines hid in respect of outward government and order to the world; and hath not put on its ornaments as yet. 2 I commend it to all my brethren the Ministers to judge
whether our ministry, as now exercised, be any other then that which is without the Church, and prepares onely for a Church ministry. 3 I doe not say but a Church constitution may be without any other ministry then the teachers; until that men are be∣come capable of the other parts of ministry, when that is come to passe, the Church ought not to continue in its defi∣ciency; but by all men to have Gods ordinances exalted a∣mong them. Again not only people, Ministers, and ordinary ministry, in some kinde resembling the Trinity, and are three, and yet but one; but we shall see the whole Scripture is divided a∣mong five; two for the giving, the other ordinary three, for the exercise of the word. 2 Tim 3.16, 17. 1 All Scripture is given by divine inspiration; here the Apostles, and Prophets worke is set forth. 2 The use of it is for the Doctrine, which is the Doctors part for a babe in Christ. 3 For instruction to righteousnesse, this is proper to the ministry of the Pastor, in the Congregation of the young∣men. 4 That the man of God may be perfect, this is proper to the Evangelists office. 1 That the whole Scriptures are imployed by this ministry. 2 That by these they are rightly exercised for Edification. 3 That there is nothing wanting in the Scripture to ex∣ercise them, is a most strong and undenyable ground, that this is the Scripture ministry; and that ministry that hath more officers or lesse then this, is not the true Scripture, or Church ministry; and this will more clearly appear if you consider, 1 That this ministry is bounded and directed in the Gos∣pell, which other ministry is not, by and in the word which proves it Evangelicall. 1 The Doctrine for the teacher, which is the ground worke. 2 Exhortation to the Pastor which succeeds rightly Do∣trine.
3. Evangelicall peace to the evangelized christian man. 2. Their ministry is bounded in respect of the people to whom it is to be ministred. 1. Doctrine is not for all, but babes onely 2. Exhortation for young men onely. And 3. Evangelicall ministry for the perfect men onely. 3. Their ministry is bounded for the place of it, which is the Church of God; these offices are not to be at all exer∣cised but in the Church: The Apostle in 1 Cor. 4.1. saith, Let a man account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteryes of God. Note here the combination implyed in the word us, us ministers, us stewards. 1. Shewing, in the ministry is to be more then one. 2. That as they are ministers, so they are stewards also. 3. Of what they are ministers they are also stewards: the doctor is minister and steward of the doctrinall part of Scri∣ture, the Evangelist of the evangelicall part. From hence I desire it may be conscienciously considered of; 1. Whether any Sacraments be to be administred untill we are in a Church-way. 2. To whose ministry and stewardship they do belong. 3. Whether the doctrine of baptisme belonging to the do∣ctor, baptism belong not to him alone, of which he is both minister and steward. 4. The ministry of the sacrament of the Lords Supper, to whose stewardship that pertains in the Church. 5. Whether any of these may be exercised ordinarily in the Church by any but those to whom they are of God recom∣mended in particular. 6. Whether the Apostle did not aim at this, in saying, the Lord hath not sent me to baptize, , but to e∣vangelize. The disjunctive seems to divide the work to pro∣per persons according to their call. This seems to be the way of God in the Churches, because the most perfect way, and most like God. 1. It hath unity answering in some kinde to Episcopacy. 2. Joynt fellowship in Government by Eldership with Presbytery.
3. Community in Priviledges with Independency. With∣out all question these all have somewhat of the way of God in it; Gods way takes up all. 1. Episcopacy could not have deceived the world else in its first institution, succeeding the primitive times, and the hiding of the Church. 2. Presbytery could not plead so strongly for a combina∣tion in Government from the word else. 3. Independency could not else refuse an external power of command to reside in any out of the Church. 1 For Episcopacy; How it is likely it arose out of the Churches first institution. 1. The ministry of the Gospel being one, and ending in the evangelist, the other two ministers ministring to him, whe∣ther hence Episcopacy took not an occasion to visit over ma∣scores of divided congregations. 2. Whether the Lord writing to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, wrote not to the Evangelist as first in order, and hence that Bishops pleaded their ground for Govern∣ment. 3. Whether that corrupt and exorbitant way of lording it over many congregations may not be a light to us? that suc∣ceeding the Primitive times, to shew us that in the true Church there was a conjunction of ministers in the Church-ministry: more then one served together therein. 4. This appears in that Episcopacy did counterfeit the way of the true churches, but in a corrupted way, grosly. 1. Setting up their Bishopricks in Cities, as Paul the churches, which I suppose is necessary to be done now. 2. In these places are a combination of ministers; but far more then they finde in the text, and for a quite contrary end. 3. Whether in union of churches, the mother church re∣present not the Evangelists meeting; the chappels the meet∣ing places of the Pastor and Teacher; and then that the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper was to be administred onely in the mother-church. Whether this hath not in it a discove∣ry
of the evangelicall practice, I leave to all the Saints to judge. I shall grant to Bishops; 1. That there are by the Gospel government more then one assembly or congregation do belong unto one compleat church. 2. One was to be the mother-church or chief assembly, in which some things were to be done that were not to be done in the other meeting-places. 3. That the members of the other two congregations were to come there and do them. 4. That the Evangelist had a priority in the church before all other officers, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons. 5. That cities were the usuall places in which the church-ministry and ordinances usually were erected. For the ground of Prebytery's rise and growth: 1. It is cleer, the ministry is in the Gospel one onely ministry. 2. All had their institution from Jesus Christ. 3. Government is common to the whole ministry and el∣ders in the Scriptures. 4. All are comprehended under the same names in the Scriptures. 5. All are to teach the same Gospel. 6. God hath in Scripture condemned lordlike authority in any, and that the greatest was to be minister to the rest: by which and many other things, whether or no that the ministers came not to see the unjust domineering power of Episcopacy, and how that the Scriptures held out no such authority to be left of Christ in the church. 1. Whether this occasioned not the ministers to break off the yoak of that bondage, and every one dividedly in his own place, without reference to other, as condemning episcopall Jurisdiction for tyrannical, and therefore saw a necessity of breaking off from that union that should not be. And now I suppose they break also from that union which should be. 2. They finding the many inconveniences by standing
singly without advice and mutual help, together with the Scriptures which speak of the Presbyters as of many persons, they were necessitated to joyn in a way of Community for Government again. 3. Now from the joyning together of Ministers and Elders in the Primitive Church of one Church onely, I suppose arose the Classical or National combination of Ministers in the Presbytery. 4. All these have somewhat of truth in them; which, when God shall reveal it fully, will help to set up the Church; which, until then, will but keep it down. I agree with Presbytery, 1. That in things which generally concern the Church, nothing ought to be done without consultation first had with the Ministery and the Presbytery of the Church. 2. That there were Meetings of the Presbytery for the de∣bate of doubtful things. 3. That several Ministers are joyned together for this work. 4. That one Minister ought not to Lord it over another in the Church, they being co-ordinate in the Ministery. 5. That every Minister in the Church is , a Bishop over his flock, and nothing to be done therein without his be∣ing first acquainted with it by the other Ministers of the same consociation. 6. That helps in Government are to be used in the Church, as that of ruling Elders, Deacons, Widows. 7. That the ruling Elders are to be chosen by the Church, and to be joyned to the ministring Elders, for the removing of scandals and scandalous persons out of the Church; the Church being not possibly all on every occasion of meeting to be pre∣sent, nor in many things are they able to determine, and there∣fore appoint chosen men hereunto, to do for them so as if done by themselves. And here I cannot but observe how all Ways deduce the strength of their way from the Way of God; and in what it fails of that, it lieth naked to be wounded by the adversaries. Episcopacie pleaded unity of Ministery: but taking the
whole Authority to it self, from those who were to be joyned with it, proved its subversion. It pleaded community of Churches: but when from three to three hundred, and from these, to those which he was to have no relation to, did shew it to be an Antichristian power. 2. Presbytery pleads a community or combination in the Church of Ministery, and so shakes Independency, which hath not any combination in Government of Ministery. 3. Independency again shakes Presbytery in its combinati∣on, it being a combination of men that are not set over the flock, nor feed it, and yet exercise authority over them. 4. Hence see the Way of God is that which holds up and casts down the ways of Worship or Government in the Church. Applic. 1. Of what strength will the Way of God be when it is in perfection revealed unto us, without mixture of humane inventions, to cast down all other Ways of Worship? Illustrat. As Christ coming into the Temple whipt out of the Temple the buyers and sellers, and none durst to stand against him; so will Truth be in power when its clearly re∣vealed; men will not be able so to dispute against it as now they do; there will not be that ground for Reason to object against it; the Word agrees with it, it will condemn every tongue shall speak against it. For Independency, I agree with it, that Corinth, Jerusalem and Ephesus is said to be but one Church, though it consisted of three several con∣gregations. 2. That this Church was ruled by Officers of its own, and not by any other Officers of another Church; but that all Officers and Offices ought to be compleat in her, by which all things ought to be done by her alone. 3. I agree with it, that people ought to be congregated in a Church-fellowship from the world. Applic. is, That I verily suppose that Independency comes neerest the minde of Christ of any. Yet lest I should be thought to be engaged to them more then others, I shall next shew in what I disagree.
1 She hath not her full ministry. 2 Not the right use of her ministry. 3 Not the right way of making her members. 4 Not the right way to increase the gifts of God in her members, as ordained of the Lord in the word. 5 Not the consultations ought to be had and held with the other Ministers, to be had in, and to be of its own consociati∣on; of whom it may be said, as Solomon said of others, that a three-fold is not easily broken. In the government of the Church, clearly appears accor∣ding to the wisdom of God, that all Government is compre∣hended in it. Monarchy, in that there was one chief Pastor. Aristocracy, in the consociation of Ministers and Elders. Democracy, in that many things which concerned the whole Church, were to be done by, and with consent of the Church. 1 Bishops, they with the help of Elders, they together oppresse the people, depriving them of all power. 2 The Bishops they grew too great for the Elders, and op∣pressed them. 3 The Pope he grew too great for the Bishops: now it was all their worke, to adulterate the way of Christ in the Churches, onely to feed their own greatnesse, and further their own vile ends. But the grand corruption of all was in that resemblance of Monarchy set up in the Church against Christ, against his Law, to the casting down of Christ and his wor∣ship. Now, in the revolution of the Churches estate, it comes a∣gain by degrees to its restauration. 1 The Bishops they cast off the Popes yoake. 2 By the same argument Bishops cast off the Popes yoake, the Presbytery cast off the Bishops. 3 The people with a ministry, joyn together against Pres∣bytery for Independency. 4 In the end, when God shall restore the Church to its for∣mer estate, all these severall wayes of government shall be reestated in the Church again, without clashing one with an∣other, which now, as divided, are in some kinde used
as it were to the destruction one of another, yea of all; we are willing to have one alone without the other, and so strive to destroy the way God hath constituted in his Church, making one form to serve all, when all are to be exercised joyntly in the house of God for the more excellent, perfect, and exact government of it, which by no means can be done by any of those powers alone dividedly: which what wee doe in seeking one, or setting up one above another, or a∣gainst another, to the destruction one of other, is not easily apprehended; especially if wee consider, 1. That the prio∣rity of the Evangelist was but in one Church-ministry, not such as to have it to be as the Papacy or Episcopacy, over whole countreys and counties. 2. That the consociation or combination of the Presbytery was not over a Nation to exalt it over all, but of the ministry joyned in fellowship for the edification of one onely Church, consisting of onely an Evangelist, Pastor and Teacher ordinarily. 3. The Inde∣pendency was not such as was of one onely minister and members joyned to him, with helping governours, in whom onely all Church-power should reside; but was to be joyn∣ed in a combination with other ministers of the same church, who were to have their helpers added to them: for as Solomon saith, In the multitude of Counsellors there is safety. 1. The priority of the Evangelist is kept in its limits by the joyning of the Pastor and Teacher with him. 2. The power of the Presbytery is moderated by the El∣ders, exceeding them in number. 3. The whole Presbytery, if they are wanting to the church in things wherein peace and purity do consist, are to be subject to the church, to give an accompt thereof unto it. Acts 11.2, 3. Peter having been with Cornelius a Gen∣tile, was questioned by some of those that were of the Church at Jerusalem, for going in to the uncircumcised, and eating with them: to which charge of the members Peter gives an accompt, rehearsing the matter from the beginning, and expounding it unto them. 1 Cor. 5.7. the Apostle writes to the whole church to purge out the old leaven. Now this was the work of all, not of some, as appears by the means
ordained hereunto, which was excommunication, not practi∣sed then as done by Episcopacy, in which the whole power of the Church was clean taken from them. 4. Without all question, the saying of Christ, Go and tell the Church, (who had no respect to the then Jewish Church, but the constitution of Christian Church to be) doth imply, that in the Church did reside authority and power to punish offenders with ecclesiasticall censures, and without them it cannot be done; which was the gracious provision God was pleased to make for the Church and the members thereof. That this was not meant the Jewish Church, appears, because there was but little good to be done by telling them of any thing, who had cast out all of their congregations that did confesse the name of Jesus Christ. 2 He begins in the beginning of the chapter with the King∣dome of heaven, which was the Gospel-government, Matth. 19.1. and was the cause of what sayings ensued concerning dealing with an offending brother. 3. Christ, to clear up his meaning in these words to his di∣sciples understandings, fetcheth another parable taken from the likenesse of the Kingdome of heaven, which was the estate of the Church to be under Gospel-government, ver. 23. Object. Christ meant here the Church of the Jewes: there was no other, nor could the Disciples understand of what he spake, if not of the Jews Church. Respon. They then understood nothing whatever he taught, for he onely taught the mystery of the Kingdom. Obj. How should they understand it? Reso. The holy Spirit tels us, that it was given to them to know the mysteryes of the kingdome; so that the mysteries and hidden things of the Gospel and Government were in some measure revealed to them, though not as after the descending of the holy Spirit on them. And here it will not be amisse to speak a word more of this Scripture; which is, that Christ did herein at least confirm the dependency of Church upon Church now, from the then dependency which was in the then Jewish administrations to which Christ alludes.
1. The ministry of Christ was evangelicall. Mark 1.14, Christ is said to preach the Gospel of the kingdom. 2 This being part of his ministry, proves that Christ had respect herein to the Gospel administration. 3 Christ intended this onely without mixture or relation to the other, Matth. 9.16. No man putteth a piece of new cloth to an old garment. Mark it well, there is not a piece to be put to it, for that which is to fill it up, will make the ren the worse: see then what it is to patch old with new, or new with old; it is cleer Christ used it not in his ministry. Obj. Matth. 13.52. Every wise Scribe bringeth forth of his treasury new things and old, that is, Law and Gospel. Resp. It is true; but then he distinguisheth them, in that they come to be cleerly discerned, as in the Parables of the tares and fish follow to be spoken of. The last generall that wee now come to speak of for fur∣ther discovery of the exercise of these severall administrati∣ons in the church, may be (for that it is implyed in the Scri∣pture) of church-meetings, though one intire church, yet usu∣ally not to be assembled in one place. 1 Cor. 14.23. If therefore the whole Church meet together in one place. The conditionall expression sheweth, they usually met not in one place: it would have been confused for all the severall Ministers to have taught their severall doctrines at the same time in the same place; the Apostle doth adjudge it so, saying, One had a doctrine, another a Psalm, which he saith ought not to be: And this was in their generall meetings. 2. Their meeting together , was for those things which were generally of common concernment to all the members, 1 Cor. 11.20. When ye meet together in the fame place, is this to eat the Lords Supper? Note, the doctrine which they were to be taught differing, and the Ministers they were to meet in severall places, for to a∣void confusion, and be a help to edification: But in the admi∣nistration of the Sacraments, in which every child had his in∣terest, as wel as the man Christian, in this all were to meet to∣gether, feasting on him as in a feast upon a Sacrifice.
This Scripture 1 Cor. 14.23. of the gathering of the whole church together, I suppose to be occasioned for the tryall of the members gifts, to see whether those under the teachers ad∣ministration were fitted for to partake with the Pastors charge, and those under the Pastor to be admitted to society with the Evangelists congregation. 1. Hence in this meeting the Apostle saith, All may prophesie, ver. 24 & 31. 2. This prophesie was to be according to the measure of faith, either as a child, or a man; according to the severall de∣grees of knowledge he had in him of the Gospel, and of God, so was he to propesie in this meeting. 3. Nor do I think that this was ordinary with them to pro∣phesie, but on tryall of members: In this kinde 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all prophets? Are all teachers? which shews the office of teaching in ordinary meetings was proper work of some particular persons. When none but the Pastor or Teacher did teach onely, the rest were onely to sit still and judge. 1. Some there are that take these words [all] all may pro∣phesie, collectively for all the Prophets or Teachers, which can∣not be; because the Apostle saith, Two or three may speake, the rest judge: now sure the Church had not so many faithfull teachers pertaining to their church. 2 Others understand it of some of their choyest Christians only. 1 They cannot agree with the word all; for if some onely, then not all. 2 The holy Ghost saith, they may pro∣phesie according to the proportion of faith; which shews that it did belong to those of the Children congregation, as well as those of the men; and whereunto should this serve if not for triall of gifts, and the bringing of the Christian from company to company for his furtherance in knowledge and grace? 3 By this tryall the Church came to know the proof of men, who among them were fitted to send forth for the pro∣pagation of the Gospel in other places. 4 It is implyed, that the admitting of members to be the first society, (and then doubtlesse it was so in the other also) it was a publick worke of the Church, in which great care
is to be had; that neglected, proved the ill calamities and trouble of the Church; and so again for the casting them forth. 2 Gal. 4. The Apostles reproves the underhand dealings there used; which was as it is to be thought a practise of the officers in the Church, who brought in false brethren privily without publick tryall, and not at the Churches publick meetings against the course of the Church: Jude saith the like, That false brethren are crept in unawares, Jude 4. Obj. How could the Church meet in one place? Res. 1 They had exceeding large roomes in Jerusalem, as appeares in the multitude met in one place, Act. 21. in which three thousand were converted at one sermon. 2 The word implyeth they did do it. 3 They being to doe it, not to hear, but to receive the Sa∣crament and the like, that may be done successively, it may easily be granted. 4 It may be the Church increasing, they may increase the roome. 5 As the Atheists of old questioned the Scriptures by que∣stioning the possiblity of Noahs ark, carrying the creatures in it, and the provision for them: So now men question the Scriptures, by questioning how these could come to meet all in one place, being so great a multitude as the Scripture affirms them to be. In the Applycation, I came to shew that there is no Church, nor Church way that is according to God, but this of A∣postles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastor, and teacher. 1 These must be to the constitution of a true Church, or it cannot be a true Church. 2 In the lack of one of these, there can be no compleat and perfect Church-administration exercised. 3 These in combination only, need no other to be joyned to them for the ordering of Church affaires, as appeares, Christ having given the ministry above said. Ephes. 4.12, he tels us they are for the perfecting of the Saints, the worke of the ministry, and the edifying of the body. 1 It is for the perfecting of the saints.
1 Shew, The Saints are not to be perfected by any one of they must have all to perfect them; which shews how it it should be the desire of the Christians to see this way of God set up among them, as the true and only means of their perfection. 2 If these serve for the perfecting of the Saints, what need we any more, yea who shall add more? 3 There is all that power and authority given to these that Christ hath given to his Church, for the Saints to have exer∣cised in the Church among them. 1 For removing scandalous things and persons. 2 For advice and counsel. 3 For exhortation, reproof &. 2 It is for the work of the ministry. 1 These all only can do but the work of the ministry that is to be done in the Church: I speak not here of that part of ministry exercised to those without the Church. 2 Without all these (as I have formerly shewed, they are and ought to be in the Church) the work of the ministry can∣not be done according to Gospel rules. 3 There is no other worke to be done by the ministry, ei∣ther in teaching or ruling, then what is to be done by these only. 4 The Church is not, nor cannot be sufficiently provided for without all these, but it must be imperfect, and must be straightned in the worke of the ministry; which is the onely worke we ought to strive to have wrought amongst us. 5 Ordination being a Presbyterial or ministerial act, is in every right constituted Church, virtually as other ordinances of the Church are. 6 Hence the Church hath all power in it selfe that is or can be for its good, communicated of Christ unto it, and needs not to go out of it self to any other for help. 1 Conclusion, Hence is this, that there is no other way to be found out more mighty to convince gainesayers, to order Assem Ites, to build up the Saints, maintain unity and peace, to restore the humbled, to cast out the profane, or to doe
whatsoever else is to be done ministerially in or for the Church, then what these, and none but these are to doe. 2 Nor hath God left to his Church any other way or means to doe it: and especiall care is to be had what authori∣ty is exercised, what way is erected in the Church of Christ over his people, that it prove not Antichristian, and turn not unto tyranny over the Saints. God complains, those that ruled over his people made them to cry; and shews, Gods people can bear no yoake as Christs that is gentle, nor no yoake but Christs: the other yoake is an unequall yoake, they can never draw easie in it. 3 The third thing this ministry is to doe, is to edifie the body; more then these three things remaines not to be done by the ministry for the church on earth. 1 The Apostles and Prophets gave the Scriptures as that by which it may be edifyed. 2 The Prophets forwarned her of her sad times, and told her again of her glad times to come. 3 The Doctor he drew the milke out of the word for the children. 4 The Pastor brought forth thence the young mans meat. 5 The Evangelist he furnish from thence the strong mans table with strong meat fit to feed him. Now judge and tell me without which of these the church can be, and how sufficiently God hath provided for his church and people in these. 1 Who can preach without the Apostles? 2 Who can comfort without the Prophets? 3 How can the child live without milke? 4 How shall the other christians live without meat? Obj. This were not provision sufficient against Heresies? Resp. Let us take heed of questioning the Lords wisdome in the order taken for the subsistence of the church: as if the Lord knew not there would be heresies, because he provided not sufficiently against them; or that he knew not best how, or by whom, or by what means to preserve the church against it. 2 God doubtlesse will not be wanting to his own Way; and whenever his way shall be erected amongst us, there will be other manner of gifts communicated by him to the church, to doe this and all other things for its good
3. See how little good Counsels have done in this kind, since that the frame of Gospel government hath been subverted. 4. The Apostle shews ver. 14. that this is the only means to pre∣serve men from being carryed away by every wind of doctrine, or by the cunning craft of men that lye in wait to deceive. 1. More then this, what is to be done? 2. Shall we now Idolize our own wisdom, or submit to Gods way in this matter? If we oppose here against God, shall we not kick against the pricks? 1 Tim. 3.15. The Church is called the pillar and ground of truth, as rightly constituted until the Church was driven away, the enemy could never set up their heresies so as after. Conclusion, 1. Let us set up Gods way, and that will pul down heresie, dissentions will fall quickly and quietly, Gods weapons hereunto are full of all might, ours full of weakness. 2. No Authority is to be made use of in a right constituted Church, but that God hath errected only. Illustration: 1. Gal. 1. The Apostle writes to the Churches of Galatia. 1. In Galatia were more Churches then one, and so no national Church. 2. These Churches are written all unto to amend their corrup∣tions they had within them, each one distinctly without any com∣mand of acting one, with, or over, another, as perfect bodies fur∣nisht with compleat Authority thereunto, without any extrinsecal power joyned unto it for assistance. The main ground in Scripture brought to prove the Combina∣tion of a Ministry in Classes, and in provincial and national Assem∣bly, I suppose, is taken from Acts 15.2. where it is said, the Church of Antioch did send to the Apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem about the question. Resp. 1. This, in sending to the Apostles, was not to send to Members of another Church, but of their own Church; the Apo∣stles being Members of all the Churches in the world. 2. In the Apostles times the word was not written, nor the mind of God fully known; therefore no doubtful thing was to be resolved, but by their advice, as the Epistles of Corinth shew, in which it appears, the Corinthians had sought to advice of the A∣postles in very many cases. Object. They had Apostolical Authority before, they need not to send to Jerusalem, for that Paul himself being with them.
Resp. The Church was not builded on one Apostle, but the A∣postles, Ephes. 2.20. 2. God required that every truth should be confirmed by the Testimony of two or three; so that to Apostolical Testimony it was necessary there should be two or three for to confirm it; yea, God saith, there are three that do bear witness in Heaven it self; so that it was in this case for confirmation of the Church in the truth, that there should be the Testimony of two or three Apostles to witness to it. Object. They write to the Apostles; that indeed was no extrin∣secal Authority: but here they write to the Elders also that were at Jerusalem, and this was extrinsecal. Resp. The Apostles and Elders were but one and the same men, they were not several persons; and here, as I suppose, is the great mistake in the controversie. 1. I have shewed before how James, Peter and John were in the ordinary way of Ministry designed to officiate, as other Mini∣sters in the Church of Jerusalem. 2, Those that held Episcopacy, held James to be Bishop of Je∣rusalem; those for Presbytery, that he was President of the Counsel, which was fulfilled in his Evangelical office, by which he had a kind of priority in the Church. 3. In 2 Pet. 5.1. Peter, who was an Apostle, as James was also  not only an Elder, but an Elder with o∣thers in the Church of Jerusalem, which were James and John. 4. None do speak to the question, but Peter and Iames, in the Counsel. Iohn, it is like, was not present; and if others had been re∣quired to answer to the question; it is like they would have been put on to speak to it; if they had spoken to it, it had been doubtless written of. 5. It being a question of doctrine, it is likely here the Church did not send to these Elders who were ordained for helps in go∣vernment only. 6. I suppose none could joyn with the Apostles that were or∣dinary men, to say as the Apostles did, ver. 28. saying, it seemed good to us, and the Holy Ghost. 7. If I should grant that there were other Elders, and not the Apostles, I suppose we should not have sufficient ground from hence to practise it.
1. These had extraordinary gifts; the Holy Ghost having visibly before descended on them. 2. That there was some more then ordinary cause in it, appears, because they pass by other Churches, and send to that, though they were neerer to them, and that not only because she was the Mo∣ther Church. Quest. Why did they send to the Apostles under both Titles, and not use one of them only, if there be meant the same persons in this place only? 1 As Elders, they wrote concerning their Members, and their sending forth to the Churches, in which they had relation to them as Pastors. 2. As Apostles, so they wrote concerning the doctrine; for the Answer is made from them distinctly, and divided into these two heads. Acts 15.24. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to write; For as much as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, subvert∣ing your souls, saying, ye must be circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom we gave no such Commandment. 1. This was done of them as Elders joyntly with the Church, where they officiated their ministerial calling. Verse 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you. Now this the Apostles did as Apostles, not as Elders; for it was not in the power of any Church to impose a burden on another Church which Christ had not imposed. I may, in this kind, speak much more in Answer to this Objection, but I am diversly at present straightned. One of the most usual Scriptures brought to confirm mixt Con∣gregations, is that of the Tares, Mat. 13. then which I think none more fully condemns it. I shall shew you the wrong application of the words, and the right using together for brevity sake, the Parable and Exposition made by Christ in the Chapter together. 1. The man is Christ, which sowed the word in his field, that is,  the world. 2. The tares, who are the children of the wicked and ungodly men, they appear among the good seed, which is the godly. 3. The Ministers ver. 28. would gather forth the wicked from
the good, but Christ saith, let them alone, lest, they root up good men with the bad. 4. They must both grow together vers. 30. untill the harvest, which is the end of the world, being the day of judgment; and then God sends forth the Angels, the reapers to gather them, and burn them. Others hence say, this was not to continue mixt societies with ungodlymen, that were openly prophane, but that the tares were so like the wheat, as that the Apostles may be deceived in the like∣ness of them, and pull up one for another. But briefly, to speak to the point, the falacie lyeth in these words, , these being rightly under∣stood, shew the truth, and it is thus. Christ, he preaching the word to the people of Church-Commu∣on, calls it the world, his Ministry works on some that they were born again by the immortal seed of the word; others, they hearing shew their hate against it; the Apostles see a necessity for the good of the wheat, that the tares be pulled away, which they desire: but, are forbid, until the accomplishment of this time, which is the time of continuance of Moses Ministry, in which Christ then was, and endured until Christs Resurrection, when the harvest was to begin, ver. 39.  not  as we understand it generally; when the Angels, the Ministers of the Gospel were to be sent out, and when the tares were to be ga∣thered out, as Mat. 28. the Apostles were sent out by Christ here∣tofore, Mat. 9.37, 38. The harvest is great, the labourers are few; Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth labourers into his harvest: Now whether the harvest in this acceptation be not to succeed the end of Moses Ministry, in which Believers were only added to the Church, or such as did outwardly profess the Gospel, and others excluded, I leave to be judged; and then what is to be gathered out? all that doth offend, Ceremonies, and all things offensive, and then the persons offending, both persons, and things are to be taken thence; to which if we add the place to which the corn in harvest is brought; It will yet more plainly ap∣pear, ver. 30. it is to be carryed into Christs barn, which is the Church, and the estate of grace here: ver. 41. after all things, of∣fences and offenders are gathered out, which is not to be untill the end of the world, and the wicked are cast into hell, then the righte∣ous shine in the Kingdom of their Father: Now this hath respect
to the state of glory in the Heavens; the Fathers Kingdom being now under administration then, before they were; this Parable, I suppose, was chiefly directed to the Jews, the Parable of the fish to the Gentiles, which is used in the same nature, to prove the same thing, as this, that is mentioned before. 1. Mat. 13.47. The net is the Gospel, the Sea the Heathen world, in opposittion to the Jew, set out by the field, and in respect of the trouble∣somness of the people under the Gospel-Ministry; as it was prophesied by the Psalmist, Psal. 2.1. Why do the Gentiles rage? 2. In that it is said, they took of every kind, signified, the many Nations, tongues and people should be brought in, and converted by the Gospel to God. 3. The Gospel under this Metaphorical expression, a net is said to ga∣therthem, to bring men to hear it, to gain on mens affections, and then to draw them, signifying, the power of the Gospel in the heart of man. 4. The net is full before he draws, which shews; 1. He observes the time in drawing: 2. He draws not for nothing: 3. He must not neglect to draw: 4. I suppose the net then full, when there are sufficient for num∣be rand fitness, to injoy communion withall in publike Ordinances. 5. He draws to shore, away from communion with the rest of the ungodly world, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye se∣perate; Now this was that part of Ministry done without the Church, the second part begins. 1. They sate down, which shews, 1. Their sedulity and care in doing what they did: 2. That they were to attend on this same: 3. That this work was a conjunctive work, not of any single person: 4 That they must be drawn out of the Sea, before any putting them into the vessels. Now, by putting them that were  fair into vessels, may be under∣stood of the Nations, severally gathered into several Churches; but I rather understand the Lord here speaking of a particular Church, in which there are to be  vessels, and the fish to be put in its own proper vessel, which is either to his company of youth, children or men. 2. They sate down, shews, the disposing of the Saints in their se∣veral places, for Communion is a Conjunctive work of the Mini∣stry. 3. The casting out of the bad, is a word used in the Scriptures, u∣sually for casting out men by Church-Censures out of Church-Com∣munion.
Obj. That the casting into the Sea, the sitting down, and putting in∣to the vessels, are not said to be done by any other then the same persons. Answer, 1. The work is one and the same. 2. As in the former Parable, the son of man did sow the seed, but the Angels gathered out the tares. So ver. 49. the Angels Ministry is to sepe∣rate the good from the bad, they are not said to cast the net into the Sea. 3. This work was to begin  at the end of Moses Ministry. 4. This work of Seperation among the Gentiles, is to be continued in the Church, until all offences and offenders are gathered out of Christs Kingdom, which is unto the end of the world. Vers. 52. of this Chapter, is indeed the key of this Scripture, without which it cannot be rightly understood, in which it is said, a housholder bringeth forth of his treasury new things and old. 1. Hence it is clear, Christ mainly intended, in these Parables, the Gospel-estate. 2. He that would understand them rightly, must apprehend some∣what of that estate which went before the Gospel. 3. It is implyed, that unless all things were understood rightly, both of the old and new; if but any thing of them all were misunderstood, it would bring a misunderstanding of all, as experementally the end of the world misunderstood, begat generally a misunderstanding of the whole Scripture. Ezekiel's Vision, Chap. 40.41. which is of a new Temple, and seems to allude unto that which we have formerly written of, which I shall write in a few words; That the vision is apprehended to set out the Church under the Gospel estate; and its several conditions unto the end of the world is assented unto of some. 1. Then, by the wall, in the gate whereof stood the man who had line and the rod in his hand; I understand the primitive times, in which Christ was, and wherein the measure was given unto the Apostles to measure the Church by, which was the Gospel. 2. In the outer Court, I suppose, was intended Luthers time, which had but little measuring in it, which was further off from the Temple-estate, and next insued the ending of the Church after the pri∣mitive times. 3. He is brought to the inward Court, which I suppose to have re∣ference to the Reformation made by Calvin, which was farther from the wall, signifying the primitive times, and nearer to the Temple-state, of which much is spoken in the Epistle to Philadelphia, Rev. 3.12.
which, if it be understood to typifie, with the 6 other Churches, the estate of the Church to the end of the world, as many suppose, will then fall out to be accomplished in these times, and that are now to succeed; and also in Rev. 11.1. & Chap. 15.8. which estate did succeed the Sardin estate, in which was but a name of life, and is rightly understood by some to represent Luthers time, as Bernard in his Introduction to the Revel. 1. In the former Courts, were only 30 single Chambers on a row, one by another; in the Temple-estate there are 3 Chambers one over ano∣ther, so in order, and the wideness of the house still upward, from the lower to the middle, and so to the upper, as having an allusion to the three-fold Congregation belonging to the Church, the last having most enlargements in it. 2. In this estate, before the doors of the Chamber was a separate place, but none in the Courts. 3. In this estate, Rev. 11.1. the Temple is measured, and the wor∣shippers, but not in the other. 4. In this estate, the Courts are left out, and not to be measured by command, which John would have done else, as is to be thought, ha∣ving been before measured. Object. Why may not Episcopacy be looked on as the first Court? Resp. They were brought off from it by King Henry the eight; but Christ was to bring these from Court to Court, and not man, as I verily suppose both Calvin and Luther were, as appeared by the work the Lord wrought by them; the last great work which the Lord brings the Church to, is the Temple-estate which will greatly differ from the other estates, in which the world will be more blessed then ever. For which is reserved the greatest mercy, in which will be amends made to the Saints for their many miseries, abundantly, through the grace that is to be revealed of Jesus Christ. To end al, one word more of places of Assembly spoken in the Scripture. 1. The Synagogue was a place the Apostles oft preach't in, but never as to the Church, but disputing or perswading the things of the King∣dom, as having to do with men, arguing against the way of God there, and not perswaded of it, being a mixt people. 2. When men were brought to beleeve the Gospel, then they were seperated thence to some private house, where they had set up the Gos∣pel. Ordinances among them, Acts 18.4, 7, 8. We read not, that in the Synagogues any publike Church-work was done, as baptizing, admini∣string the Lords Supper, and the like. 3. Because that one house, it is like, could not contain all for number,
and to avoid confusion in the execution of the Ministry in publike mee∣tings; it was necessary, that they should be distributed according to the several administrations of the Gospel, dispensed among them into seve∣ral places. Hence Paul, writing to the whole Church of Rome, writes in particular to the Church in the house of Priscilla, Rom. 16.3.5. here cal∣led a Church Synec dochically, for a part of the Church of Rome, as the Pastors part, or Teachers for the whole. 4. The place where the whole Church met, as is observed by Master Mead, was called by the name of Church, figuratively calling so the thing containing for the people contained in it, 2 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eate in, or despise ye the Church of God? where he notes, That the Church here set in opposition to their houses, is to be taken for a material house seperated to publike meetings among them. Obj. May be made, That there was no particular place for general meetings, or for receiving Sacraments: The Scripture saith, they went from house to house breaking of bread. Resp. As Mr. Mead hath well observed, that  may be un∣derstood for  in the house; which some understand to be the house in which the Disciples were, at the descending of the Holy Ghost. 5. I suppose, that whereas in several places of Scripture, we have men∣tion made of certain Churches in particular houses; I suppose it serves to illustrate the truth of the doctrine proposed; and this one thing I dare affirm, that the way of God, when ever brought out to the world, will be as strange, though contained in the word, as if it had been never writ∣ten in it, as appears in Ezekiel's writing of the Government to be un∣der the Temple-state, Ezek. 43.10, 11. which is yet to be. Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern; And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, the goings out thereof, and the commings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof write it in their sight; which sheweth, that all these things were to be hid for the sins of the people, & when revealed, it should be as a thing now written, and new to the world, which the Lord will not reveal un∣til the putting away of our abominations out of his sight, and have pulled down the posts we have set up by his posts, and the thresholds placed by his thresholds, which keeps the Lord and his way from us, and may occasion, being hid, through dissentions, destruction to us, from which God and his truth can only rescue and save us, which is to be diligently sought for of al, as that, in which our lives and peace are bound up in, & of our posterity, by which we shal become one in God, in Christ, in the Faith, in way and worship of the Lord, and become all of one mind and one spirit, as becometh the Saints and the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ; all which the good Lord, for the glory of his grace, works in all the Saints, according to his mighty working, which he worketh in those that beleeve to peace and righteousness here, and eternal life hereafter. Amen.
depiction of a man or minister preaching from the pulpit in a church full of people The Orthodox true Minister, depiction of a man or minister preaching from the window of a house or inn, with a sign featuring a bell, to a crowd of people outside, including three in a tree the Seducer and false Prophet.
