B4296dA R233980 45789174 172488
PROPOSALS To the Reverend Parochial Clergy, being an Epistolary Supplement to a former Essay for promoting Lending Libraries. Reverend Sirs, THE Persons I chiefly address to in this Supplement, and to whose Hands I transmit it, are you who have subscrib'd to my Catechetical Lectures. And the Experience I have had of your Candour and Good Affection to my Attempts, encourages me to communicate to you particularly, the following Proposal, in order to lay the Foundation of Libraries, for the Use of such of the Parochial Clergy amongst you, whose Preferments will not enable them to buy for themselves. I know to whom I write, that it is to Men of Letters, and Lovers of Books; and therefore need not enlarge in shewing, first, that as the Soul of Man is infinitely more valuable than the Body, so that Charity which goes towards the cultivating the Minds and Manners of Men with Divine Knowledge, and Christian Graces, whereby they may be made meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, must needs be of a far more exalted Nature, than that which terminates only upon the Welfare of this mortal Life. Nor, Secondly, need I more than suggest, that Libraries dispers'd throughout the Nation, are the most wanted part of Charity in this Church, as the Case now stands with us of the Inferiour Clergy. For why? I am very sure, there are not so few as Two thousand Parishes in this Kingdom endow'd with not above Twenty Pound per Annum, for the Maintenance of the Minister, out of which, as it is impossible he should furnish himself with necessary Books; so it is equally inconceivable, how without Books he can answer the Ends of his Function, and, and not fall into the Contempt, to which Ignorance must necessarily expose us; especially now that (so many of the Laity pretend to some Skill in Letters.) And now being perswaded, that if the Foundation of a Library in every Deanary, or Market-Town, were once begun but in 10 l. the Stock wou'd by one means, or other, soon increase to a compleat Sett of all necessary Books; Out of a well-meant Zeal for the Service of God's Church, and the Honour of my Function, I have adventured upon the following Project for the carrying of it on; and that a Design I put my Heart so much upon, may better take, I shall therefore propose a Means, which I humbly conceive may be of such a Nature, as will be a considerable Good in it self, abstracting from the End it serves; nay, and will be as immediately serviceable to the Good of Souls, as the end it self will be, which is to be accomplish'd by it; And is such withal, as cannot be properly said to be a Charge to any. In order to make which appear; First, I desire the Preface to the Discourse upon the Doctrine of the Baptismal Covenant may be read, and consider'd in the full Purport of it, by the Reverend, both Clergy and Schoolmasters, into whose Hands that Book shall come. Secondly, I humbly propose that they would please to recommend that Book to the Youth both of their Parishes, and Schools, to the Purposes specify'd in the said Preface. Thirdly, That especially every Minister wou'd recommend it to such of the Gentry of their Acquain∣tance, as are piously disposed, to purchase Numbers of the foremention'd Books to bestow in such poor Families as are their Tenants and Neighbours; but not well able of themselves to buy a Book for the Use of their Children and Servants, and the promoting of Family-Religion. Fourthly, The Property of that Discourse upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, being so far kept unalienated to any Bookseller, that it may be in my Power to dispose of it as shall be most for any Publick Service; I do propose by a Sale of 400 Books in every Deanary, at 1 s. 6 d. per Book, to clear 10 l. with which to purchase a Box of the choicest Books wherewith to lay the Foundation of Lending Libraries in every Deanary, or Market-Town. Fifthly, That 400 Books may be vended in every Deanary, to the Purposes aforesaid, is not hard to imagine; when it is consider'd, that there are at leastwise Twenty Parishes in every Deanary, and that Twenty Books may be dispos'd of into each Parish, one with another, the Amount of which will be 400 Books. For tho' in some Parishes Five Books may not be purchas'd; yet what may be suppos'd to go off in the Towns and Schools in each Deanary, will make up the Number propos'd. Sixthly, Since some of the remote Parts of this Kingdom are neither furnish'd with Schools, nor in most Parishes with Persons of Ability to purchase these Expositions for their own Instruction, and to advance such a Fund of Learning for their Clergy, as will enable them to instruct the People commit∣ted to their Charge: It is propos'd, That what can be gain'd by the Subscriptions of the great Schools of England; viz. Westminster, Eaton, Winchester, Merchant-Taylors, St. Pauls, and Charter-House Schools; as also from other Eminent Schools, and from Subscribers in London, should be wholly laid out towards purchasing Lending Libraries for those Places in England, which are not sufficient of themselves to make such a Provision. And it is but reasonable that this part of the Nation which is so much under the blessed Influences of Religion and Learning it self, and wants no Supplies to promote both, should permit what may be advanced in this way, to go towards the promoting the like in other Parts not in a Condition to do it. And indeed it is a matter of sad Consideration, to see how barbarous and ignorant some places in this Kingdom still remain, notwithstanding that the Gospel shines in other parts of the Nation with a Meridian Brightness. The reason is, the poor Provi∣sion made for its Encouragement in those places, whereas in all reason the greatest Encouragement ought to be given there, where Nature is most unkind and uninviting, to balance the Inconveniencies thereof. And I am verily persuaded, that if Books were more easie to be met with in those Parts, as ungrateful as is the Climate, Men of Worth would follow them, it being natural for Persons who are Lovers of Knowledge, to value all Places alike, where Religion and Learning do flourish. Seventhly, And now I hope by this time it may appear that the means herein propos'd, for the purchasing of these Lending Libraries, is of such a Nature as to be a most great and considerable Good in it self, ab∣stracting
from the end it serves, and to be as immediately conducive to the Good of Souls, as the end will be which is to be accomplished by it. Nor lastly, Can that which is here Propos'd, be properly said to be a Charge to any, because every Pur∣chaser has here a Book at an under Price for his Money. There are not many of that Generosity as meerly to Give, though to advance the most Publick and Useful Design; and what they bestow does generally come with such difficulty from them, as not to be obtain'd without so much Application, as will require a Person should have little else to do than to solicite that one thing amongst them. But the way here Pro∣posed, seems to me to be both easie, and grateful; easie, because few grudge their Penny if they have but a Penniworth; and grateful, because I verily believe there is scarce that Parent so bad himself, who will not be very well pleased his Child should be Principled in Religion as well as Learning, and who will not thank the School-Master that puts him upon buying a Catechetical Exposition, in which to Instruct him; and the Parent or Master of a Family, will, in all likelihood do the same, and value the Clergy the more for their Care, in advising them to such Books as shall be for the Instruction of those who belong to them, especially if Ministers will be at the Pains sometimes to examine the Youth upon what they shall read. And methinks where Publick Ends of the greatest Consequence can be provided for, to no Man's Private Charge or Disadvantage, all should be satisfied. And now I am to intreat the Candour of my Reverend Brethren, that however I may be mistaken in the Practicableness of this Design, (which yet I hope I am not, several of the Libraries propos'd having been already advanc'd upon this Foot) they would believe I sincerely intend the Good of Souls, and the Honour of my Function, in all that is here propos'd. That I am so pressing, as for Parochial Libraries in the Planta∣tions, so for Lending Libraries in England, is, because, as in the former I know no good a Clergy, that are not able to furnish themselves with Books in going over, can do in a Country where none are to be bought when they are there; So in the latter, I am certain that Good cannot be done, which is expected from every Minister here in England, when the Third Part of our Parochial Clergy are not enabled by their Pre∣ferments, to buy the fourth part of those Books, which are necessary to enable them fully to instruct the Peo∣ple in the meer Necessaries to Salvation. Standing Libraries will signifie little in the Country, where Per∣sons must ride some Miles to look into a Book; such Journeys being too expensive of Time and Money: But Lending Libraries, which come home to them without Charge, may tolerably well supply the Vacancies in their own Studies, till such time as these Lending may be improv'd into Parochial Libraries. But when I propose to lay the Foundation of these Libraries, by the Sale of my own Book, this will need some Apology. That I propose my own, it is not so, but that I do with all Humility submit to the Judgment of my Superiors and Equals too, to accept it, or refuse it, and to substitute some other in its room, the Sale whereof may provide for the End propos'd. But that it ought to be some Book upon the Subject of our Baptismal Covenant, as fittest to be the Subject of a Christian Institution for Youth, and indeed a Family-Book, with Submission to better Judgments, I have these Reasons to offer for it: 1. I take the Covenant of Grace, or our Baptismal Covenant, to comprise the whole of Christianity, even all that, than which, no Man, as a meer Christian, is necessitated to know more, and than which the meanest ought not to know less. No Man in any Civil Contract can perform his Bonds, without knowing the Conditions of the Obligations; no more can a Christian be suppos'd to perform his Covenant with God, without knowing the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of it. 2. It is absolutely necessary, that all Youth should comprehend the General Nature, Terms, and Conditions of their Baptismal Covenant, before they go to be Confirmed. 3. And all Persons whatsoever, before they go to the Holy Sacrament, because in both these Ordinances they ratifie their Vow with God. 4. And if in our Visitation of the Sick, the best Advice we can give to Persons in that Con∣dition, in order to prepare them for Death, is to examine themselves concerning their Failures, in all, and every the Terms and Conditions required on their part in their Baptismal Covenant: 5. And if at the Day of Judgment the Process will turn upon this, and they will be justify'd or condemn'd, according as they have perform'd, or not perform'd their Covenant with God, I know no Scheme of Divinity so necessary for every private Christian to be Master of, as this. And when moreover some suitable Devotions for Families are added at the end of such a Book, I know nothing may bid more fairly for a proper Family-Book, than one upon this Subject. It may seem indeed, as is objected in the Preface to the Book here propos'd, That the Matter treated of, in a Discourse of this Nature, may be above the Capacities of Youth. And I would fain know what Gram∣mar, or Institutions in other Sciences, are not so at first: But as often conning of Rules and Terms of Art by Children, lets gradually into their Minds that Knowledge, which will be useful to them all their Lives; so here with a hundredth part less reading o'er a Book, they will become perfect Masters of the whole Scope of these Christian Elements. And as for grown Persons, as nothing is more familiar to them than the Notions about Covenants and Contracts, and of Signing, Sealing, and of the Obligations resulting therefrom; so I am perswaded their Capacities will soonest reach that Scheme of Christianity, which is deliver'd in those Forms, and under those Terms. And therefore, in compliance with the General Apprehensions of Men, it is to be suppos'd, that the Holy Spirit does all along represent the Transactions between God and Man in the way of Covenant. It is not indeed to be expected, that a Discourse of this Nature should descend to all the particular and subdivided Terms of the Covenant, whether Articles necessary to be believed, or Duties to be practised. No Elementary Institution of any kind does that; but in a Discourse upon the General Doctrine of the Co∣venant betwixt God and Man, enter'd into in our Baptism, are laid down those great Strokes of Christiani∣ty, which are to be fill'd up afterwards by more particular Explications. And here the whole Scheme of saving Truths is to be laid down in an orderly Method, so that every Hearer of the Word of God may be able to refer what he shall at any time hear or read in a desultory manner, to its proper Head; for want of which Skill, Christianity (though the most rational System of Verities in the World) seems to many to be a meer huddle of incoherent Principles and Practices, whose end they know not, nor how wisely every thing in it is adapted to carry on that noble End. In short, as meer Zeal for Publick Service has excited me to leave no Stone unturn'd, to procure Parochial Libraries for the Plantations, (and I thank God with some considerable Success:) So if, in laying the Foundation of the like Design in any Parts of this Kingdom, I can be serviceable to my Mother the Church, and my Reverend Brethren at home, whilst the Business I am prosecuting for those Parts detains me here, I shall think my self sufficiently happy in such an Undertaking; being to both A most Devoted, and Humble Servant, THO. BRAY.
A Double CATALOCUE of BOOKS, to the Value of 10 l. pro∣pos'd for the laying the Foundation of a Lending Library. The First, A Catalogue of some of the Principal Fathers, according to the latest and best Editions of the same. SAnctorum Patrum Clementis, Barnabae, Ignatii, Polycarpi, &c. Epi∣stolae juxta Ed. Cottelerii Antwerpiae 1698. 2 Vol. Fol. Justini Martytris Opera Grae. Lat juxta Ed. Parisiensem, An. 1636. Col. 1686. Fol. — Clement is Alexandrini Opera Grae. Lat. juxta Ed. Parisiensem 1641. Col. 1688. Fol. — Eusebii, Socratis, Sozomeni, Theodoreti, Evagrii Hist. Eccles. Grae. Lat. juxta Ed. Valesii Par. Amstel. aut Moguntiae, 1679. 3 Vol. Fol. —Praeparatio Evangelica, juxta Ed. Par. 2 Vol. Fol. Col. 1688. —Demonstratio Evangelica, juxta Ed. Par. 2 Vol. Fol. Col. 1688. The Second, A Catalogue of some Modern Authors upon the Chief Heads of Divinity. Bodies of Divinity. THomae Aquinatis Summoe, Fol. — Turretini Institutionis Theologiae Christianae Compendium, 4o. — Philippi à Limborch Theologia Christiana, Fol. — Dr. Scot's Christian Life, 3 Vol. 8o. — Apologies for the Truth of Christianity, and the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. GRotius de Veritate Christianae Religionis, 12o. — Parker's Demonstration of the Law of Nature, and of the Truth of the Christian Religion, 4o. — On the General Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace. MR. Allen's Discourse on the Two Covenants. — First Volume of Catechetical Lectures; with the Six Additio∣nal Lectures, Fol. — Upon the CREED. BIshop Pearson on the Creed, Fol. — Kettlewell's Christian Believer, 8o. — On the Moral Law and Christian Duties. BIshop Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium, Fol. — Bishop Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiae & de Juramento. — Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Commandments, 4o. — Kettlewel's Measures of Christian Obedience, 8o. — Upon the Doctrine of Repentance. DR. Goodman's Penitent pardon'd, 8o. — Dr. Hooper's Discourse of the Lent-Fast, 8o. —
Of Divine Assistance, Prayer, and the Sacraments, those Means of performing the foregoing Articles. MR. Allen of Divine Assistance. — Bishop Hopkin's Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, 4o. — Mr. Kettlewel's Help and Exhortation to Worthy Communion, 8o.— Sermons. BIshop Sanderson's Folio. — Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons, 10 Volumes, 8o. — Ministerial Directories; with the Lives of Eminent Divines. BIshop Burnet's Pastoral Care, 8o.— Bibliotheca Parochialis, 4o. — Life of Bishop Bedel, 8o. — Modern Controversie. MR. Allen's Works, 4 Vol. 12o. — Bp. King's Inventions of Men in the Worship of God 12o. — Snake in the Grass, 8o. — Note 1. That either of the foregoing Setts of Books, either that of the Fathers, or the later consisting of Modern Authors, shall be sent according as the Clergy in the respective Deanaries shall agree amongst themselves. Or they may pitch upon any other Book, or Books, of equal Value, instead of either of those here propos'd. 2. That each Library, together with the SHORT DISCOURSES shall be sent down in such a Book-Press divided by Shelves, as may serve for a Repository to keep them in where-ever they are lodg'd; and the Books shall be mark'd on the Covers to what place they belong, at the Charge also of the Undertaker. 3. A certain pious Person out of Zeal, as well to lay the Foundation of Christian Knowledge in the Minds of Youth, by an Instruction in the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant (which, besides that it is the first, and most necessary part of Christian Instruction upon the foremention'd Accounts, is at this time more peculiarly requisite, as it is a direct Antidote against the two prevailing Heresies of these Days, Socinianism and Antinomianism) as to promote the Design of having Lending Libraries in every Deanary for the Use of the Clergy, does promise to contribute five Pounds towards the Purchase of 30 Setts of the Short Discourses, which will reduce the Price to 1 s. 3 d. per Book. 4. If in any large, or Populous Town, the Number of the SHORT DISCOURSES propos'd, shall arise to 400. the Mi∣nister of that Place may have the Benefit of the Library, purchas'd out of the Profits thereof, solely to himself, and his Successors, Libraries being more peculiarly useful and necessary to the Clergy in Towns, where though it be requisite their Abilities should be greatest, yet the Provision and Maintenance for that purpose is generally there the least. 5. If any School shall solely from it self advance the foremention'd Tale of Subscriptions, the School-Master thereof shall enjoy for himself, and Successors, the like appropriated Advantages of the purchas'd Library. 6. So also shall any large Country-Parish; but with this Proviso, with respect to both Towns, Schools, and large Parishes, that a Quota of Subscriptions go from each towards purchasing Lending Libraries for the Use of the respective Deanaries, That being the first and principal Design. 7. and Lastly, The Person, who will undertake the providing both the Short Discourses, and also the Lending Libraries at the fore∣mentioned Terms, is Mr. William Hawes, Book-seller at the Sign of the Rose in Ludgate street; of whom any of the Clergy may have the Six Additional Lectures to the First Volume; and as many of the First Volume perfect as they please. And I take this Opportunity also to let my Reverend Subscribers know, that when the Cheapness of Paper, and better Leisure, will permit me to proceed in Printing off my Second Volume, from the same Person they are to receive the Books in my Absence out of England. And now I shall only crave leave to add, with respect to my present Proposal, that upon Experience it has been found, that if but half a dozen of the more sober Youth in a Parish, can be once brought to purchase, and make use of the Book, and to render the Minister some Account thereof every Sunday in the Vestry, or Chancel, after Divine Service is over, the whole Youth of the same Parish, (excited thereunto either by Example, or Emulation,) will in a short time give themselves up to the like Discipline of their respective Pastors, to his exceeding great Comfort, and their own no small Advantage: Whereby an Opportunity also will be given to each Minister, so to form the Youth who are the growing Hopes of his Parish, that they shall all of them devoutly make their Respouses in the Common Prayer, and observe an exact Decorum in their Behaviour throughout the whole Service, for want of which our Liturgy does so sadly suffer at this Day. In short, the whole Profit of this Copy of the Short Discourse, is intended to promote the Design of Lending Libraries, if my Bre∣thren of the Clergy shall please to accept it, and so encourage it, as shall be serviceable to that purpose; and tho' I am offer'd considera∣bly for it, yet, as upon the nicest Computation, it is not thought that one Shilling will be gain'd by the Sale even of 12000 Books in the Method here propos'd, when all requisite Charges shall be defray'd; yet if, by the best management of the Design, any thing shall be sav'd, that all, and every Farthing of it shall be accounted as a thing devored, and laid out to the promoting of the forementioned Design, is what I do here enter my Protest to, and shall be punctually observ'd, whilst under the Management, and Direction of, Reverend Sirs, Your most Devoted and Humble Servant, THO. BRAY. London, Printed for William Hawes, at the Rose in Ludgate-street, 1698.
