C3579 669.f.26[23] 99869577 163905
CR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the King. A PROCLAMATION To Restrain the Abuses of Hackney Coaches in the Cities of London, and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof. CHARLES R. WHereas the excessive number of Hackney Coaches, and Coach-horses, in and a∣bout the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, are found to be a common Nuisance to the Publique Dammage of Our People, by reason of their rude and disorderly standing, and passing to and fro, in and about Our said Cities and Suburbs, the Streets and Highways being thereby pestred and made unpassable, the Pavements broken up, and the Common Passages obstru∣cted and become dangerous, Our Peace violated, and sundry other mischiefs and evils occasio∣ned: We taking into Our Princely Consideration these apparent Inconveniences, and resolving that a speedy remedy be applyed to meet with, and Redress them for the future, Do by and with the Ad∣vice of Our Privy Counsel, Publish Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, And We do by this Our Proclamation expresly Charge and Command, That no Person or Persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Quality whatsoever, Keeping or Vsing any Hackney Coaches, or Coach-horses, Do, from and after the sixth day of November next, permit or suffer the said Coaches and Horses, or any of them, to stand, or remain, in any the Streets or Passages in or about Our said Cities, either of London or Westminster, or the Suburbs belonging to either of them, to be there hired; but that they and every of them keep their said Coaches and Horses within their respective Coach-houses, Sta∣bles and Yards (whither such Persons as desire to Hire the same may resort for that purpose) upon pain of Our high Displeasure, and such Forfeitures, Pains and Penalties as may be inflicted for the Contempt of Our Royal Commands in the Premises, whereof We shall expect a strict Ac∣compt. And for the due execution of Our Pleasure herein, We do further Charge and Command the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Our City of London, That they in their several Wards, And Our Iustices of Peace within Our said Cities of London and Westminster, and the Liberties and Suburbs thereof; and all other Our Officers, and Ministers of Iustice, to whom it appertaineth, do take espe∣cial care in their respective Limits, that this Our Command be duly observed. And that they from time to time, return the names of all those who shall wilfully offend in the Premises, to Our Privy Council, and to the end they may be proceeded against by Indictments and Presentments, for the Nuisance and otherwise, according to the severity of the Law, and Demerits of the Offenders. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighteenth day of October, in the Twelfth year of Our Reign. God save the King. London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1660.
