C3980 E1531_2 99867840 170057
Saint Chrysostome HIS PARAENESIS, Or Admonition wherein hee recalls THEODORUS the fallen. Or generally An Exhortation for Des∣perate sinners. Vincenti datur Manna, torpenti relinqui∣tur multa miseria. T. A. Kempis. Translated by the Lord Viscount Grandison Prisoner in the Tower. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Signe of the George near Cliffords Inne in Fleet-Street. 1654.
To the Reader. I Should not have the vanity to believe any thing of my owne worthy the Presse: but being concern'd much in this treatise, I un∣dertook he translation; and with some paines renew'd my long discontinued acquaintance with the Greek, to render Saint Chrysostomes mean∣ing into this plaine English. It was writ with passion to his fallen friend, & I am very confident it may be bene∣ficiall to many, whose case is not unlike this of Theodorus. I wish it may, and that it may not be look'd lightly on as mine, but with more serious eyes as the counsell of that reverend father whose it is. I am certain there can be nothing more appositely said to men in a despe∣rate course of life, then what may bee
found here. I propound nothing of my own to any man, but such an excellent cordiall as this I could not take alone, I desire it may be to others, what I pray it may prove unto my self, that in this time of misery (though we are ly∣able to all other losses) we may lay cer∣tain hold on the better part which can∣not be taken from us. Yours GRANDISON.
TO MY NOBLE LORD THE EARL of CLEAVLAND. MY LORD, SInce I first began this translation, your Lordship has stil encourag'd me to go on with it, and when I had ended it, I could not
but think it unfirnish't, till I had prefixt your name to it. I have alwaies told your Lordship that I had no vani∣ty to own my imperfections: and if I thought my confi∣dence to print this Treatise a fault, I would smother ra∣ther then publish it. But ha∣ving most seriously weighed the content and satisfaction the originall brought to my selfe, after I had taken the paines to translate it, I re∣solv'd to make it communi∣cable to as many as please to read Saint Chrysostome in my English. And though it par∣ticularly
aimes at fallen Theodorus, and as at him, so at every dissolute person; the most opinionated reser∣ved men may read it, and perhaps somtimes find them∣selves not a little concern'd in it. For it most particular∣ly treats against desperati∣on; which is a disease lyable to the greatest confidence. Especially when the very same men (who have had the severe curiosity almost to blind their brethren with plucking the motes out of their eyes) shall be brought to consider the beames that
are in their own: so great and just often proves their doome, who are not fore∣warn'd by our Saviour not to judge lest they be judged. My Lord, This treatise of the holy Father, signally invites us to be our owne Physicians: and sincerely to arraigne our soules before the face of Heaven; it in∣structs us how to prize the beauties God has endowed our minds with, unlesse wee soyle them with our owne negligence; it teaches us to preferre the care of our souls
above all earthly alurements though baited with the most tempting delights; and may well then be a fit mission from a Prison to those in the greatest liberty; for men in restraint (while they are most forbid vanities) begin to know then most truly what they are; for all decei∣ving delights possesse us like the Devil; they take our wits from us; but the correcting hand of God, whilst we are in the troubles and miseries of this world, prepares us for a better; and here wee shall find weapons and arms fit for the fiercest conflict of
that nature, here (my Lord in this translation which I dedicate to you with that infinite desire I have ever to be esteemed Your Lordship's Most faithful servant GRANDISON.
AN EXHORTATION TO DESPERATE SINNERS, Taken out of St. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM In his admonition to falling THEODORUS. CHAP. I. SAint Chrysostome passionately describes the great esteeme and valew wee ought to have of our own soules, and on that Basis hee raises this Fa∣brick of this Treatise, to perswade Theodo∣rus plung'd into extream sinns, and be∣witch'd with the vanity of dissolute life, to return to Vertue and Piety, in which hee had once been a most eminent exam∣ple. Who will give water to my head? and to
my eyes a Fountain of tears? I take up this lamentation at a farre more seasonable and needfull time, then when the Prophets sor∣row for the Jews, made him so passionate a Mourner. For although I determine not to bewaile the desolation of many Cities, or Kingdomes: I esteem the necessity of my grief much more urging, that am to de∣plore the losse of thy most inestimable Soul, more to be priz'd, and therefore more to be lamented then many Nations: Whose dig∣nity, though never so swelling in the additi∣ons of vast riches, and innumerous numbers of people, could not make them equall to thee? Eccle. 16. For such is the esteem of one man embracing the will of God above ten thousand transgressors. What then were infinite millions of those Jews in the bal∣lance with thee before thy sad fall? Where∣fore let no man blame me, if I double the bitternesse of the Prophets lamentation, de∣siring (thus nearly concern'd) to make my grief exceed his. And though I bewaile no sackt City, nor sinfull men subdued by a conquering power; the subject of my tears exacts a deeper sorrow. It is a most sacred soul, whose ruine I regret; a soul for∣saken, and in a most deplor'd condition, God's own Temple demolisht and raz't. A
Temple so sacred, as Christ himself tooke pleasure to inhabite there, while he go∣vern'd alone unrivall'd by the possession or dominion of sin or vanity whatsoever. How did the glorious beauty of thy soul excell all the magnificence and pomp of this World? whose onely Ornament was our Lord JESUS, the World's Saviour, and Redeemer. Where is this beauty ba∣nisht? Where consum'd it? in the rage and flames certainly of that hellish Fire, which every temptation thy too easie soule yeelds to bring with it; for prepar'd art thou by the Devills malice for thy destruction. What honest and ingenuous man could abstain from mourning, perusing cordially the Prophets lamentation. When he speaks of those barbarous sacrilegious hands which prophan'd the Holy of Holies, com∣mitting every thing that was dedicated to the honor and service of God. The Cheru∣bins, the Ark, the Propitiatorie, the Tables of stone, the Golden Urne. And is not thy fall of much more sorrowfull consequence, when all these were in a manner Types of thee, but representations of that greater ex∣cellence thy soul was once enricht with. Thou wert the more sacred Temple, though not resplendent with Gold or Sil∣ver;
Yet refulgent with the grace of the Ho∣ly spirit: Who hadst within thee in stead of Cherubins and the Ark, God the Father, Christ his Son, and the holy Comforter. But (alas) Thy glories are perisht, and thou become a very Wildernesse, wild and desolate, stript and naked, rob'd and spoil'd of all thy riches and sumptuous Ornaments, which were once so miracu∣lously and divinely eminent in thy pious life, that they were above humane faith, these (I say) are ravish'd from thee, and (more to augment our sorrow) wee see thee ruinated like a desert full of dangers, which no body undertakes to keep. Thou hast no Vertue left to bar the doors against assaulting temptations, but lyest open to e∣very corruption, and wicked determination of thy fancy. Whether it be pride, or lust, or drunkennesse; or avarice what sin soever the Devill commands to storme thee, there is nothing that defends the breach, no∣thing that guards thy unman'd soule: Yet once how much of heaven hadst thou in thee whilst (like it) the purity of thy thoughts was inaccessible to all manner of ill. Mee thinks I speak wonders, not to be believ'd by those who see thee in this thy forlorne and desperate condition, which makes me
pray, lament, and mourn continually, that I may see thee return again, to thy former integrity, and piety, which may perhaps seem to humane apprehension impossible; but all things are easie in the hands of God. For he it is that lifteth the beggar from the dust; and exalteth the needy from the Dunghill, that he may sit with Princes, even with the Princes of his people. Hee it is that maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother of Chil∣dren. Ps. 113. On this infinite and un∣searchable love of our God to us, build thou thy hopes, and thou wilt find an im∣possibility, a strange incapacity within thy self to despair at any time, grace still work∣ing in thee to change thy heart into better, and better desires? For if the Devill had the power to pluck thee from so eminent a top and glory of Vertue, into this Abysse of wickednesse: Much more easily can our Omnipotent God raise thee up again, restore thee to thy former liberty and honor, and and not onely set thee free from this base captivity, but make thy happinesse greater then ever yet it was. Onely I beseech thee resolutely to break all snares that shall be lay'd in the way of thy return. Let not thy hopes which are so full of certainty, be cut
off by any destructive fear, or timorous per∣swasion; lest those punishments light on thee which are due onely to the desperately wicked. For neither the number nor the greatnesse of our sins does absolutely con∣demn us to a condition irrecoverable. But resolv'd settlednesse, and an intollerable composednesse in impious waies, are the sure manifest signes of a soul so fall'n, that it shall never rise again. Wherefore Solomon does not speak generally of every man who transgresseth: Pro. 18. but names that wicked man, who when he comes into the depth of evill, contemns his mercy. It is onely a wicked purpose never to leave sin that plunges men into this dangerous Gulfe of despair, and iniquity, from whence they can never so much as look back, and much more difficultly return. For the deceiving weights of wickednesse lie like a heavy Collar on the necke of the soul, and forcing our eyes upon the Earth, forbids them to look up to our Lord that made them. Know then it is the part of a gene∣rous and truly daring Christian spirit, not to endure the Tyrants yoake; vali∣antly to combate and destroy those offi∣cious guards, his watchfull malice sits over us. And with the Prophet, to acknow∣ledge
our obedience there onely, where it is onely due; saying with him, As the eyes of a Mayden unto the hand of her Mistresse; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, un∣till he have mercy upon us: have mercy on us, Lord have mercy on us, for we are ex∣ceedingly fill'd with contempt. Ps. 123. These are divine exhortations, these are the doctrines of the most heavenly Philosophy, we are fill'd with contempt, we are shaken with infinite violent stormes of sad events. Yet shall not this debar us from looking up to our God, and imploring his assistance: Nay, till our Lord has granted our Petiti∣ons, we must put on the confidence of im∣portunate beggars, and not let our prayers cease til our requests are granted. This is the true Character of a pious daring soul, not to be baffled from his hopes by the violence of ill successe: not to start out of the way or goe back, because as yet he has not found the expected issue of his prayers, but to en∣dure to the last, till the Lord have mercy on him according to the precept and exam∣ple of the Prophet David.
CHAP. II. The Devills endeavours and practices to undermine our hopes, and raze the Foundation of our eternall happi∣nesse. The comparison betwixt a dy∣ing body, and a perishing soul; with an exhortation to be couragious in our conflicts with the Devill. THE wily subtilty of Satan aimes at nothing more then to inveigle us in a Labyrinth of despair; still feeding our na∣turall tottering inclinations with change and variety of doubts, and once unsetled, we are his certain prey; for irresolution ex∣cludes us from our expectations in Heaven, and relyance upon the benignity of our most mercifull God and Father; it vio∣lently and too insensibly drives us from our hopes, our surest Anchors. By it wee lose the very essence of our lives, the guide which leads us to God, the Pilot which steers our forlorne and shipwrack'd soules into the Haven of Salvation. For resolution and a constant hope, never fail of assurance in the end; by hope (saies the word) wee shall be sav'd, that will to the last preserve
us. Hope is a stronge and Golden Chain let down to us from Heaven, taking fast hold on it, wee learn to subdue our soules most desperate rebellions; Which our benign Lord finding us sure link'd to it, has pro∣mis'd to raise and lift us by it, above all the dangerous billowes of this present mi∣serable life. Whilst he (who through idle∣nesse neglects to make his hold sure to this golden Anchor) sinks and is certain to drown, and perish in the deeps of his own wickednesse. Which Satan that subtle Fox so well know's, that he then makes his Hel-Harvest, when he sees us laden with sin, and overprest with the weight of our guiltiness, this is the time hee so diligently watches for, then falls he on us, and presses our de∣clinings with arguments of the immensi∣ty of our offences; and deceives us with his cunning aggravations. Then suggests he to our soules horror and despair in their ex∣treames, as there were no salvation left to us, and the doors of mercy were lock'd a∣gainst our cryes for ever; And once in this dejected and base low condition, how prone and precipitate is our descent into Hel, forc'd still violently downwards by unresisted desperation, having weakly lost our hold on hope, that Golden Chain, wee
sink perpetually in the deepes both of sin and misery. Thus is it with thee (Theodo∣rus) who hast cast off thy obedience and subjection to a meek and mercifull Lord, quite rejecting his commands, and art be∣come a slave under the outragious Empire of that Tyrannous enemy to mankind, who never rests day nor night from ensnaring us our selves to fight against our own hopes and expectations of Heaven. Thus hast thou flung off a light and easie burthen; freed thy self from a mercifull yoke, to fasten thy neck in linkes of Iron. And what is both base, and ridiculous: hast laid a Mill∣stone (the Asses burthen) on thy owne shoulders. What wilt thou think to do in the future, that at present suffers thy most miserable soul to be swallow'd in this im∣petuous Gulfe of lusts: Nay, that wilfully has brough a kind of necessity on thy self, which continually compels thee to fall in∣to deeper extreams? The woman in the Gospels when she had found her lost groat, call'd all her neighbours together to partake of her joy with her; saying, Rejoyce with me because I have found the lost groat. Lu. 15. 8. Thus will I call your friends and mine together, but to a different end and purpose. I will
not bid them rejoyce with me, but grieve and weep, lament, be truly sorrowfull and mourn with me. For our losse is grievous and insupportable, greater then if we had lost never so great a treasure, or Magazine of Gold or Diamonds; For we have lost a friend not to be valewed, who sailing with us through this vast Ocean (I know not by what means) is fallen overboard, and sunk into the bottomlesse Gulfe of perdition. If any man should offer to disswade mee from my lamentations, I would answer him with this passionate expression of the Pro∣phet Isaiah, Let me alone, I will weep bit∣terly, you cannot comfort me. Is. 22. Such is the sorrow which draws this flood of tears from my eyes. Such a sorrow as doubtlessely would not shame Saint Peter or Saint Paul to own it, though in such excesse, as they denyed themselves all con∣solation or perswasion to the contra∣ry. They who deplore the naturall decreed death of the body,No comparison betwixt the death of the body and the soul. may perhaps find cōforters, who by the strength of reason and ar∣gument may without much labour restore their dooping spirits to settledness & tran∣qulity;
& by religious precepts gently quiet and palliate their griefes. But who can plead gainst his just deploring, who laments the death of a soul fallen into perdition, dead in sin and pierc'd with ten thousand arrows, venom'd with Hells malitious poyson, the beauty, form, and grace of most eminent Vertues, and devotions lost, and extinct in him. These administer matter justly to pro∣voke lawfull and lasting tears. What flinty heart? What rockie soul could in an agony so moving forbear lamentings, or entertain an apparition of any delusion, should forbid him his just sorrow. At the fall of the bo∣dy it is humane, though not altogether re∣bellious to weep. At the falling of a soul, the extreamest lamentation is the greatest evidence of the truest piety. He who had on Earth possession of Heaven, in so much as hee contemn'd, abhor'd, and laught at the vanity of the World, hee who beheld the greatest beauty but as a statue of stone, or a fair picture; That he who despis'd Gold as dirt, pleasures and vanity as mire; He it is who most unexpectedly falling into a ra∣ging feaver of burning lusts, has lost his comliness, and his courage, is now turn'd a slave to his own bestiall appetites. Shall not we then grieve for him? shall we cease
our lamentations till he return to himselfe again? it is no more then our duty, and tye of Christian charity, if we have any sense of pitty or humanity in us. What (alas) is the destruction of the body, but an accom∣plish'd course in the order of nature? yet such a losse finds dayly mourners and la∣menters. What ought we then to doe for his perishing soul, which manifestly appears resolv'd on eternall damnation, if our pray∣ers bring him not to repentance, but that he finish his course in obstinate sinning, and obduratenesse of heart. For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Psal. 6. How great a sin then is it against the rules and Laws of charity, not to resent with the greatest pitty a soul thus everlastingly perishing. Violent cries, and abundance of tears cannot possibly recall the dead; But frequent experience teaches us, that a soule dying here in sin is not wept for in vaine; For the humble requests of brotherly cha∣rity plead so effectually before the Throne of mercy, that many hardned in obstinate impenitency, have melted into floods of tears, and have ow'd thee thanks for their contrition to the importunity of other mens prayers. And by such meanes, many
both in our daies and the daies of our fore∣fathers, who have deserted the paths of righteousnesse, and run headlong astray out of the waies of piety (which is a spirituall dying) at length have risen again with such heavenly alacrity, their fall so hid and obscur'd by the glory of their rise, that they have purchas'd the palme of recom∣pence, and crowned with the wreath of victory, have triumph'd Conquerors on earth, till they were summon'd to be num∣bred with the blessed for all eternity. Yet infinite such examples prevail not with a man who wilfully continues in the flames and fires of his lusts; Such a wretched per∣versenesse withstands his recovery, and pleads an impossibility of mercy against him. But if he chance to get a little way out of the fire, and by degrees leave it still far∣ther behind him, the dimnesse which the flames caused will be taken from his eyes, & then how plainly wil he discern the way of salvation to be accessible and very plain, smooth, and easie, having obtain'd grace for his guide. And conquer'd those Troops the Devill laid in ambush for him. But hee who wants the courage to undertake the combat, in vain desires the conquest. He may that's willfull stay and burn in the fire, nay,
shut the doors against himself that are open for him. And whatman who is thus sotishly his own enemy, can design any thing nobly and virtuously? Wherfore this our common enemy makes it his onely businesse, leaves nothing unattempted which may render us diffident of grace and mercy. Nor needs he much labour to compasse that his end, if we lie prostrate at his feet; and take no counsell or resolution, or order the bat∣tail against him, it is an easie conquest to o∣vercome us. But he who violently breaks his fetters, and betakes himself to the use of his strength with courage; He (I say) who in so desperate a condition allows himselfe no cessation, but with a continuall violence maintains the battell against him, though hee have before lost the day a thousand times, shall then recover his losses, and glo∣riously triumph in his enemies overthrow. When he who is dejected with despair, and permits his spirits to fail and languish, can never hope for conquest; how can he over∣come who makes no resistance at all, but fearing the encounter lays down his armes, and submits to his enemy.
CHAP. III. Gods mercy to the greatest sinners, an argument against despair. THE mercies of our Lord so infinitely exceed our transgressions, that medita∣ting on them, they cannot but greatly con∣solate our drooping spirits, and arme us with courage against those temptations we ought strongly to resist, lest they over∣come our trust and confidence in God. I mean those stupid apprehensions of the un∣pardonable immensity of our own guilt, as if God were not able to forgive us our sins being so great and so many, that to our imaginations they exceed the saving pro∣mises of his mercy. Oh let us take heed of such desperate perswasions as these? oh let us be careful that such thoughts as these, do not quash and annihilate our hopes, let not the Devill delude us with an opinion that our Lord is mercifull indeed; but extends that goodnesse onely to small offenders, to those onely who have provok'd him but with a few and those small faults. For suppose a man justly branded with all the markes of those infamies and shames which are due to the greatest reprobates; One who had
committed all those wicked acts, which most certainly unrepented fail not to shut the gates of Heaven against them who transgresse so highly in them. And withall, we must grant this person to be no stranger to the truth, but to have been one of Christs Church. Whatsoever was the cause of his fall? Whatsoever the inveterate ma∣lice of the Tempter had chang'd him to be, either whoremaster or adulterer, nay, per∣haps Sodomite: Were he theef, drunkard, or common calumniator, one who had hug'd all these sinns with appetite and de∣light, nay, had made it his serious study to contrive his ends and hellish satisfacti∣on in them? For my part I would not be Author of despair to such a wretch as this: no though he had continued in them many years. For it is impious blasphemy to re∣flect upon the anger of God, as if he were therefore displeas'd that we might be hard∣ned, for then wee justly should relinquish our hopes, if we were assur'd the flames of his wrath set on e by so many sinns, were not to be extinguish'd with the tears of true repentance. But wee must look with more believing eyes on his mercy, and admire the excellency of his justice and his clemen∣cy, who in his punishments is quite free
from passions, and perturbations; And any one, but willfully blind offenders, may plainly see, that our Lord has no delight or contentment in his revenge, but takes ex∣ceeding pleasure in his love, and tenderness, which is infinitely intent on our good. Be thou therefore of good courage, confident∣ly and undauntedly rely upon the hopes of thy restauration to grace and happinesse, in spite of all the machinations of the De∣vill. Let him not deceive thee and possesse thee with so horrid an opinion; as that God should at all delight in the punishment of sinners; For he is a most indulgent Father, carefully fond of us, and directing all his actions towards us for our good, even in the depth of our malice against him, un∣wiling (is he) and loath to see the en∣crease of our perversenesse. But of his owne Fatherly compassion keeps us off from con∣temning and despising his mercy. If any one voluntarily of his own free motion forsakes the light, who can accuse the light for that mans darknesse, does not he want the be∣nefit of that light through his own folly, and willfullnesse? So he that disdains submissively to adhere to the omnipotent power of God, and to live in the light of grace which illuminates all true believers,
suffers not by the goodnesse of that power, (which is the originall Fountain of all blessings) but the unrulinesse of of his own rashnesse, and stupidity which so willfully brought him into his own ruin and destruction. Our mercifull God sometimes lets us see the rod to frighten us; but draws it back and puts it up again, that his chil∣dren may be sensible of his aversnesse to revenge, and of his infinite propensity to allure and attract them to himself. So a discreet Physitian afflicts not or troubles himself, at the raging distempers of a man frantick, but is himself the patient when he workes the cure. He treats him gently, he courts him into his own health; and though the mad man fly in his very face, hee uses meeknesse with art and skill, and unmov'd endeavours to palliate the violence of his disease; though perhaps he be justly enough incens'd to leave off the cure. And as the distemper'd man recovers his senses, the Physitian encreases his joy, and prosecutes his intended cure, having never return'd peevishnesse for fury, but laying aside all self-respect, applyed himself wholly to the good of the lunatick. So our Lord (when we arrive at the extreamest madnesse, and rage in sinning) takes no revenge of us e∣ven
in the height of that fury, but like our carefull Physitian, most charitably applyes his mercies, which are his medicines, to cure our madnesse, not any thing reflecting on those wild passions we provoke him with. This is a truth to be justified by the testi∣monies of all right minded Christians, who daily find the effects of his clemency, and the records of holy writ are full of exam∣ples, teaching us the verity of it. CHAP. IV. The example of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, a coherence to the preceding Chapter. WAs there ever any one so great a Monster as Nebuchadnezzar, that King of the Babylonians? And yet I beleeve the records of all ages cannot pro∣duce the man to whom God reveal'd him∣selfe more apparently, both in his power and his mercies. Observe his story, how at first he honors the Prophet of the Lord, e∣ven to the adoring him, commanding sa∣crifice to be offer'd to him as God. Then see how at last he returnes to his owne old
pride, which puffs him up to believe that he his self is the God to be only worshipp'd; and who exalts not him above God is cast into the fiery Furnace. Behold the infinite mercie and love of our Lord, who forsakes not this strange beast, (for such was he ra∣ther to be esteemed then a man) But still followes and pursues him with his favours in his most irrationall rebellions, calls him back with profers of grace, and loving in∣vitations to repentance. First shewing him his omnipotency by the miracle in the fiery Furnace; then by the strange vision which the King saw, and Daniel interpreted. Wonders able to move a Rock could not mollifie his harder soul. To these the Pro∣phet joynes his pathetick counsell; Where∣fore O King, let my counsell be acceptable unto thee, and redeem thy sins by righteous∣nesse, and thine iniquities by shewing mer∣cy to the poor; if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. Dan. 27. What saist thou? thou opinator of thy owne wisdome and happinesse? Canst thou return yet? canst thou repent after this thy strange fall? Is thy diseast so desperate thou darest not hope for a recovery? Can no wisdome re∣gulate the passions of a mind so troubled? The dumb-struck King has no answer left,
he is now denuded of such apologies, hee might have made for his purgation in those times hee scarce knew who created him, and was ignorant of his power, whose om∣nipotencie had plac'd him in that seat of Majesty, though in that very darknesse he might well have seen and resented both the power and providence of the Almighty, in those great things he had done for him and his progenitors. But after God had (con∣vinc'd, & calld, him to true heavenly under∣standing) manifested himself unto him in such evident demonstrations of his wisdom and praescience; as he did in the discovery and overthrow of all the diabolicall delu∣sions of the Magicians, when he had open'd and display'd all the colours of their cun∣nings and deceipts. God rests not here, but proceeds yet farther with him. For that dream which the Magicians, the Astrolo∣gers, the Caldeans, and the Southsayers could not expound; in the which were those things (as they confest themselves) exceeded humane learning; this vision God interpreted to him by the mouth of a boy. The youth Daniel unriddles what surpasses the wise mens knowledge: The miracle so convinc'd his judgment; That he did not himself believe alone, but proclaim'd
and promis'd that faith through the whole world, imposing it by his edicts on all Na∣tions. If before this illumination of grace by miracles reconciling him to faith, hee were unworthy his indulgence, though hee knew not God; much more unworthy of it was this wretched King, when he had seen him in these wonders which our Lord wrought purposely to call him, when hee knew his Omnipotent power, and ratified his belief, by declaring and imposing it on others: without all doubt, he (that so much honor'd the Lords servant) profest no mock-faith, but really believed in that God whose Prophet he was; nor had he en∣joyn'd it to others, if he himself had not been first truly convinc'd in his soul, that it was that truth to which the whole world ow'd their obedience; yet falls he into Ido∣latry against the perswasions of his soul, & his own confession to Daniel, when he an∣swer'd him, Of a truth it is that your God is a God of Gods; and a Lord of Kings, and a revealer of secrets, &c. Dan. 2. 47. Hee that of late prostrate on the ground, ador'd the servant of God: is at last possest with such a fury against them, that hee commits them to the firy Furnace, because himself they would not worship as their
God. And pray observe the sequell. Did not our Lord think you (as he so justly merited) punish the Apostate. No! hee begins anew with him, and gives him still greater arguments of his Deity; indulgent∣ly and like a like a loving Father reducing him from his stupid arrogance to a modest knowledge of himselfe, and an humble obe∣dience to him. And what was more to be admir'd, God never show'd his omnipoten∣cy and love more to him, then in this try∣all (for certainly the greater the miracle was, the greater ought his faith to have been) therefore our Lord did never more exalt his convincing powers, then in pre∣serving the children flung bound into that fierie Furnace, which the Tyrant himselfe had kindled with most malitious and stu∣dyed fury. The flames burnt to so great a wonder, that they threatned quicker de∣struction then the beholders imagination could fancy possible. Which God most meekly suffered to encrease to the height of miracle, that so manifesting his greatnesse in his wonders, he might strike him with fear and terror, to reclaim him and startle his obdurate heart from that obstinate de∣nyall of him, and what he had done for him. The Tyrant stands insulting ore the
innocent sacrifices prepar'd for his rage, he laugh's and rejoyces to see these unparalel'd flames still encrease, which without the Al∣mighties permission could not have burnt or been a fire at all; But God contradicts not his desires, shewing his power modera∣ted by his wisdome, which renders the at∣tempts of his Enemies against his servants vain and ridiculous, when they are at the greatest height. And that the flames might not be thought fictitious or fantastick de∣lusions; he lets their power be seen in con∣suming the men, commanded to cast his Servants into the Furnace. What power can be compar'd to the command of the Almighty God; to whom the nature and essence of every thing that has being is obe∣dient, and to him which made them out of nothing return their nature, and become what he would have them, as did this fire whose flames devour'd the bodies of the Officers which cast them in; yet added beauty and lustre to the children who walked in the very midst of them, uncon∣sum'd and untouch'd. Nay, they return'd from out of the fire triumphant ore the flame? and with such Majesty as Kings out of their stately Palaces, march'd they
out of the Furnace? No man affords the King one looke, every ones eyes are fix'd upon this unparalel'd object. Neither his crown, nor Royall robes with all the Or∣naments of his stupendious Pomp do move the peoples admiration, as did the beauti∣full appearance of those faithfull Children, who seem'd rather to have suffer'd the punishment of a dream then to have past through substantiall and reall fire. Their hair, the lightest catching part of their bo∣dies (not so much as sing'd) remain'd as perfectly intire, as if every hair had been harder then an Adamant, while the flame∣devouring heat consum'd all about them: Nor do thou consider that alone, but like∣wise how insensible of any pain in the mid∣dle of the Furnace they continually dis∣cours'd, whilst the standers by every mo∣ment expected their dissolution; Yet are not the spectators onely fill'd with this wonder; but as far as letters could carry it, the astonisht world believ'd it with amaze∣ment, whilst the unconcern'd and mov'd Tyrant (who had on lesse reasons pub∣lish'd his former edicts to command the World the worship of the true God) passes this neglectedly by, and peruses his old
impieties. Nor did our Lord for all this, powre out the full Vialls of his wrath up∣on the head of this desperate wretch; but proceeds in his purpose to reclaim, both by dreams and the warnings of the Prophet. And when nothing prevailes to reduce him, then he brings his rod forth, though not as a revenger for his past sinns, but to pre∣vent his future calamities, by taking away the remaining rancor of his inclinations. For God destroy'd him not utterly. But af∣ter a few years discipline and correction, restores him to his former honor. The pu∣nishments of our mercifull God make us no losers but exceeding gainers in the end, and are to be reckon'd as his greatest blessings, when they bring us to a sure con∣fidence in Christ Jesus our Redeemer, and a sincere repentance for the sinns wee have committed against him.
CHAP. V. That sincere repentance is alwaies accep∣table to God, declar'd out of holy writ by example, precept and parable. HOw surpassingly great is the kindnesse, and love of God to us? who never (af∣ter the greatest provocations) rejects our sincere repentance, though we sin most ma∣litiously against him, if we most humbly return to him; his sweet embraces are ready to receive us; Nay, though we should be unwilling, he often contends with our per∣versenesse, and forces our recovery; Nay, helpes the defects of our falling inclinati∣ons, with his preserving grace which raises us above our selves to pious desires, which he both gives, and prepares their reward. What greater argument can there be of the benignity of an incens'd God, then when we have provok'd him to anger, to accept of our sorrow? and though our repentance be not so long and so full as it ought, though it want something of the circum∣stances of form, and time, or other proper∣ties;
our Lord helps us in our humilia∣tions, and sends his blessings on very weak∣nesse and frowardnesse. As in the Prophet Isaiah you may find it. He went on fro∣wardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his waies, and will heal him. I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Isaiah 57. 17, 18. Let us remember the story of that most wicked King (who by a womans perswasion had given himselfe over to all abhomination) when he once repented, and putting on sack∣cloth, acknowledg'd his sins; he so mov'd the compassion of God, that he escap'd all those evills which then threatned him. For God spake to Elias upon his submission, saying, Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me, I will not bring this evill in his daies. 2 Kings 21. 29. And af∣ter him Manasses exceeds all the former Kings in madnesse, and Tyranny; he over∣throws the Law, shuts the Temple, sets up the worship of Idoll's to confront the Ma∣jesty of God; outstripping all that went be∣fore him in wickednesse. 2 Chron. 33. He after his repentance was receiv'd into the num∣ber of Gods elect friends. Had Manasses when he saw the deformity of his impiety, despair'd of his restauration to grace, and
believ'd an impossibility of his change to a new man; he had certainly never partaken of those blessings afterward befell him; but when he weigh'd how little the excesse of his sins was, put in the ballance with Gods immense, and infinite mercies; hee cast the the fetters off, wherewith the Devill had made him fast, became Conqueror, and finish'd his good course. Nor has the Scrip∣ture furnish'd us with these examples alone, to preserve us from splitting on the dange-Rockes of our own harden'd hearts. But by his commands, God calls us continually, and forewarns us of our destruction. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the day of temptation in the Wildernesse. Psa. 95. 8. 9. This day to us may be any day of our life from the ten∣dernesse of our youth, to the extremity of our age. Wee must imagine the Lord al∣waies speaking to us, and calling us to him, who proportions not his mercies to the circumstances of time, but the affecti∣ons of our hearts. The Ninivites had not many daies for repentance, and to pray to God to forgive them their crying sins; yet could a little portion of one day blot out all their iniquities: and in how short a time was Paradise assur'd the theefe
upon the Crosse? In how small a time did his contrition purchase him Heaven, even before Christs followers and Apostles? Many have obtain'd the honor of Martyrdome, and purchas'd Crownes of glory, in lesse then few years, in a few daies, nay, some in lesse then one day. Let us be alwaies and in all conditions undejected, and cheerfull, confident and assur'd in our soules of Gods infinite mercies which will intice and al∣lure us to prepare our confidences for such a tendernesse, as will dread and abhorre sinne, as will make us shake off our infirmities, and violently suppresse the malice of temp∣tation; Our own election will lead us into better paths with Gods assisting grace; waies quite contrary and opposite to our lusts, such as God commands us to walke in, such as he rejoyces to see us tread in, whose end is rewarded with eternity, to which course the shortnesse of time can be no obstacle, for many that were last have got to be first in this spirituall race by the eager feavour of their desires. Our fallings are not our miseries, but this is our calami∣ty, when we are sunk under the weight of sin, that we lie under the heavy burthen, and never strive to rise again; that wee sleep under it, and those litle intervalls we
awake, dispute our soules into despair, against such as are thus sottishly bewitch'd to their own destruction; the Prophet cries out in the heat and height of passion, Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn a∣way, and not return? Why then is the People of Jerusalem slidden back by a per∣petuall back-sliding? They hold fast deceipt, they refuse to return. Jer. 8. 4. Whoever it is that wilfully refuses, humbly and with his whole heart to accept the grace of the spirit offer'd him, after his wandring from out of the waies of God, is concern'd in this of the Prophet. For it cannot be said he fell who never stood; or that he went out of it who never was in the way. Many things to confirme this truth, are evident in para∣bles and other manifestations of holy writ. That sheep which was lost from the ninty∣nine, and after found and brought back to the rest; Mat. 18. 12. what did it signifie but the going astray, and the return of the faithfull? For the sheep belong'd not to an∣other Shepheard, it was of the same flock; and under the same Shepheard: it wandred through the Mountaines, and the deserts, it stray'd far from the fold; And what? did the Shepherd neglect the wanderer? No, he brought him back, nor did he angerly
drive and beate it before him, but laid it on his owne shoulders, and so brought it home. Observe the best Physicians how in some fierce and dangerous diseases, they please, and humour their patients, dispen∣sing with the set rules of their art, to com∣ply with these distempers; so God uses not the fiercenesse of his wrath against the greatest sinners; but his meeknesse heales them, hee applyes the gentle cure of his compassion; like the good Shepheard hee layes them on his own shoulders, like the Physitian he heales them with forbearance; lest they wander for ever, lest their woundes prove incurable. Next followes the parable of the prodigall to justifie this truth: Luke 15. 12. Who when hee had run into extraordinary exorbitancies wil∣fully, and on purpose, by his own folly wandred to purchasing shame, and misery, (whilst his brother stay'd at home ever pleasing his Father) he that was rich, free and nobly borne, became more despis'd then the worst of his Fathers hirelings; Yet at last was restor'd to his former honour, and repossest of his Fathers favour. Had he in that miserable condition despair'd of life, and those enjoyments he afterwards
found, he had nere known blessing, but had perish'd perhaps in the Wildernesse with fa∣mine, of all deaths the most miserable. But because that he repented (that he trusted to the hopes at his return of his Fathers forgivenesse) see the change of his base and abject condition; he is thus restor'd to his Fathers favour, cloath'd in a rich garment, and better treated then his brother, who had never transgrest. For saies the brother: So many years have I serv'd thee, and ne∣ver transgrest thy commands, and yet thou never gavest me a Kid, that I might make merry with my friends; but now this thy Son is returned, who has devour'd thy sub∣stance, thou hast killed the fatted Calfe. Out of this parable, and the precedent dis∣course may be collected the great efficacie of repentance.
CHAP. VI. That we ought carefully to cleanse our souls from the filth of sin: which must by no means be slighted or neglected, since in this World wee cannot presume on to morrow, every thing is so subject to mutabili∣ty. And then the pleasures of the Earth being so short, and quickly va∣nishing; That we ought to fix our thoughts upon that eternity, in which we shall be crown'd with glory; or plagu'd in torments. HAving before our eyes so famous and eminent examples of Gods inviting benignity to stirre us up to repentance, with such ample assurances of his mercies to the truly penitent; Our duty is, not to waver as uncertain of his assisting grace, but resolutely to attempt the encounter, when we are assur'd of such irresistible aide to second us, as the power, and favour of our omnipotent Lord. Do not his mercifull
calls summon us? Let us go on with cou∣rage. Let us say, We will go to our Father, &c. like that prodigall. For if we approach our selves but one step towards him, our God will draw us nearer, so far is he from refusing us. But we are a generation that willfully depart from the Lord, and on set purpose forsake his waies, designing our selves to perdition. Yet saies our Lord, Jer. 23. 23 I am a God at hand, and not a God a far off; and again he speaks by the Pro∣phet, do not your sins separate you, and make this division betwixt you and me. Are they our sins which hinder us? are they the blocks which lie in our way to eternall hap∣pinesse; Let us remove them by the force of prayer and humiliation, that we may ap∣proach nearer to our Lord. Set before our eyes Saint Pauls treating the Corinthian, and apply to this present discourse. 1 Cor. 5. A Corinthian an eminent person, had committed such a sin as the like is hardly named amongst the very Heathens; He was of the faith of Christs family, & some believe he was a Priest. What follow'd this fall of his? Did St. Paul cast him off as a reprobate from the hopes of salvation? not at all. For in his first and second Epistles to the Corin∣thians, he expostulates with them, because they had not received him into repentance.
ver. 7. 4. In all which treating with them, he manifestly declar'd that there was no sin so heinous, but God has appointed a condi∣tionall pardon for it, that the diseases and distempers of our souls are to be cur'd by pennance, their proper medicine and pur∣gation. ver. 5. Deliver such a one (saies he) to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be sav'd in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the A∣postles language before his repentance, in the time he stood excommunicated; but af∣ter his repentance saies Saint Paul, To him that is such a one, this rebuke sufficeth that is given of many. 2 Cor. 6. Wherefore he wrote to them to comfort, encourage him, lest Satan should get an advantage over him: In like manner, the intire Nation of Galatia (after they had embrac'd the faith; after miracles wrought amongst them; after they had overcome many temptations a∣gainst their belief in Christ Jesus) at length fell into infidelity; yet recover'd their fall. He therefore that giveth you the spirit (saith he) and worketh miracles amongst you, Gal. 3. 5. Certainly they had many temptations whom he so teaches. ver. 4. Have you suffer'd so many things in vain? yet in vain? These people after a great en∣create of a strong faith in our Lord, com∣mitted
a heynous offence, they alienated themselves from Christ, of which he seems to speak to them. Behold, I Paul tell you, that if you be circumcis'd, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. 5. 2. And again, who ever of you are justified by the Law, are faln from grace. ver. 4. From so dan∣gerous a fall, how lovingly and friendly he strives to preserve them. My little children whom I travell withall again, untill Christ be formed in you. Gal. 4. 19. Here he de∣clares that in our worst estate, Christ may be renew'd and form'd in us. For he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickednesse and live. Eze. 18. 12. Return then to our Lord (most dearly beloved Theodorus) and performe his will, that would so have it. For this end he created us, for this we were made, to bestow on us the glory of eternity, to give us the Kingdome of Heaven, not to fling us into Hell, or cast us into those flames, which were indeed made for the Devill and not for us. Our Saviour declares this to us▪ when he saies to those on his right hand. Come you blessed of my Father; Possesse the Kingdome prepared for you from the begin∣ning of the World, Mat. 25. but to those on his left hand, Depart you cursed into
fire everlasting which was prepared (hee does not say for you) but for the Devill and his Angels. ver. 41. You see then Hell was not purposely made for us, but for the Devill and his Angells. And that Heaven was appointed for us from the beginning of the World. Shall we then render our selves incapable of infinite honors, and felicities by eternall providence and favour deter∣mined us, and not make our selves ready to enter the Bride-Chamber with the Bridegroom. This preparation is onely possible in this World, here it is that wee must put on our wedding Garments, that we must dresse our selves in the robes of contrition and repentance, and though we may be often disordered in our atttire, and contract again the filth, and deformity of our sinne, there is hope left, as long as the waters of repentance may yet cleanse us; but if we neglect it to day, wee know not how late it may be to morrow; the end and terme of our life is forbid the curiosity of our knowledge; and when wee depart hence, it will be too late to expect a∣ny good, though wee repent with all the passionate humility that can be imagin'd, it will not profit us; though we gnash our teeth, howle horridly, and fill that Hell we
are in with our complaints, till they reach the Heaven we complain to, wee shall not be the better so much water as would cool our tongues. Luke 16. 16. Remember A∣brahams answer to the rich man, there is a great Chaos betwixt you and us. Let us lay hold on mercy while we may; Let us now acknowledge our Lord humbly, faithfully, and sincerely as we ought. For while there is life, there is hope by repentance; and the benefits that never faile to accompany it, are ready for us; it is a physick for the sickest languishing soul, nay, a most sure re∣medy, but it calls not the dead back again, it is a salve cannot be applyed to their wounds who suffer in Hell, where there is no cure, from whence there is no redempti∣on; though in this World the last and weakest of our daies render us not so despe∣rately ill but this Soveraign balme may cure us. Wherefore the Devill uses all his power and subtlety to plant desperate ap∣prehensions in our soules, seeing the mercies of our Lord are free and open to the least re∣pentance that is hearty; and never let's it passe unrewarded. As he expresses his pro∣pensity to charity in the Gospell. Even hee that gives a cup of cold water to one of these in my name, shall not lose his reward,
saith Christ, Mat. 10. 42. & the same Christ's promise is, that he who repents him of the sins he has committed, though his repen∣tance be infinitely beneath the merit of re∣tribution, the mercies of our Lord will find him out, for the least good in us though ne∣ver so small, the benignity and compassion of so mercifull a Father will not neglect. He (who searches our sins with that severe curiosity, that our very words and thoughts shall be arraign'd at the day of judgement) much more carefully search and look upon the least good we do. So infinitely his mer∣cy and love to mankind exceeds his re∣venge. He is a God of so great mercy, as he will remember his bounty to the least good in us, as well as his severity to the least ill. Wherefore if thou findest thy strength so to flagge and faile thee, when thou attempts an enterprize so difficile to our naturall corruption, as is a reall repen∣tance, which is the totall change of our in∣clinations, and deprav'd appetites: yet do not faint in thy undertakings, and weakly fall from trusting in the promises of a God that will never forsake thee; but begin by degrees to stoppe the superfluous humors of this disease, which so debilitates and infee∣bles thee; then art thou ready for this spi∣rituall
combate, the victory will soon fol∣low, when thou hast once valiantly re∣sisted the fury of the assault. But if like a coward thou dreadst the first appearance of the Enemy, it is no wonder if every thing seem difficult and hopelesse to thee. Before attempts and tryalls, the most feasable and facile things that oppose, may possibly look full of danger, and horror, which once re∣solutely attempted; our confidence and our courage of our banisht fear, and stupid weaknesse will assure us of those victorious wreaths which are prepar'd to incircle the Temples of all true Christian souldiers. The Devill himselfe was fearfull to lose his Conquest, even over Judas himself, he keeps him down with despair, knowing that re∣pentance and contrition might have turn'd the day for that lost wretch: For it is truth, and it must be confest, (though it almost exceed belief) that sin of Judas went not beyond the possibility of pardon, could he but have repented. Wherefore I pray and beseech thee to drive a∣way, St. Chrysostom's application to The∣odorus. and expell all these deceits of the Devill from thy soul; that thou maist enter this Port of salvation. I expect not at an instant that
perswasions can give thee leave to think thy self so soon lifted up out of the pit of de∣struction to the possession of a Crown of glory; it were too much presently to believe, as thy condition hath made thee, (though to God nothing be impossible) Therefore all that I desire of thee, is, to stop here, and adde no more to thy former transgressi∣ons, that thou wouldst turn thy eyes ano∣ther way, and not let them rest fixt on the dotage of thy beastlinesse, to let us see that thou hast gone in those crooked meanders, have quite tyred thee; and thou beginst to be refresht, and recover thy strength in better paths: and art thou thy own hindrance? Doest thou not know that many have dyed in their drunkennesse, their lusts, and other sinfull delusions of this age? Where are some now, who lately trac'd the streets in pride, who fed their parasites with dainties? and cloath'd them∣selves with the finest silkes? they that pre∣sum'd the walkes they went in? what is be∣come of all this pomp and pride, is it not vanish'd, is it not past over like a dreame? Their costly feasts, their jollities, their compleasing mirths, and laughings had their period, and are now no more; their vanities, their uncheckt thoughts, and un∣contrould
liberties, their delicious and in∣satiable luxuries are all fled. What are be∣come of those pamper'd bodies so studiously observ'd, and fed so lusciously: Pray look into the grave: Contemplate on their dust, and ashes, on the wormes devour'd them, the deformity of their charnell houses, then sigh, and bewaile that folly which took so great a care, to preserve so litle a nothing. And would to God this destruction there terminated where their ashes are consum'd. But turn thy eyes from the grave, and wormes there devouring them; and reflect on that everlasting fire that can never be extinguish'd, on that gnashing of teeth, that utter darknesse, on those streghts and irre∣mediable afflictions declar'd to us in the Parable of Lazarus and the rich man (who once was cloathed in purple, and the Lord of unvalew'd treasures, of riches that had no end) and at last became so destitute of all necessaries, that he could not purchase one drop of water to cool his tongue when he suffer'd in flames of fire, and was con∣demn'd to the bitterest cruelties of all tor∣ments. And how miserable a soul then is that, which thinkes pleasures, and the vain lights of this World to exceed the gain or Prophet of a dream? suppose a man were
condemn'd to work in Mines of Metalls, or doom'd to undergo some harder punish∣ment; & then fancie this miserable creature sunk under his labour, and fallen asleep; next in that sleepe imagine him to have a dream possessing him with the delusion of all pleasures and content: which when hee awakes are with his sleep fled; how little ows this poor soul to this mockery of feli∣city. And truly, that rich mans happinesse on Earth, was no more then such a kind of dream. If we consider how little it lasted, and how it concluded, in bitternesse, and dreadfull punishments, in everlasting fires. There is no meditation so necessary to one besotted to his appetites, as it is to com∣pare one fire with the other, the burning of the lusts with the eternall flames which are their decreed punishment; and hee is worse then mad that will not quench the one to eschew the other. For there is such nicety and dependance one on the other, insomuch that hee who puts out the present fires of his concupi∣scence, is certain to avoid the eternity of the future; but if the catching flames last till they are joyn'd, they are never to be extin∣guish'd: and unrepenting souls departing
this life, presently unite their sinfull fires, with the revengefull flames appointed them in Hell for all eternity. Now then consider how long thou canst possibly presume on the continuance of these felicities thou here enjoyst. When thou canst not promise thy selfe any length for thy life; fifty years were a great space to be assur'd of; but in∣deed we so little know our ends, that wee cannot tell but this evening may be our last; how then can wee relie upon so many years; Time is uncertain, nor can we assure our selves any thing of the future. And were it so that we were certain of a long life, the pleasures still are uncertain wee might expect in it, which sometimes are with us & again in the twinkling of an eye. But were a long life assur'd thee, and thy pleasures to last with it, that no chance or fortune had power to interrupt the continued course of thy contents, which should be still equal to thy desires; What a litle would this be to everlasting ages of bliss, or eternity of punishment? And hereafter we must expect the like everlasting durance of both joy and sorrow which soever be our lot: though here delight and sadnesse have their vicissi∣tude: in the World to come neither shall
ever end: And as both for continuance are endlesse; so in the extremities of value both incomprehensible. CHAP. VI. Hell fire expos'd to the terror of the im∣penitent, with the torments, and eternity thereof. O Vainly deceived man? most foolishly and sottishly deluded sinner? who (when thou heardst speak of Hell fire) be∣lievest those dreadfull flames prepar'd for the vengeance on thy impenitency o be no other, then some materiall pile that soon with it's own violence, will of it selfe con∣sume into ashes. Thou must believe in time, (or thy experience will teach thee too late) what those fires be, which are prepared in Hell for the Devills and his Angells there, and for thee (unlesse thou sincerely repent) they are immortall unconsuming flames, flames that shall never extinguish or dy. So that in fine, the very damn'd may promise themselves eternity, but it will prove the perpetuity of endlesse shame, pains, and con∣fusion. While the blessed shall be cloath'd
with immortality, but together with infi∣nite joy, and incomprehensible glory. O vild impenitent wretch, meditate on what thou art for ever forfeiting; a Crown of immortall honor and what thou art assu∣red to purchase with thy obstinate impie∣ties! Endlesse miseries, and plagues; tor∣ments in fires can never possibly consume, which shall alwaies last, and still supplyed, ever encrease, and never diminish, or exte∣nuate. No mans tongue (be he never so elo∣quent) can teach us a way to comprehend the true knowledge of such unspeakable horror. Yet in this (as in other things im∣possible to be certainly known) we may re∣gulate our conjecture by the experience wee make on things of lesse moment. As for ex∣ample, suppose thy selfe in an overheated Bath; thy skin scalding, thy veines, and sinewes shrinking? Or burning in a violent fevour, at the insufferablenesse of these pains thou maist give some probable guesse, and after think thou on Hell fire: Thou wilt of necessity allow neither Bath or fea∣ver possibly to be endur'd by the greatest and most invincible fortitude; and argue thy self into an apprehension by degrees of the fearfull horror thou wilt have, when for thy sins thou art flung into a torrent of
mercilesse flames issuing from that dread∣full tribunall where the vengeance on im∣penitency is prepar'd. There will be how∣ling, and gnashing of teeth, punishments neither to be suffer'd nor redrest, or com∣forted; for no body shall help them. So vain and fruitlesse will be those lamentati∣ons which cannot avail the lamenters any thing, when their complaints can profit them nothing: Their torments still encrea∣sing with their desperation, in a place where their eyes can fix on nothing to promise comfort, for what shall they see there but the damned, their companions, and a vast desolation. Next to add to the horror of eternall punishments, know that these fires there, as they can ne∣ver dye, neither can they afford light; for they are most peculiarly, and properly de∣scribed to be utter darknesse. Consider what it is thus to suffer in horrid and lothsome darknesse, with terrors, affright∣ings, and tremblings in all thy members this must needs cause; then the infinite multitude of thy tortures (which will fall on thee faster then violent fleakes of snow upon the earth) shall cruciate thy soule. In so hideous and over-whelming a man∣ner,
that humane capacity can not well comprehend how it is possible for the soule of man to bear them, and not utterly con∣sume and annihilate in so fierce and devou∣ring destruction. To make which more e∣vident and plaine to our understandings, we may call to remembrance what fre∣quently happens in this world we are now in: How many men have fallen into violent diseases, and those as lasting as violent, but neither their time nor force had the power to their soules dissolution till the decay and ruine of their materiall cor∣ruptible bodies: the substance of the soule being proof against the keenest arrowes of death; Even so shall it be at last with the miserable bodies of the damned, which will be changed into a substance that the fiercest flames shall never be a∣ble to consume; and though man be compos'd of such materialls as now cannot resist the violence, but yeeld to the con∣quest of assaulting paines; when the cursed immortality of the body shall be equall to that of the soul, both together must suffer to all eternity. Thou oughtest (The∣odorus) rightly to consider this undenia∣ble truth, and not to give way to any fan∣tastick
dream that would perswade thee, any end, or period can be propos'd to the eternity of their sufferings, who shall be thus prepar'd for everlasting fire. And what are the pleasures, the delights and vanities thou puts't into the contrary ballance to weigh against so heavy a doom? How short the time of their continuance com∣par'd with eternity? Couldst thou suppose that Hells torments were to end in a hun∣dred or two hundred years, the fury of them for such a space might prudentially affright thee from that dissolute and wild life thou art so besotted to; Then certain∣ly the thought of their eternity must needs deterre thee; and to presse this nearer to thee, I begg of thee to lay thy hand to thy heart, and answer me, whether thou canst or not exchange blessings and plea∣sures eternall, for as everlasting punish∣ments? or forfeit an inestimable weight of glory for a dream? and all the reputed hap∣pinesse of this life are no better? What fool would bee content for one pleasing moment to lead all the rest of his life in mi∣serie? who is there so sottish, as would will∣fully forfeit all his peace for a minutes pleasure? yet thou doest far exceed such
frantick beasts in thy madnesse. But alas I dilate in vaine upon thy dotage till it forsake thee, thou art deaf to perswasions while thy eares are stopt with thy delights, or wilt, if thou hearest, think them lyars that call the sweets, so please thee, what they really are, bitter and noysome. But when by the mercifull deliverance of our Lord, thou art freed out of the toyls, thou wilt with patience hear mee treat of the malicious cunning that de∣ceiv'd thee with those snares: Wherefore I deferr to tell thee the malignity of thy disease, till I see thee recovering. Now let us fancy pleasures to be really the things they seem, and that the delights of this world have nothing of gall, or bitternesse; But what then (I pray) shall we say of the punishments attend them? how shall wee avoid them? whither shall we flye to escape the wrath that followes them? They that now rejoyce and triumph in the shades of seeming content, shall not with their greatest fortitude be able to en∣dure the least punishments of those many prepar'd for their vengeance. And how lit∣tle time well spent in prayer and unfaign'd hearty penitence, might save them from
those torments, and bring them to those joyes prepar'd for the blessed? Such is the clemency and mercy of our God (who so earnestly loves mankind) that hee has not appointed a long time of conflict with Satan; the Warre last's no longer then the short space of this fleeting life, which is but the twinkling of an eye compar'd with those infinite ages to come, wherein wee shall be crown'd with glory for ever. And this will adde infinitely to those things the damn'd shall suffer, when they remember their great neglect of that little time they had to repent in, and at how easie a rate and low a price they sold and betray'd themselves into everlasting thraldome. Let us then awake, and rouze our selves out of this lethargie of sin, lest this sad doom be ours. And let us hast and do it whilst the time is yet, that wee may be receiv'd into mercy and favour, while there is hope, and that salvation may be had, before re∣pentance be too late; for they who idly and sloathfully wallow in the mire of their iniquities, shall not onely endure these, but far more intolerable torments. Since it is not to be exprest in the most artificiall termes of eloquence, how great those tor∣tures
are which are prepared for the dam∣ned in Hell. But if it were onely to lose the joy and blessings of Heaven: the thought alone of so great a losse (though we were after to perish like other beasts) would be insupportable, it would bring with it so just cause of sorrow, such affliction, and tribulation, that were no o∣ther punishment ordain'd for sinners, that it selfe should bee sufficient to reduce us from our wicked waies, and might terrifie us more then the apprehension of all those torments that threaten, and affright us, and wee may most assuredly expect, unlesse wee truly repent.
CHAP. VIII. Of the beatitude of the Saints glorifi'd in Heaven, pressing Theodorus farther to amendment, by arguing that Heaven is rather to be sought after then Hell to be fear'd. The glory of one being a more moving object, then the terriblenesse of the other. FRom this caution given thee (Theodo∣rus) of the unspeakable paines of Hell; I would raise thy contemplations to the most necessary, most admirable, and ra∣vishing delight thy soule can possibly fix it self upon; which is to imploy thy curiosity in search of the Knowledge of the joyes of Heaven, for though the dignity of that blessed state be not within the compasse of the most accurate expression, and farre ex∣ceeding the delineation of the acutest wit: yet my advice presumes to invite thee to conceive as much of it as is allow'd our hu∣mane judgements to comprehend: And as farre as wee are taught and instructed by holy writ, our contemplations have liber∣ty to soare into the felicities of Heaven.
Isaiah the Prophet expresses them thus. The ransom'd of the Lord shall rejoyce and come to Sion with songs, and everlast∣ing joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladnesse, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Isai. 35. 10. 51. 11. What can be more happy then such a life? There you shall never fear povertie, or sicknesse. There shall be neither oppressor, nor op∣prest; No troubsome tormentor, nor any one tormented; No man angry or vext, nor any repining at anothers displeasure; No proud man swelling in abundance, nor any person dejected and mourning for his necessities; No man contentious for principality or power; nor any one lament∣ing under the persecution of a superiour? There all the tempestuous passions of our minds shall be hush't in a perpetuall calme. All things shall be peace, joy and glad∣ness; all things serenity, and tranquillity. There shall be eternall day, brightnesse and light; Light as farre excelling the splendor of the Sun, as that does the blaze of a torch; for it shall never be hid with the vail of night, never be obscur'd in clouds and darknesse: yet (though so exceeding lustrous) withall so temperate, that it shall neither burn nor scorch. No night nor
evening shall the blessed know, no scorch∣ing summer, or chill winter, no change of seasons shall molest them, every thing is so ordered in a setled constancy, and so ap∣pointed for their fruition, whom grace and repentance shall fit for it: They shall feel no old age, nor the evills of it, there shall nothing remain subject to corruption, but every one be crown'd with incorrupti∣ble glory, & what exceeds all already said, the blessed shall then enjoy eternally the company of Christ, with his Angels, Arch∣gels, and all the glorious hoasts of Heaven; contemplate on the skies in that excellency they appeare now to our eyes, behold the beauties there? No starre in the firmament shall in thy beatitude outshine thee, which will be, when all things created shall be re∣fined into greater abundance of glory, and exceed themselves as they are now, as much as the purest Gold (which seems to give light to the air, and captivate our hu∣mane sence) does the complexion of lead. So shall all things created (as they shall then be refin'd) excell themselves in their glory. For as blessed Saint Paul saies. The creature also it self shall be deliver'd from the servitude of corruption, into the liber∣ty of the glory of the children of God.
Rom. 8. For now in our flesh we suffer ma∣ny things lyable onely to the corruption of the body, which nature in the body it selfe shal be chang'd into incorruptible, and that together with the soul become immortall, the soul it self possest of more beauty, and greater excellencie. And where then canst thou dream of any jarre or discord may happen? what ruines, or what destroying civill dissention, when an eternall inviola∣ble love shall knit the Saints of Heaven in one knot, and make them one soul. The dread of the Divell shall be no more; no more threats, no more snares, no more death; the body it selfe shall be immortall, and the soule quit her fear of a far more terrible destruction. All apprehension of ills that may befall us, shall for ever dye; and it will be with our happy soules, as with the heir to a King, who in his infan∣cy and minority is kept severely, and edu∣cated under fear, and the lash of a Tutors discipline, lest remisnesse in his education might let him fall into unprincely wild∣nesse, and render him, by having no govern∣ment of himself, uncapable of governing o∣thers, and inheriting his Fathers dignities: but growing in years, and encreasing in vertues, becoming the Royall Majesty of a
Prince, he is then let loose to the guidance of those engraftments becoming his high calling, and a full possession of his liberty: He is clad in purple, and his Temples cir∣cled with a Diadem; the fears and mena∣ces of the masters of his younger years are no longer his terrors; but every thing serves his magnificence, and complies with his happinesse and pleasure: so at the consum∣mation of blisse shall it be with the Saints of God, whom as his beloved children here he keeps under the rod of affliction, to fit and prepare them for those immortal honors, and crownes they shall inherit in the Kingdome of Heaven. No assimilation indeed is sufficient to give us a guesse at those transcending joyes, nor can the Arts of eloquence expresse them: But let our thoughts ascend to that mount, where our Lord was transfigur'd: and behold him there shining as he then did with the eyes of devout contemplation: and yet there we shall not find one full entire figure of the perfect glories of the world to come; that appearance being such as was fitted for the discerning of our naturall opticks. As ap∣peare by the words of the Evangelist. His face did shine like the Sun, Mat. 17. that is, like to that body which it selfe is sub∣ject
to corruption, but the glory of in∣corruptible bodies shall be of a nature farre excelling that, which mortall eyes shall not be able to look upon; to behold the which, we shall have incorruptible and immor∣tall eyes. On the mount, though there not appear'd not greater light then was probably possible for them to have be∣held without detriment to their sight: yet that they endur'd not: For they fell on their faces. Tell me (I pray) If any one should lead you into a glorious Theatre, and present your eyes with the sight of a gallant number of persons cloath'd in Gold, and adorn'd with all curiosities of value: And amongst them should shew one infinitely exceeding the rest in glory, and power, who were able to bring thee into the happy number of that society, wouldst thou not be obedient to all his commands, to purchase such a glorious felicity: Let thy soul fly up to Heaven on the wings of holy meditations, and view their Theatre, whose glory consists in the assembly of far more transcending persons; whose orna∣ments exceed the lustre of Gold and Dia∣monds; whose beauty excells the very light of the rayes of the Sun: There is the
seat of Angels, Archangells, Thrones, Do∣minions, and Powers, and of what farre excells them: For of the Kings of Heaven and his glory, all tongues must be silent, or not presumptuously attempt so unequall a task, so much does hee superexcell all expressions, so transcendent are his Lustre, Glory, Splendor, Majesty, and Magnifi∣cence. And (tell me) how great madnesse it is to lose, and forfeit so infinite blessings, onely for the satisfaction of abusing a lit∣tle time. What if we were to die a thou∣sand times in a day? to endure the tor∣ments of Hell it selfe for a season? Would it be too much for us; when the reward would be see Christ comming in his glory, and our selves receiv'd into the number of the blessed for ever. Observe what blessed Saint Peter saies. Mat. 17. 4. It is good for us to be here: if hee (who saw but in a manner the shadow of the glory to come) emptied his soule of all other thoughts, to give up the possession, to the contentment and joyes of such a sight; What shall we say, when not the shadow, but the reall truth of that happy vision shall possesse our selves? When the Chambers of Heaven shall be opened, and wee behold the King of Glory him∣self,
not obscurely as in a glasse, but face to face, not barely with the eyes of faith, but as he shall bee then manifested in truth unto us. Their spirits are base and abject, who rejoyce they have escap'd Hell, out of the apprehension of the horrors of it. It is to be accounted certainly a greater torment then any is in Hell it selfe, to lose Heaven and the glory of it. So pressing a calamity it must needs be to the damn'd, to thinke of the losse of Heaven, that cer∣tainly it will punish them more then the paines of Hell. Our eyes wander with a∣mazement after their happinesse whom we see great in Princes favours, and won∣der what possibly they can want, who per∣take of the counsells of the mighty, and share with them in their honors; to them we allow the fullnesse of all happinesse, and adjudge our selves miserable, if wee want any thing our emulations can receive to contribute to their happinesse. Though perhaps our condition may exceed theirs, if we consider the the lubricity and unstable∣nesse of fortune. How slippery they stand who are tottering on the top of pinacles: how uncertain their honors be, and great∣nesse, whose duration cannot be secur'd beyond the fate of battell, or the ruins of
domestick envy. Certain it is: All the pompe of the Earth will have a period; And it is vanity to fix our soules on any imaginary happinesse in this world. But what wee look for from God our Lord, whose raign shall be for ever, whose King∣dome has no bounds. Isaiah 40. Who possesseth not a part, but the whole com∣passe of the Earth. Who hath measur'd the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out Heaven with his span; who sustains all things with his power; to whom all Nations are nothing, and are re∣puted as a drop of water. Hee it is whose powr, and mercies can onely make us e∣ternally happy. Let the immensity of the joyes then, which are the determined por∣tion of the blessed, argue our soules into a true apprehension of them, and let us more dread the losse of future happinesse, then all the terrors of future paines; and more abhorre to bee excluded out of the doors, and not admitted into the quire of the Angels, and the blessed Saints of Heaven; then to be doom'd to eternall flames.
CHAP. IX. Of the day of judgement. THE terrible and mighty King of Heaven and Earth shall not come to judgement drawn by white mules, or ap∣pear to the condemn'd in robes of peace, & crown'd with a diadem of mercy. But how he then wil come the tongue of man cannot expresse, you can have no surer evident rule for you, then out of the Prophets thundring forth the terrors of his ap∣proach. Psal. 50. ver. 3. Our God shall come and shall not keep silence, there shall go before him a consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him. He shall call the Heavens from above, and the Earth that he may judge his people. The Prophet Isaiah dilates thus on this dreadfull appearance. Isaiah 13. 9. Behold the day of the Lord commeth, cruel both with anger and fierceness, to lay the land desolate, and to destroy the sinners out of it; for the starrs of Heaven, Orion, and the constellations there, shall not give their light. The Sun shall be darkned in
his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. And I will punish the whole Earth for their evils, and the wicked for their iniquitie, and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terri∣ble. And those that are left shall be more precious then fine Gold; such a man shall be more esteem'd then a precious stone of Ophir, for the Heavens shall be shaken, and the Earth shall be removed out of her place, for the anger of the Lord of Sabbath in the day when his wrath shall come. And in another place the same Prophet, The windowes of Heaven shall be opened, and the foundations of the Earth shall be shaken: the Earth shall be utterly broken down, the Earth shall be cleane dissolved, the Earth shall be moved excedingly, it shal reel to and fro like a drunkard, it shal be removed like a Cottage, and the trans∣gression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and and it shall fall, and not rise again: Isa. 24. 18. For their iniquities have prevail'd a∣gainst them. To these adde the Prophet Malachi; Behold (saies he) the Lord Almighty cometh, but who shall abide the day of his comming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiners
fire, and like fullers sope, and he shall sit as a refiner of silver and gold. Mal. 3. 2. And again (saith he) the day of the Lord commeth consuming like a furnace, and it shall burn them up. Mal. 4. 1. And they who are proud, and all that do wick∣edly shal be as stubble; & the day commeth, (saith the Lord Almighty) it shall leave them neither root nor branch. And to the same purpose does the vision of the Pro∣phet Daniel alarum us with the terrors of that day. I beheld (saith he) till the Thrones were placed, and the antient of daies did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wooll: his Throne was a flame of fire, and his wheeles burning fire: A fiery streame issued out before him: Thousand thousands ministred unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The judge∣ment was set and the Bookes were opened. Dan. 7. 9. And a little after, thus speakes the Prophet, ver. 13. I saw a vision in the night, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the antient of daies, and they brought him near before him: And there was gi∣ven him Dominion and glory and a King∣dome; that all People, Nations, and lan∣guages
should serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which cannot passe away, and his Kingdome a Kingdome which cannot be destroyed. ver. 15. I Da∣niel was grieved in my spirit, and the vi∣sions of my head troubled me. Let us con∣sider these menaces of holy writ: and in∣struct our soules how in that day the glory of Heaven shall be revealed, the clouds shal separate, the whole firmament open; parting like a curtaine before a screen, and discovering to us the Majestick pros∣pect within: which will fill all things created with fear, amazement, and horror. Then shall the Angells themselves be full of fear, with the Archangells, Thrones, and owers of Heaven, not for themselves, but because their fellowservants are brought to judgement, and to give their strict accompt of their past life in this world. For if they (under whose tutelage we are) grieve at the judgement pro∣nounced against one sole City under their charge, what will be the generall affrights and horrors, when the Son comes against the whole world: for though them∣selves they know, exempt from the danger, they will have a sence of them brought before a Judge, whose alseeing
eye needs no proof of witnesse, or accusa∣tion. Who will force the guilty to accuse themselves, and lay their own offences o∣pen, when every delinquent to Heavens justice shall produce his owne deeds, his words, and thoughts to condemn himself? Will not this mighty and just severity of our Lord astonish the very powers of Hea∣ven themselves. If it had not in it the hor∣ror of an inundation of a river of fire, and those terrible affrighting Angells, ministers of his justice, which assist the fury and rage of his revenge: How would it move men to see the workmanship of the same creation, call'd some to be highly preferr'd and ho∣nour'd; Nay, had in great admiration while others are blinded with disgrace, lest they should see the glory of God. Can you imagine a more tormenting Hel then this? When the thought of that Heaven we have lst, will more sensibly cruciate our soules from the torments of that Hell wee suffer in. The infinite losse our wilfully erring and self-abusing soules bring to themselves (in the forfeiting those excel∣lent great blessings ordain'd them) are im∣possible to be apprehended by thought, or in words comprehended. Sad will be the experience of it to the impenitent. Where∣fore
(I beseech thee) set before thy eyes the different ends of piety and impiety. Behold the impious overwhelm'd with horrors and unspeakable punishments: and even then when the truly pious children of God shall be cloath'd with immortality, and eternall glories: When the damn'd shall be deliver'd to cruell tormenting fu∣ries; the blessed shall be adorn'd with crownes, accompanied with Angells, sing∣ing and rejoycing before the Kings Throne; thus shal it be with them who on Earth have done good and justice, and are found worthy of eternall life.
CHAP. X. The joyes of Heaven prosecuted, give occasion to discourse of the fe∣licities and blessings God has pro∣mis'd our soules, the excellencies Wherewith they are enricht with, and the vile contempt wee have of them, preferring our bodies their slaves before them. THE joyes of Heaven are beyond our dull perceptions, while wee are loa∣den with earth; in vain it were to under∣take labour of their description: Ineffable are those pleasures, and delights, the great profits unvaluable, which will then bee ours in eternall possession, when we are re∣ceived into the number of the Saints glo∣rified for ever. When the immortall soule shall be invested with her own glory; and eas'd of all her yoakes in happy freedome, enjoy the pleasure to behold her Lord. It cannot, it cannot (I say) be exprest how great the extasies of her joyes must bee when she shall not onely be ravish't with
contentments of her glorious condition for the present, but rest likewise secur'd of their eternity, that without lessning or decay, but rather with encrease they shall endure for ever. Nor is this happinesse alone above expression: For no soarings of the most elevated soules in contemplation can reach the high perfections of those blisses. We may by the waies of weak com∣parisons give obscure guesses, and such demonstrations the excellency of that glo∣ry onely allowes our conjectures to pra∣ctise on. Let us then seriously contemplate their conditions we commonly allow hap∣py in this world; let us make enquiry of their felicities, who exceed in riches, pow∣er, or honor, in so great overflowes, that they scarce believe themselves on Earth: Then let us weigh the certainty and per∣manence of what they hold themselves thus happy in, and wee shall find them possest with nothing but vanities, which will leave and quit them swifter then a dream. Nay, imagine those pleasures last∣ing as their lives (which is the most you can allow them) and yielding the fulness of that content they fancy who enjoy them, when you find how short that time is of their being, you will confesse them
none. And yet how much are worldings puffed up with these transitory delights? Will it not then bee infinite content and unspeakable satisfaction, to soules arriv'd at the Haven of bliss, when (having choos'd the stormy Seas of this troubled world) they shall bee landed on the bankes of peace, and tranquillity, and enter possession of a Kingdom abounding with all joyes, and pleasures, honors, glories, and felici∣ties without end. For in the narrow streights of this world, hee that possesses the largest inheritance, may be likened to an infant within his mothers womb, so little is his liberty, compar'd with the spatious fields of that heavenly paradise prepar'd for the blessed from all eternity. And as those are embrions in the womb, having not yet the naturall benefit of light, till their legitimate and full birth, when they are brought into the world, and partici∣pate even with their Parents (though in their first clouts) the fulnesse and per∣fection of their Creation: So have not wee the true effects and ends of our re∣demption, till we see the day of our glory. And as amongst them abortives, such will be the condemned sinners at the latter day amongst men: abortives, though those never
see the light of the Sun; never know day: yet deliver'd from the cell of the wombe, into the spacious world, have the doom of a larger, yet to them a darker Prison, if wee consider there is that light for them they are incapable to enjoy. So, abortives, im∣penitents, shall be delivered out of dark∣nesse into greater darknesse, out of afflicti∣ons into greater afflictions. But the mature offspring bearing his marks and characters, shall be presented to the King of Heaven; then shall the mystery of salvation be re∣veal'd to them, and they become fellowes in glory with the Angels, and the Arch∣angells. Wherefore (my beloved friend) do not for ever blot out those characters thou art sign'd with by Gods Holy spirit: Bury them not in a loathsome abysse of sinns. Raise up thy soul by repentance, which will refine and beautifie those thy excellent parts that are now besmear'd and spatter'd with the filth of a dissolute li∣ving; then will the lustre of thy vertues dazle those eyes to whom now thou ap∣pear'st a cloud of vanity: The most excel∣lent beauty that is in man or woman, is no beauty, if not in relation to our discerning them; and what to dotage our enamour'd
senses, have admir'd them; we must at the last confesse them, subject to decay and ruine: But the beauty of the soules exempt from that servitude to natures necessities, is of a more excellent condition then that of the body in it's greatest pompe: yet are our soules enjoyments more ours then are our bodies. So earnest and passionate a lover of mankind is our Lord, whom hee has so nobly honor'd, that things of lesser va∣lue, (which carry little of greatnesse in them) he has decreed to the Laws and ne∣cessity of a naturall production; but has made us our selves the workmen of better, and more glorious effects. Had the forming of our bodies beauty been left to us; Our fantastick natures had taken too much care about it, and we had utterly neglected the greater businesse of our soules. But Divine providence having denyed us the power, we may justly conclude our task appoint∣ed us to bee the care of our own soules. Since all the curiosity to make our selves finer creatures then we are (which finds so many, so much employment for their pre∣cious hours) is altogether fruitlesse: The nicer arts of colours and curles to adorne us, lookt into have made up nothing but
a becomming handsome lie. When so much time spent upon the soul, had really enricht and adorn'd it with such beauties as will last for ever. And for all this how little time should we allow the better part, if so be we had a ful power to accomplish our desire on the more ignoble; scarce any time would be spar'd upon our soules, could we beautifie our bodies as we desire, still should we be decking and adorning the base & ab∣ject slave, whilst we neglected the soule her Mistresse and Lady with the laziest sloath, and meanest contempt. Therefore has God taken the effect of this fruitlesse labour clean out of our power, if we truly consider the end of it: But has given us the use of better, and more profitable labours, and appointed their reward. For hee that can∣not truly better and beautifie his body, may do it to his soul, though never so de∣form'd with sin, by true contrition and repentance, making it not onely the object of good mens affections, and bad mens envie: But reduce it to the honour to bee belov'd even of God our Lord, and King. This is it the Psalmist means, when hee saies Psal. 45. ver. 95. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is the
Lord, and worship thou him. Nay, such is the great benignity of our Lord, that the vildest and most dissolute sinners may hope by repentance to regain his favour, though they stand in the highest degrees forfeited to his anger, and severe judge∣ments: Which is very apparant through∣out the Prophets: Ezekiel thus patheti∣cally aggravates her abhominations faln into a new unheard of manner of whore∣dome, contrary to the custome of Harlots. They give gifts (saith he) to all whores; but thou givest gifts to all thy lovers, and and hirest them that come unto thee on e∣very side for thy whoredome, and the con∣trary is in thee from other women in thy whoredom, whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredomes, and in that thou givest a reward, when as no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary. Yet the mercy and grace of God calls her home, thus given over to the abominations of her lusts. For he laid not this captivity on her, having an eye to his revenge, and punishment on her wickedness, but to convert her, and bring her into or∣der by his corrections. For would God have punish'd her as she deserv'd, shee had
been swallowed in destruction. He had not brought her captives home, nor prepar'd for them a better City, or a more glorious Temple then the old. Haggai 2. 9. The glo∣ry of this latter house, shall be greater then the former, saith the Lord of hosts; & in this wil I give peace saith the Lord of Hosts. See thus often defil'd with her abhominati∣ons, the Lord will not exclude this City from repentance, nor shut the doors of his lemency against her. No, he will not, nor will he forsake thee for ever, (though thy desperate condition by the suggestions of the Divell would perswade thee to it) but with infinite desire and affection receive thee into mercy if thou returnest to him; and he will lovingly embrace thy soule a∣gain, though thus sunk in the deeps of wickednesse. For no man, no man (I say) though passionate even to madness, can so truly affect the greatest beauty of the world, as our Lord does the soul of man; And if we look narrowly into the daily expressions of his love to every particular soul, this truth will shew it self as clear to us as the light of the day: And the Scrip∣tures abound in testimonialls of this his infinite love to us. Observe in Jeremiah,
and throughout the Prophets, how the Lord has been wearied, nay, contemn'd and despised by his; yet has restor'd the desertors, and plac'd them again in his high favours, this witnesse he bears of himself in the Gospell; when he saies: Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children, even as a hen ga∣thereth her chickens under her wings, and you would not. And Saint Paul. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God (saith he) was in Christ recon∣ciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath com∣mitted to us the word of reconciliation: Now when we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; wee pray you in Christs stead, be reconciled to God. O let us lay these invitations to our hearts, and the minute wee read them be∣lieve the holy Ghost calling us. Nor let us think it enough that wee believe aright; for alas, infidelity is not the onely bane of the soul; to believe well availes us nothing, if we live ill; if wee purifie not our soules from uncleannesse, and bid a farwell to that lewdnesse of life, which so incenses
the mighty anger of the Lord against us. Because that the fleshly mind is enmity a∣gainst God; for it is not obedient to the Law of God, neither can be. Rom. 8. 7. The concupiscence of the flesh stands like a separating wall betwixt our soules and mercy, which wee must utterly raze and destroy, or never hope to have a free passage to that happy reconciliation, which will crown our soules with triumph and honor; and make them lovely and ac∣ceptable to God himself. Thou art now bewitcht, with thy Hermion's: face, and thinkst nothing in the world comparable to such an excesse of beauty; believ'st the Earth bears nothing like it; thy selfe (if thou pleasest) maist be far more lovely then she, nay, excell her more then starres of Gold and inestimable workmanship doe images of clay and dirt. If men are natu∣rally amaz'd, and ravisht with the sight of some extraordinary beauties; how will they be extrasied with the splendour of a soule in glory. For indeed the substance of the greatest beauties (though in a greater excellence of composure) is the same with the meanest and most contemptible
things of nature. And are nourisht by the same meanes, and subject to the same decay, if not preserv'd by most common, contemptible and inferiour supplies. What is the inside of her killing glittering eyes? What lies under that sweet and lovely outside of thy Hermion's sur∣passing graces, or her purpled cheeks? If thou art once redeemed from thy dotage, thou wilt confesse the greatest beauty but a Sepulcher fairly whited and painted over, every thing within it being decreed to the certainty of ruine and dissolution: for there is nothing soe lovely that turnes not into loath∣some putrifaction. But what was that former grace and beauty (whilst thou wert in thy integrity) in which thou didst so infinitely excell? that was of another composition: above al the glorious things of this world, as much as the Heavens exceed the Earth in splendour: nay far more glorious then the Heavens themselves: for though the soul be undis∣cernable, and wee are altogether strangers to her excellencies wee may behold her in the elevated expressions of those, whose
pious zeales have left their attempted de∣scriptions, to inflame us with the favour they had to possesse their thoughts with so amiable desires, as the contemplation of future glory, which they have severall waies aim'd to know, especially by soaring high as they were able, into the natures of Angelical, and heavenly substances.
CHAP. XI. Saint Chrysostome continues the glorious nature of the soul; and from that excellence prosecutes his perswasives to Theodorus; still striving to overcome the rebellions of his lusts with exhortation, and press∣ing arguments. HEar him whose desires would have showne the excellent substance of an happy soul; but finding it unequall to all comparison, he betakes himselfe first to il∣lustrate it by an assimulation to the nature of metals, whose gross being was too hea∣vy in the purest of their extractions, to give him a sufficient hint and light of it: thence he rayses his contemplations, and attempts his comparison with the bright∣ness of lightning; and next of Angelicall bodies, whose glorified essence he finds of a nature so abstracted from our knowledge, that he cannot expresse the curiosity and subtilety of their essences, so transplendent
are they. And such shall the blessed be in their glory. Mat. 22. They shall be as the Angells in Heaven, saies our Saviour to the Sadduces. In fine, all examples deriv'd from materiall things, can never expresse the beauty of a soule. Heaven excells all the glories of the Earth, fire surpasses wa∣ter, the starres in lustre excell the most pretious stones; wee may admire the rainbow in Heaven, the violets and lillies, withall the pride and variety of the fields, which are all nothing in a manner, if compar'd with the glories of the soule; and those ineffable honors she shall be clo∣thed withall in the day of her blisse. Let us not forfeit so much happinesse which a lively faith and constant hope can secure us. Nay, for this wee must wade through all the inconveniencies of this miserable world. 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light afflicti∣on which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. And as blessed Saint Paul teacheth us, It is really easie to beare the greatest afflictions looking to the reward of our sufferings; So is it equally easie to overcome the petulant passions of our lusts, and the same reward is appointed for both
the conquests. For when I would draw thee from thy dissolute courses, I invite thee not to dangers, nor the horrors of eminent death, nor to perpetuall plagues and scour∣ges: to no afflictions abroad, nor strife at hope; no prisons, or Irons, no hazard of shipwrack, no violence of theeves; or thy own familiarsnares; no hunger, cold, nor nakednesse, neither to scorching fire. And alas, wilt thou dread my exhortations? I impose no bitter task on thee, but on the contrary, earnestly desire thee to set thy self free from a most tyrannicall captivity. And when thou art ransom'd from this bondage of thy sinns, to the happy liberty thou didst once enjoy: thy eyes opened to behold what true bliss is: Thou wilt con∣fesse the merited paines of a dissolute life, the unquiet and tormenting afflictions of a mind, given over to carnall lusts; and what the happinesse and content of such a godly life is, as thou didst formerly leade. It were no greater wonder that an Athiest, who believ'd no resurrection from the dead, should lie lull'd in his lethargick be∣stialitie, without any sence of his conditi∣on. But that believers, that Christians (who look after, expect and foresee what is de∣creed
both to the good and bad) for them to live thus miserably unconcern'd in their own calamities, nothing at all awakened with the remembrance of their future hopes or fears is most heavy, dul and sence∣lesse stupidity. When with their lipps men shall professe themselves believers, but look into their waies, they are by many degrees worse then infidells, and commit greater abhomination then they. For amongst the very heathens themselves, there cannot be greater monsters in sinns then are some Christians: Nay, what is more (which should severely advise us to amend) a∣mongst them, there are often eminent ex∣amples of lives led morally, so well that they are fit to be look'd upon for our in∣struction; with what shame then shall we cover our faces, when the actions of hea∣thens and aliens to God may be precepts. Merchants who have suffer'd great da∣mages and losses, fall not from their hopes, but try the Seas again, though there be the same danger of stormes, and shipwrack, which they know their greatest skill and care cannot sometimes avoid. And shall we base unworthy cowards that suffer by sin and wickedness, not dare the recovery of
our lost soules, nor attempt our future pre∣servation, though wee fall into dangerous lapses, being wee know we are forbid to despair in the greatest extremities. When indeed no evill has power over us unlesse we willingly our selves consent unto it. And why remain we then so insensibly stupid? why use we not our hands in this combat, but lie as if they were tyed behind us, or what is worse, (if they are employ'd) it is against us our selves; what madnesse is this? that men entring the lists to fight their adversaries, turne all their blowes upon themselves. The Divell lies in ambush for us, diligently observing the advantages hee has over humane weaknesse to make us de∣stroy our selves. Wee must have courage then with undaunted spirits to meet the cunning assaltant on every attempt against us, or with our own negligence and care∣lesse fears he ruins us for ever. As thou art fallen (Theodorus) so likewise fell blessed David; he to adultery added the heynous murther of innocent Uriah: But what fol∣low'd? did he lie under the burthen of his iniquities? did not he attempt to rise again, but overcome by Satan lay prostrate to his fury? No! he couragiously resumes his arms
against his enemy? and fought him with so prevailing courage, that his children after him were the trophies of his victory, and receiv'd the benefits of his conquest. For when Solomon his Sonn's heart was turn'd after other Gods by means of his wives, 1 Kings 11. When he went after Ashtoreth the Goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the abomination of the chil∣dren of Ammon, &c. When he had with all his abhominations provok'd the Lord, it is recorded in holy writ, that for Da∣vids sake, God rent not his Kingdome from him. ver. 11. I will surely rend thy Kingdome from thee, and will give it to thy servant; Notwithstanding, in thy daies I will not do it, for David thy fathers sake, but I will rend it out of the hands of thy Son. Howbeit I will not rend away all thy Kingdome: but will give one tribe to thy Son, for David my servants sake. So likewise in the daies of Hezekias, though he himself were a just man, does the Lord alledge the same cause of his mercy to Je∣rusalem. 2 Kings 19. 34. I will defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake. Thus did the Lord continue the remembrance of Davids
hearty penitence; to shew us how effectu∣ally true repentance finds accesse to the tri∣bunall of Heaven. This servant of the Loreds disputed not against his redemption; had he had the desperate opinion thou seemest to be of now, that hee could not be recon∣cil'd to God: He would have said perhaps; God has done me mighty honors; he has chosen me into the number of his Pro∣phets, has given me Empire and Dominion over my brethren; and deliver'd me out of mighty dangers; and how can I hope for his mercy, whom after so manifold bless∣ings I have thus infinitely offended. Had the Prophet permitted such desperate con∣ceptions to overcome him, he had not one∣ly excluded himselfe from Gods favour in that his sad condition at the present, but had blotted out the remembrance of all his former life. As the wounds of the body neg∣lected, grow altogether incurable, so those of the soul, if we seek not for their reme∣die, lapse us into eternall perdition: yet such is our folly, that in the least distem∣pers of our bodies, we refuse no paines, no troubles, but submit to any tortures art can prescribe for our recovery, but obstinately werefuse the medicins of our sick souls: nay,
though wee are so ill, that we are beyond all cure, with what a longing desire we are attentive to what the Physician speakes, in the last extreames willing to hear of com∣fort. But in the disease of our soules wee despair, and languish before we see reason for it, since the most dangerous wounds there are not incurable. And where the na∣ture of the sicknesse is really desperate: wee continue our hopes; but miserably despaire where there is no need: And where we are absolutely forbid it, we are willfully diffi∣dent, putting on the vanity of a confidence when 'tis ridiculous and beyond all hopes: but such is our naturall fond inclination to our bodies, that wee look on their de∣cayes with horror and affrightment, and in the hazards of our pretious soules, are sot∣tishly insensible. Me thinks in such a state, those words of Christ may awake our hea∣vy dull spirits. Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill soul: but rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in Hell. If these be not prevalent with thee, to perswade thee as yet to return to thy integrity, I shall la∣bour in anguish and affliction of soul for thy deferring so long, so acceptable and
necessary a task as thy reforming thy life, but I cannot utterly despair of thee, though thou wilfully do so of thy selfe as yet; for I should be then guilty of thy own folly and peevishnesse by my distrust. Which is a sin I will not commit: For (though I see thee strangely fallen) I will still trust in Gods mercy and grace to thee, and doubt not but to see thee in a happy con∣dition, clear'd and purg'd of all that fatall malignancy thy carelesse soule has now contracted; and behold thee perfectly re∣concil'd to vertue, godlinesse, and the fa∣vour of God.
CHAP. XII. The story of the Ninivites repentance, the proeme to Saint Chrysostomes farther urging Theodorus to his conversion, collecting thence, that greatest sinners may return to God: he prosecutes his perswasions, alledg∣ing that many so converted, have be∣come the best and most zealous peo∣ple. THE Ninivites hearing that threatning, and sharp crying out of the Prophet Jonah (Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty daies and Ni∣neveh shall be destroyed) were not so dis∣courag'd and dismai'd at so terrible war∣nings of their approaching destruction from the fierce anger of an incens'd omnipotent God, but they would yet trust to his mer∣cy. Though the decreee of his vengeance was not conditionall, but positive, Niniveh shall be destroy'd without admittance of a∣ny clause to foment a hope in them, for the words of the Prophet were not dis∣joynted,
but a plain and direct sentence of judgement; yet they submit with humble penitence. ver. 9. For (say they) who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that wee perish not. ver. 10. And God saw their workes, that they turned from their evill ways, and God repented of the evill that he said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. See how those barbarous, rude, and mad people apprehended their imminent destruction: & togther understood the possibility of their deliverance, having their hearts set upon his infinite mercy, in his greatest wrath and rage against them. Let us then (that are Christians, and nursed up in the knowledge of our Lords benignity, who are instructed and disciplin'd in his word; and know ma∣ny the like examples) stir up our soules to sincere repentance; and not be less then them in our confidence of his goodness, and mercy For he it is whose sacred spirit has told us. Isa 55. 8, 9. That his thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are our waies his waies. For as the Heavens are higher then then the Earth, so are his waies higher then our waies, and his thoughts then our thoughts. Servants of men erre from the du∣ty
they owe their masters, and commit foul faults against them, yet if they grow sorrowfull, and recant that disobedience, they are againe received into their masters good opinion, and sometimes with advantage of preferment: God our gratious Lord and master, (whose thoughts and waies exceed those of men) will deale as favourably; Nay, far more mercifully with us. If the intent of his creating us, had been to damn us, then thy despaire were reasonable and just, nor couldst thou do otherwise then doubt of salvation, when none were prepar'd for thee; But God ha∣ving made thee out of his goodnesse, and created thee to good ends no less then that thou mightst enjoy everlasting happinesse, (and to that intent his great workes con∣tinue in thee, if thou willfully denie not to perceive it) what should make thee thus diffident, or in the least to mistrust his mercy? When we have the most incens'd him, then ought we most carefully to look to our selves? most diligently and couragi∣ously to resist all issuing temptations pre∣sent, and most bitterly lament our easie yielding to those past which so miserably overcame us; so shall wee be able to give a
manifest testimony of our perfect change. For nothing more provokes our Lord then our obstinacie and denyall to returne into the right way. For to do ill is but hu∣mane weaknesse, to persevere Diabolicall malice. Consider how horrid a thing it was, which wee read in the Prophet, that Iudah call'd back in the race of her vild whoredomes, would not return to the Lord: Jer. 3. 7. And I said, after shee had done all these things, turn thou unto me; but she returned not. The Lord strives with us, to show how mercifully he is inclin'd to our salvation, many are his promises to those who return into the right way, for∣saking the Meanders, and by-paths of ini∣quity: When hee saw Israels promises of repentance, that they began to prepare their hearts to fear him, and to keep his Commandements; his promise was, that it should bee well with them and their Children for ever. Wherefore Moses joyns the reward with the command, when hee bids them to keep the Commands of the Lord and his statutes, which he com∣mands (saies he) for their good. Deut. 10. 13. And immediately before, he commands us to fear him, to walk in his waies, and
to love him. Which is most remarkable, that the God of Heaven should earnestly seek their loves, who so wretchedly offend him. Wherefore ought wee to love him who desires to belov'd of us, who woes us, and does us all things to win our affecti∣ons. Nay, who spar'd not his onely begot∣ten Son for us, but gave him up, and de∣livered him to the ignominious death of the Crosse, that we might be reconcil'd to him. And what think you, so loving a Father will do for them, he has purchas'd at so dear a rate. Nay, and what lies on our duty, which is humiliation and re∣pentance, even that he presses on us, if wee were not insensible of our own miseries (the evill of our own miseries) the evill of our own condition would invite us to. As he speakes by the Prophet. Isaiah 43. 26, Tell thy sinns first, declare thou that thou maist be justified. Which the Lord speakes, desiring to make our affections vehement, that so with freenesse and o∣penness of heart, we may deliver our selves up to his mercifull kindnesse. Infinite is this love of our Lord while we anger and provoke him, while we abuse his good∣nesse, and his patience, all this ingratitude
cannot extinguish his love, and when hee laies open to us the injuries wee offer his divine Majesty, he does it but to dilate on his love, and so to tye our affections nea∣rer to him; and demands of us nothing but penitent acknowledgment. If then to con∣fesse our sinnes unto him bring with it so much comfort, as the promise of justi∣fication; how great will our joy be, when our workes are rendred acceptable in the sight of God, and all the filth and unclean∣nesse of them washt quite away. And if this way to him were not accessible, after we err'd and leudly strai'd from the paths of righteousnesse, how few of many soules now glorified in Heaven, had ever seen their salvation. It is worthy all mens ob∣servation, seriously to consider the returne of many desperate sinners, who after the reconcilement of their enormous soules to grace, have strangely excell'd in piety, and outshin'd those who were (in compa∣rison of them) unspotted and undefiled: For the same heat and violence of theirs which made them rage in sinne, has after their conversion turn'd into a zeale as passionate in good and vertuous determi∣nations, out of a true sence of their guilt,
and the merited judgements on their past iniquities. In this excesse did Christ resent the officious service of Mary Magdalen when hee answer'd, Simon, Luk. 7. 44. Doest thou see this woman? I entred into thy house, thou gavest mee no water for my feet; but she hath wash∣ed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kisse, but this woman since I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet: My head with oyle thou didst not annoint; but this woman hath annointed my feet with oyntment. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many, are fogiven, for she loved much; but to whom little is forgi∣ven, the same loveth little: and he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. This is the Devills reason, both for his vigilance and fears, that hee has often known the greatest sinners, prove the sincerest peni∣tents. It is this makes him dread the losing of his prey, when hee perceives a conscience beginning to be struck with the sense of sin! O how he fears and trem∣bles at the very first step a transgressor makes out of his snares, how he is trou∣bled at our least inclinations to conver∣sion.
For they who have once begun this happy course, can very difficulty bee turn'd back from it; the zeale of true pe∣nitence burnes like a flame within us, till it consumes our drosse, and refines our soules to a greater purity then that of Gold tryed in the fire. Wee are driven with the horrid memory of our past sins, as if it were with a violent wind into the Haven of vertue. And this is the reason that great sinners often prove better then they who seldome fell; because their undertakings is to be manag'd with greater fervour, and alacrity; the diffi∣culty in the beginning onely deludes us, it seems a precipice at first, too hard for us to clime off the bottome of impie∣ty, to the top of piety; while our feet are nail'd in Hell, wee may deem it im∣possible to get loose, and fly to Heaven; Therefore wee must boldly enter into this conflict, our resolved penitence must storme the passe, though the enemy spit fire in our faces; valiantly assault him, and thou hast already overcome the im∣potent wretch; the vanquisht Devill flyes thee, and leaves thee master of the field. O let us begin this Heavenly jour∣ney,
let us ascend into this Heavenly City, let us step up the first stepps, and never look back; till wee arrive at it, for there are wee appointed Citizens; there are our glorious dwellings design'd us. For if wee (like forlorne soules) cast off our hopes, wee shut the gates of Hea∣ven against our selves, and bind our feet in linkes of despair, the chain that keeps Satan tyed for ever. For despair at first flung the fiend into the bondage hee is confin'd to for all eternity. The soule that once despairs, is never sensible of her own condition, weighs not the danger she is in, but speakes and acts every thing in opposition to salvati∣on. As men quite frantick, fear nothing, are asham'd of nothing, dare do any thing without apprehension of danger, will run into Seas, or fires, and fly in their fits to the edge of precipices for security. So those sinners (who by negligent obstinacy become desperate) run upon vices unheard of, abhominati∣ons never dream't of, imminent death and damnation stoppe not the violence of their courses, but still they winde themselves into wild Labyrinths, where
they are lost for ever. I therefore intreate thee (Theodorus) before thou drownst thy self any more in this thy drunken∣nesse, manly to contend to get out of it; Awake, recover and cure thy soule of this diabolick surfeit. If thou think'st it too difficult presently to resolve, to leave it quite off, do it by degrees. Though in my opinion, such excuses are childish, fond delaies; and too much show thy do∣tage on thy beastlinesse. For if thou tryest, thou wilt find it a most easie mastery to cast those base suggestions, if a true knowledge and disdain of thy in∣firme reasons back thee in the conflict. O let the blessed contemplation on eter∣nity prevaile with thee, to accomplish this blest conversion. I beseech and pray thee by those vertues by which thou once didst so highly merit, by that former trust, and confidence in our Lord; to let us see thee rais'd again to that top of vertue, where thou wert once so eminent; and from which thou fellest so miserably; Let us see thee recover the lost strength and vigour of thy soule. Pitty them that are scandaliz'd and offended at thy fall; Pitty those who perhaps by thy exam∣ple
example run into the same dangerous de∣struction, despairing of the waies of ver∣tue, seeing thee forsake them. Consider how great the grief and sorrow is, who dearly love thee. And that this thy rui∣nating state can be joy or gladnesse to none but desperate Atheists, and youths sacrific'd to their lusts and sensualities; Return then to thy former goodnesse, and piety; we thy friends shall be over full of joy to see that happy hour. When thou hast left them to contempt and infamie, who are now Enemies to thy recovery; malitiously wishing thou maist still con∣tinue this dissolute life; Then will wee triumph 'ore them, who gloried to blast thy honor: and once assur'd of thy con∣version triumphing, crown thee with elo∣gium's, when thy detractors shall blush and envie the truths our tongues shall ut∣ter of thee. Add to this the benefits thy example may bring to other falling soules; seldome it is, but such recoveries beget companions; and what a joy will that be, when the splendour of thy re∣claiming shall give light to others to find the way out of the same darknesse. Do not (Theodorus) neglect so great a
good as may happen by thy return to vertue. And for pitty deny not our soules the joy we shall have for thee. Keep not us in this depth of grieving for thee, but turn our suffocating lamentations into gentler melodious aires of joy and exul∣tation; Which will be full in us when we see thou hast forsaken the troops of Sa∣tan, and that thou art come over to the army of Angells, and enroll'd in the Mi∣litia of Heaven. Consider how infinitely exemplary and eminent their glories be, who escape the toiles and snares of Sa∣tan; how much they acquire of praise and reward, whose true repenrance brings them home to the Lord, how indeed they seem to excell those who have appear'd alwaies virtuous, as has been formerly de∣monstrated out of holy writ. So Harlots and Publicans have gain'd the Kingdome of Heaven for the lot of their inheritance, and many who were last, have obtain'd the preeminence to be the first.
CHAP. V. Saint Chrysostome relates a story of Phoenix, a young gentleman of his time, another of an Herm it, a∣nother of a Disciple of John's the Son of Zebedeus, and of Onesi∣mus, out of Saint Paul, with which he continues his perswasives to fallen Theodorus. I Will now relate to thee (Theodorus) a story of mine own time, and of which I my selfe am a witnesse; I knew a young Phoenix the Son of Urbanus; Who was left a very young Orphan by his Parents, with a very great fortune in Monies, Land, and Servants. His education was sutable to his Estate, sumptuous and no∣ble, his studies most in the liberall arts, much addicted he was to musick, and all the most pleasing attractives of so green years. He on an instant forsakes his more delightfull studies, all his pomp of youth, and gaiety of cloaths, and clad
himselfe with the coursest vestments hee could get, putting on the austerity of the most reserv'd religions. Hee betakes himself to the Mountaines, and most so∣litary retirements, spending his time in the highest and most profound contem∣plations; Hee was alwaies exercised in matters unproportionable to the qualifi∣cations of so young a Philosopher; hee soar'd to the highest and most sublime studies, such things as were the labours of the greatest proficients in Divinity, were his onely imployment; till at length he decrees and dedicates himself to holy orders, for which he had the repute to be very fit, and gave large testimonies of his sufficiency for his undertakings. Every man began exceedingly to rejoyce and wonder, that a young man so nicely bred up in all plenty and delicacy, one sprung from so noble a stock, should in the prime of his youth forsake the mag∣nificence and delights of his large fortune, and all that bewitched happinesse, which deludes the fancy of most men, to under∣goe so strict and severe a course of life; most admirable it was, that not any temptation (of those many his conditi∣on
and fortune afforded him) could hin∣der his progresse to the very height and greatest perfection of a contemplative life. At which eminence, when hee was arriv'd and justly become all mens wonder, some of his own family esteeming this his re∣solution beneath the dignity of his birth: make themselves the corruptors of his inclinations. Their siren songes allure him into the waves of his former vani∣ties: He forsakes all his pious resolution; quits his solitary, and contemplative life on the Mountains, and his happy soli∣tudes, and now begins to fill the streets with his train, and pompe; his multitude of horses, his superfluous retinue, with thousands of other follies are every mans discourse; in fine, he grows so dissolute, that he lives neither temperately nor cir∣cumspectly; But enflam'd with all vio∣lent and shamelesse lusts fell into most abhominable courses. Every good man (who sees his tribe of sycophants, and lewd villains stick soclose to him) despairs of him, who had no Parents living to cor∣rect and curbe the enormities of his lasci∣vious youth, which had the ill advan∣tage of a vast fortune to feed his extrava∣gant
inclinations. Some there were who calmly expostulate with him, and urge him (though he forsook the severities he lately had undergone) he would yet ap∣ply himselfe to his former more pleasing, and delightfull exercises; and bethinks himself how convenient it were more carefully to look to his Estate, and the honor of his noble Family; these things were often rung in his ears, and he de∣nied not them the hearing, who under∣took the speaking. The goodnesse of his nature, and an innate modesty he had often show'd, encourag'd some holy religious men to seeke all meanes to get into his good opinion, that so they might dis∣charge their duties to God in endeavou∣ring to reclaim a person of whom they conceiv'd so much hopes; to this pur∣pose they diligently and constantly watch and observe him: When they met him abroad, their custome was to salute him with all respect, all love and kind∣nesse, which hee at first but slighted; Yet these compassionate men, infinitly ambitious to preserve his perishing youth, would not be mov'd at his behaviour, or put by the good of their intentions, ha∣ving
still their eyes fixt upon the mark they so coveted to hit, they would not be put off from the resolution they had to redeem this lambe from the wolfes jawes by some meanes or other, which at length, with much study and patience they performed. For in the end hee be∣came something mov'd with their civili∣ties, and a little to wonder at their be∣haviour to him, (being conscious that his waies were not at all agreeable to their liking.) In so much, that if hee spyed them a far off, hee would leap from his horse and reverently meet them with his eyes fixt on the Earth, and with a grave serious attention, and hearken to what they said, till in processe of time, his respect to them continually encreasing, he ever treats them with such becomming gestures, as were due to their good in∣tentions, and Divine callings. By this artifice of theirs, they restore this young man to the grace and favour of God, and breaking all those nets entangled him, reduc'd him to his own peace of soule, and to the love of Heavenly wisdome, and true piety. In which he grew so emi∣nent, and farre excelled others; That no
man could dream he ever had led so vain a life, when they saw him so exceedingly reform'd. For having now learn't by ex∣perience, what the dangerous baits of loose and ungovern'd appetites were, hee distributes all his riches amongst the poor, and needy. And thus he frees him∣self from all worldly incumberances, re∣moving all lets and obstacles that lay in his way to that Haven whither hee di∣rected his course, and where at length hee arriv'd, and became a rare and most ex∣quisite pattern of devotion, and true pie∣ty: thus fell this noble youth, and thus recover'd he the eternall happiness of his soul. Another after an exempla∣ry patience,The Hermet. and many hard∣ships in his Hermitage (who with one single companion, had liv'd in a Cell to a very great age, and there led a most An∣gelicall life) at last by the malice and subtlety of the Devill, fell into idlenesse and ugly dreames, into sluggish and yauning desires, and gives Satan the op∣portunity to surprize him. Who fires him with lust after a woman, hee burnes to have one, though hee had seen none of
the sex for many years, that is, from the first day he entred into his solitude. First, hee askes his companion for delitious meats, wine, and Junkets, threatning him (unlesse he got them for him) hee would himselfe break the ties of his vows, and go to the next Town, and fetch them. Which hee did not out of a true longing for wine, or those delicates, but made this pretence for his farther lewd purpo∣ses; his companion attempts him with all the perswasive cunning he could, but find∣ing him willfull in his resolutions, pro∣mises him to get those things he desir'd to satisfie his appetite, lest it might occa∣sion him to run into greater sins. Which he perceiving, and seeing his intents like to be frustrated; began to deal plain∣ly with him, and saies he must himselfe to the Town. His friend (who in vaine strove to hinder his strange madnesse) yields his consent to that too; but fol∣lowing him a far off, observes whither he goes; And at length spies him enter into a brothell; where he learnt out that hee had got a woman into his embraces: which when he knew, hee staies abroad in expectation of the Hermits returne.
The old man after his lewd conversation, comes from the brothell. This compani∣on meets him and receives him into his armes, and kisses him extream kindly, never questions him what had past, but desires (if hee had satisfied his appetite) that he would return to the Cell. This great meeknesse in his friend brings the poor Hermit to a perfect sence of the grie∣vous sin he had committed, and a great shame for it; thus with passionate com∣punction, and contrition of heart he fol∣lowes his friend to the Mountaines, la∣menting still by the way his inconsiderate licentious fall: Comes thither, he shuts himselfe into a little roome of the Cell, locks the door, which after he ne∣ver opens but to his companion who brought him his bread and water; hee charg'd his friend likewise when any one askt for him to deny him, and make an excuse as if he slept; He found his com∣panion very willing to assent to this; hee then shuts himselfe up close, and there spends his whole time in fasting and prayers, and devotion, cleansing his soul from the guilt and filth of his abho∣minable transgression. Not long after a
great drought invades the neighbouring Country: When all the inhabitants had in vain bewail'd this calamitie, one of them was commanded in a dream to goe to his recluse, desire him to pray for them, and that then the drought should leave them. He went and took his neigh∣bours with him, and comming they found the Hermits old companion alone; who told them the man they sought was dead. They return to their prayers again; and again had the same answer by the vision in every thing like the former; then more resolutely they demand the Hermit of his friend (who was yet un∣willing to confesse the truth) till they conjur'd him to shew them the man, affirming with vehement asseverations that they knew he was not yet dead, but that he lived. He heard them thus earnest, and guess'd that the secret compact be∣twixt him and his friend was now re∣veal'd; he conducts them to the place where the man was, where they found the doors lockt fast against them, and im∣mediately they broke down the wall, and rusht in all upon him, where kneel∣ing at his feet, they declared the particu∣lars
of the command they had from the vision to him, requesting his prayers that they might be free'd from the drought. He at first denies them, affirm∣ing his unworthinesse to be far below the confidence to believe he could obtaine any such blessing from God: For he had yet the horror of his old fault before his eyes as fresh as it had been then commit∣ted. At last (when they declar'd all which had happen'd unto them) overcome with their importunities, he was perswa∣ded to pray for them; and as soon as hee had pray'd the drought ceas'd. What also became of that young man who was the schollar of John the Son of Zebedeus in his youth;The schooler of John, In Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. 2. and turn'd afterwards for a long time a leader of theeves and robbers: yet it so fell out, that he was re∣ceived at the last again by the holy hands of the blessed old man; out of the Caves and denns of Robbers, hee returnes into the waies of religion and piety. This thou art not ignorant, of his thou know∣est as well as I: For I have heard thee ad∣mire the meeknesse, sweetnesse, and ten∣derness
of the good old man; when the story has been related how he first kiss'd his bloody hands, and after that earnestly embrac'd him▪ and by this softnesse re∣duc'd him to his lost goodnesse. So blessed Paul did not onely receive One∣simus that unprofitable vagabond, that theefe converted to goodness, but thought him fit to be honour'd with honour e∣quall to his Masters. Philemon 10. I be∣seech thee, saith he, for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds: Who in times past was to thee uprofitable: but now profitable both to thee and me. Whom I have sent again; Thou therefore receive him who is my own bowells: whom I would have retain'd with me, that in thy stead he might have ministred with me in the bonds of the Gospell: But without thy mind would I do nothing: that thy bene∣fit should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly: For perhaps he therefore de∣parted for a season, that thou shouldst re∣ceive him for ever. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother belov'd, es∣pecially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive
him, as my self. In the contrary case, St. Paul writeth thus to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 12. 21. And lest when I come a∣gain my God will bring me low amongst you, and that I shall bewaile many which have sinned amongst you, and have not repented. And again he tells them 2 Cor. 13. 2. As before I foretold you, I fore∣tell you, that if I come, I will not spare. Doest thou not understand whose lost condition it is he so bewailes; 'tis their? whom he will not spare; it is not those sinners whom hee brought to repentance by his holy precepts; but those who were obstinate and would not lend their eares to his divine dictates. And this as I foretell, so I foretell you of Saint Pauls was writ for all posterity of Christians. For though the blessed Apostle be not present with us as he had been with those Corinthians, nor writ immediately to us: yet Christ is present with us, who then spake by him. And wee are deeply concern'd in this sharpe menace; for if we presumptuously persevere in sin, hee will not spare us, but will severely pu∣nish us, both in this world and in the world to come. Let us prevent his wrath,
and turn the face of his anger from us, in confession of our sinns, and let us powre out our hearts before him. Eccles. 21. 1. My Son (saies the Son of Sirach) hast thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former sins. Let us not stay for an ac∣cuser, but our selves accuse our selves, and so preventing him wee shall render our Judge the more mercifull to us. Thou wilt say, thou doest confesse thy sinnes, and that thou deemst thy self miserable above measure. I believe thee. But I must entreat more of thee; that thy amend∣ment justifie thy sincerity. For so long as thy confession is not from thy heart, that thou doest not accuse thy self severely with a purpose to reform them; thy sinns will grow greater, and lie the heavier on thee. For no man brings his undertakings to a true perfection, who prosecutes them not with alacrity and due observance. Would any man that sowes fling away his seed but in expectation to receive the fruit there of? Who ever propounded to himself (if hee were wise) to labour in vain? and get no reward for his paines Can he likewise who sows hypocriticall, tears, prayers, and confession of his trans∣gressions,
(without a lively hope and con∣fidence in Gods mercies) ever think to refrain from his sinns? no! he must needs still remain under the curse of desperati∣on. For as a husbandman who once de∣spaires of his croppe, neglects to prevent the destruction of his Corn: So hee who sows a seeming repentance, though with tears in his deluding eyes; yet expecting no profit by it, will not at all take care to banish those malignant inclinations from his soul which utterly destroy his reconciliation to God. Alas, what is it to repent, if we persevere in our wickedness? Eccl. 34. For when one buildeth (saith the Scripture) and another pulleth down, what profit have they but labour? Hee that washeth himself after touching a dead body, if he touch it again, what availeth it him? So is it with a man that praies and fasts for his sinns, and goeth againe and doth the same, who will hear his prayer, or what doth his humbling profit him? No! who ever diverts from righteousness to sin, the Lord will pre¦pare for him a sword. Proverbs 26. 11. And as a dogge returning to his vo∣mit
becomes odious: so does a fool, who by his own wilfulnesse renewes his sinns. CHAP. XIV. The summe and conclusion of this treatise. IT is not sufficient for a perishing soule barely to accuse it self of sin: but the substance as well as the forme must con∣curre for the efficacie of repentance to justification. Our contrition must beare a manifest accompt of our shame, and detestation of sin with a solid resolution against all relapses. Hypocrisy is a maske so easily put on, that it is ordinary and common throughout the whole world, seemingly to condemn our selves of our evill waies, infidells do it with much ap∣pearing detestation of their iniquities. Many men and women in the very scene while they are acting their wickednesse, will acknowledge their basenesse, when they consider the following shame: though they determine not to seeke after
gathering the fruit of true repentance, or diving home to the perfections and ends of confession which are amendment, and resolution. Vain and of no effect are those acknowledgements, which proceed neither from compunction of soul, nor are accompanied with tears truely bitter, and heart-breaking contrition which are the onely evidences of a resolv'd change. And yet there is something like this in the world which is not it, there are some demure Devills which speak like Saints, making their hearers believe by their grace and elegant setting forth them∣selves, they are what they never intend to be; While they seek onely the reputation, and honor to be accounted good: Which is the most easie delusion possible; for who can judge of that which is presented to him in contrary colours, for the crime would not be the same if another man knew the truth of it, and how to tell it: as when the offender delivers it for such as he would have it believ'd. There are another sort of dull sinners, who are so sencelesse grown with their despair, and closed with the deadnesse of their condition, that they respect neither good
opinion, nor bad, and will tell stories of their own shame, with as much venome as their detractors would: believing their glory the greater the more wicked they make themselves. God forbid I should live to see thee like any of these; either a demure Hypocrite dissembling the righte∣ous man, whilst thou art rotten within; or so vile a wretch as would not be con∣tent to sin, unlesse he had the plea∣sure to boast of it. What thou art chiefly exhorted to by my counsell (my belov'd Theodorus) is to pluck up by the rootes from the very bottome of thy heart all diffidence in Gods mercy, and all despair. Now let us inquire what is the root, and mother of despair. It is a stupid faintnesse of mans heart; a deprivation of cou∣rage in our spirits; which may most pro∣perly be call'd not onely the root, or mo∣ther of desperation, but the nurse of it. As putrifaction in a dead carkasse breeds wormes, and those wormes encrease in that putrifaction; so mutually does his faintnesse of heart combine with that despair it self bred, and is the nursing cause of its encrease. So doe they alter∣nately
administer nutriment to all the incurable plagues of our soule; It must then be thy part to overcome this dull stupidity atd faintnesse in thee, and thou wilt find that having resum'd a Christian courage, and resolv'd confi∣dence in God: Thy despair will quickly vanish: For he that faints not, cannot de∣spair, and he that abjures not his hopes of salvation cannot faint; or cowardly submit to his own eternall destruction. Thy resolution must part with these asso∣ciates benumm'd faintnesse, and dangerous despair. For where these keep possession, the soul loses her uniformity, and grace∣full essence; becomes every thing, turnes into every monstrous shape that varietie of sins can put upon her. And who is hee we may truly judge to be in this sad con∣dition' It is thus answered; it sometimes happens, that a man may repent and seem to correct some of his known and grossest enormities; and in the meane time sinns again, goes on still insensibly encreasing the weight and burthen of his former transgressions, whose guilt is never per∣fectly taken away, till absolutely amen∣ded; and this in time proves the greatest
cause of desperation; This is truly to builde with the one, and pluck down with the other hand: and on this he must alwaies think seriously who by entire reformati∣on intends his souls good. For if we look not to the scales, all our good deeds, our prayers, and our tears will prove too light, if such a continuall weight of sinne through our negligence be crept into the contrary ballance; and from hence will follow our eternall damnation. But let us still be exercis'd in good deeds, and the conscience of discharging our duties ac∣cording to our power will be a coat of male upon us, and bear off all the darts and arrowes of Hell's malice, that they shall not be able to harme us. For such is the favour of God to good deeds, that they who have done some good on earth, and yet escape not the severity of con∣demnation, shall have their pains miti∣gated, and find some consolation even in the cruelty of torments. But he who never did any good deed, and can give no o∣ther accompt but of a wild reckoning of a life still continued, and ended in sin, what tongue can expresse the extremity
of torments that forlorne soule is con¦demn'd to. There will be at last a tryall of good and bad deeds; if the former weigh down the scales but a little, they will very much secure the owner; nor will he suffer punishments equall to the ills hee has committed. But the weight of sin without any counterpoise of vertue sinkes us into the deepest abysse of Hell. Nor does this discourse alone aver this: For the records of holy writ most amply testi∣fie the same. The Evangelist Saint Mat∣thew shewes it. Matth. 16. 27. He shall render (saith he) every man according to his workes. Nor in Hell onely, but in Heaven also shall there be difference of reward. John 14. 2. In my Fathers house are many mansions, saies our blessed Savi∣our. And again, 1 Cor. 15. 41. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the the Moon, another of the Starrs, for one Star differeth from another Star in glory, so likewise in the Resurrection of the dead. Let him who considers this value the expence of his labour, and be continually employ'd in good deeds. If we attain not the glory of the Sun or the Moon, wee
get to be little starrs, if we discharge the duty of good Christians so far as to get there at all. If we shine not in glory like Diamonds, or like Gold, wee may like Silver. But we must be carefull we are not found of materialls fitter for the fire then a place in his Heavenly mansions. And if wee are not able to discharge the highest actions of perfection, let us not neglect the due observance of lesser things which we may perform. For it is most desperate madnesse to do no good at all, because we are not in the state of the most excel∣ling perfection. For as worldlings grow rich by saving every little trifle, encrea∣sing their store, so are spirituall riches at∣tain'd by a circumspect laying hold on every occasion wherein we may serve our Lord. It is wonderfull and something strange to humane sence, that God has appointed so great a reward as the King∣dome of Heaven to him that shall but give a cup of cold water in his name? yet are men so foolish, that unlesse they can atchieve the greatest, they neglect lesser matters which are likewise very profitable. He that neglects not his duty
in things but small in their appearance▪ will learn to be able to performe greater. But he that is negligent in a little, will be a weak discharger of greater duties. And to prevent this humane inclination, Christ has left us great proposalls of cer∣tain reward for things to be compast with very little trouble. What is more easie then to pay the labourer his hire, which is but a part of thy own gain, and yet large are the promises of our Lord for that. See then the way to lay hold on Everlasting salvation, & enter into it; de∣light in our Lord, & pray incessantly unto him, again, submit thy self to his easie yoak, take on thy shoulders the light burthen thou bearst in a more happy condition: and let the end of it prove worthy the beginning of thy life. Do not, O do not despise such infinite riches which freely flow unto thee: And they are all for ever lost to thee, if thou per∣severest to exasperate our Lord with those ill courses thou art in. For if thou yet stopst the channells, and hinder'st this de∣luge in time before it has made too great a breach; thou maist repaire thy losses
to thy great advantage. When thou hast considered, and meditated seriously on this, as thou oughtest, fling away the filth and mud, which hangs upon thy soule; rise from out of the mire, wherein thou hast wallowed. And see how for∣midable thou wilt be to thy adversarie, who believ'd he had cast thee down never to rise again, it will amaze him to see thee again provoke him to the battaile, surpriz'd with thy recovery, and asto∣nisht at such an undaunted resolution, how fearfull will the coward the Devill be to attempt again the ensnaring thee. If other mens calamities be proper lessons for us; shall not all our owne instruct us? I believe that I shall see this shortly in thee, and that thou wilt appear in the sight of Heaven a person restor'd to grace, a more excellent and clearer soul then ever thou were, one that shall give testimonies of such perfection, and integrity; that thou maist be ranckt a∣mongst the best men, if not preferr'd be∣fore them. Onely despair not, fall not againe! This is my counsell; do thou as my custome is: When ever I hear any thing from others may profit me: I
make no delay to embrace and follow it, and if thou receivest with a good purpose these my admonitions, thy sick and languishing soule will need no other Physick. FINIS. Erata. Page 1. l. 5. for this r. the l 7. of dissolute r. of a disso∣lute. p. 3. l. 4. of sin r. of any sin l. 13. for, for prepa∣red. r. so prepared. l. 20. for committing every thing that was dedicated. r. committing every thing to the flames that was dedicated. p. 6. l. 7. for intollerable r. in altera∣ble. p. 9. l. 5. r. linkd to. p. 12. l. 16. for rebellious r. religious. p. 14. l. 15. for wretched r. wretches. p. 23. l. 1. leave out and promised. p. 24. l. 6. r. like a loving fa∣ther. p. 26. l. last, for peruses r. persues. p. 31. l 11. for confidences r. consciences. p. 44. l. 28. r. delights for lights. p. 46. l. 17. for again r. gone again. p. 60. l. 7. r. there appeared not p. 62. l. 22. for receive r. conceive p. 67. l. 11. for screen scaene. p. 70. l. 4. for undertake labour r. undertake the labour. p. 72. l. 5. for choosed r. crost. p. 79. l. 12. for Hermions r. Hermiones. p. 79. l. 17. for starrs r. statues. p. 80. l. 7. for Hermion's r. Hermione's p. 84. l. 6. for hope r. home ibid. l. 23. for greater r. great. p. 87. l. 3. for were r. wore p. 103. l. 13. Chap. is intitled the 5. ibid l. 3. I knew a young Phoenix; r. I knew a young man Phoenix. p. 104. l. 3. for religions. r. religious. Reader, this multitude of faults in so small a treatise I can attribute to nothing but my own ill hand which deceived the printer, which I entreat thee to correct.
The Contents of every Chapter. CHAP. I. SAint Chrysostome passionately describes the great esteem and va∣lue we ought to have of our own soules, and on that basis he raises the fabrick of this treatise to perswade Theo∣dorus plung'd into extream sinns, and bewitch't with the vanity of a dissolute life, to return to vertue and piety, in which he had once been an eminant example. CHAP. II. The Devil endeavours and practi∣ces
to undermine our hopes, and raze the foundation of our eternall hap∣piness. The comparison betwixt a dy∣ing body and a perishing soul; with an exhortation to be couragious in our conflicts with the Devill. CHAP. III. Gods mercie to the greatest sinners, an argument against despair. CHAP. IV. The example of Nebuchadnez∣zar King of Babylon, a cohaerence to the preceding Chapter. CHAP. V. That sincere repentance is alwaies acceptable to God, declar'd out of Ho∣ly writ by example, precept and para∣ble.
CHAP. VI. That we ought carefully to cleanse our soules from the filth of sin, which must by no meanes be slighted or neg∣lected, since in this word we cannot pre∣sume on to morrow, every thing is so subject to mutability. And then the pleasures of the Earth being so short and so quickly vanishing, we ought to fix our thoughts upon that eternity, in which we shall be crown'd with glo∣ry or plagued in torments. CHAP. VII. Hell fire expos'd to the terror of the impenitent, with the torments and the certainty thereof. CHAP. VIII. Of the beatitude of the Saints glo∣rified in Heaven, pressing Theodo∣rus
farther to amendment, by arguing that Heaven is rather to be sought af∣ter then Hell to be fear'd: the glory of the one being a more moving object, then the terriblenesse of the other. CHAP. IX. Of the day of judgement. CHAP. X. The joyes of Heaven prosecuted, give occasion to discourse of the felici∣ties, and blessings God has promis'd our soules; the excellencies wherewith they are enricht, and vile contempt we have of them, preferring our bodies their slaves before them. CHAP. XI. Saint Chrysostome continues here the glorious nature of the Soule, and from that excellence prosecutes his perswasions to Theodorus, still striving to overcome the rebellions of his lusts with exhortations, and press∣ing arguments.
CHAP. XII. The story of the Ninivites repen∣pentance, the proeme to St. Chryso∣stomes farther urging Theodorus to his conversion, collecting thence that the greatest sinners may return to God, he prosecutes his perswasives, alledging that many so converted have become the best and most zealous people. CHAP. XIII. Sant Chrysostome relates a story of Phoenix, a young Gentleman of his time; another of an Hermit; ano∣ther of a Disciple of Johns the Son Zebedeus, and of Onesimus out of Saint Paul, with which he continues his perswasives to fallen Theodorus. CHAP. XIV. The sum and conclusion of this treatise. FINIS.
