C62 669.f.22[15] 99870085 163598
MAGNA CHARTA: Containing that which is very much the Sence and Agreement of the good People of these Nations, notwithstanding their Differences re∣lating to Worship. Humbly tendered to those that are in Eminent Place, both in a Civil and in a Military capacity, and earnestly desired that it may be by them also (in this juncture of Affaires) speedily concurred with, resolved upon, and vigorously Prosecuted, for the escaping of the sadest, and for the enjoying of the joyfullest dayes and station, that England hath seen. By an unfeined lover of his Countrys welfare, and a Sincere Promoter of the Common-wealth and just concernments of all men. As some further Essay in order to a well grounded Vnity, Peace and Settlement, of these poor shaken and shattered Nations, upon that sure and durable foundation of Righteousness, which will without doubt, according to the wise mans experience, not only establish, but exalt a Nation. 1. FIrst, Let it be in the fear of the Lord resolved; That singular care shall be taken forthwith, and so from time to time, that the Arrears of the poor Souldiers, the Pentions of the poor Pentioners, and the Publick faith debts, of the poor Creditors of these Nations, (whose straights presseth them sore, and makes them to sigh, and whose sighs and cryes goe up unto Heaven, and will have their returns) may be speedily and out of the first receipts discharged and cleared. 2. Secondly, That singular care shall be taken forthwith, and so from time to time, that the poor in general thorowout these Nations, which are very numerous now, (by reason of the decay of Trade, and other wayes) shall be so provided for, and in such sort, that all the Impotent shall be releived, and all the able shall be imployed. 3. Thirdly, That there shall be a speedy and effectual course taken to rectifie the Laws, and the male-Administration thereof, by bringing them into a Brief, Plain, and easie Method and Form; and as neer the Laws of that famous Common-wealth of Israel, as the nature and Constitution of a Gentile State (under the present dispensation of light and grace) will admit; and so, that as much strife and contention between man and man as may be, by plain and brief Records, Registers, and Peace-makers, might be prevented, and what by such a Provision cannot be prevented, might be with as much ease and speed, and with as little expence of Money and irritation of spirit as may be, fully redressed; so that loving kindness, judgment and righteousness, which the righteous Lord himself delights to be exercised in on the earth, may be found and felt in our Land, to the great contentment and rejoycing of the inhabitants thereof. 4. Fourthly, That singular care shall be forthwith taken about that perplexing business of Tythes, which being continued as now it is, stands but as a relict of Monarchy, and as a witness against these Nations, as if they denyed the change of the Priest-hood that was under the Law, or that Christ Jesus is come in the flesh; is also a thing that looks much unlike the maintenance of a true Gospel Ministry, and which is as some conceive the very fomenter, and nourisher of a Persecuting, and imposing Spirit in these Nations; by reason whereof, even under the greatest Profession of liberty, many tender Consciences have been daily perplexed, and very much of the Land of the Nation hath laine unimproved, which is rendred by many, as a great reason of the scarceness of Corn, which hazards a Famine oft times in this Nation. Let this be done by altering the Title thereof, and bringing it to a Pound rate, Sci. to eight or six in the hundred, which may be from time to time without any further charge paid into the publick, and so disposed to the proper use and end to which it belongs. 5. Fifthly, That the very much decayed Trade of this Nation, both in these famous Cities of London and Westminster, and other Places (so universally complained of) and by the many sad effects, so fully Demon∣strated, may now thorow special care be forthwith revived, by easing the troublesome and vexatious burdens that lies upon it, and by putting it under a good regulation and Government; That the Seas may be so guarded, that being propounded as the ground of the Customes; that the Trade, Treasure, and strength of these Nations, may not so often fall into the hands of the enemies. 6. Sixtly, That all the Relicts and Props of corrupt Monarchy, thorowout these Nations, which do but wait and serve for its return, and have entrencht upon the free-born Peoples Rights and Liberties, upon a Civil account, shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed. 7. Seventhly, That all the Relicts and Props of superstitious Hierarchy thorowout these Nations, which do but wait and serve for its return, and have entrenched upon the Peoples Rights and Liberties, upon a Religious account, shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed. 8. Eightly, That all those horrible corruptions, abuses, and mischiefs, which have crept into houses that have been erected and maintained by free Donation of persons for Charitable uses, and also all those corrup∣tions and abuses, That are found in Prisons thorowout these Nations, and especially those of the Kings Bench, the Fleet, Newgate, and Ludgate, shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed. 9. Ninthly, That none shall be forst upon any Publick imployment in this Common-wealth against his will and consent; and that whosoever is imployed from time to time in the management of the affairs thereof, from the highest unto the lowest, shall receive out of the publick Revenue, a sutable recompence and incouragement for his service therein: and then in case any shall be found taking bribes, either directly, or indirectly, or otherwise unfaithful in the trust committed to him, he shall be severely punished, and forthwith cashiered. 10. Tenthly, that some substantial Laws, relating to Liberty and Freedome, both upon a Civil, and upon a Religious account, whereby every man may be preserved safe in his person, name and estate, from the vio∣lence of another, under what pretence soever, may be laid as Fundamentals in the bottome of your Government, as that which hath been gotten in the late wonderful and hazzardous engagements with very much difficulty, and is the price of very much bloud and treasure; Let these be known to be as the Laws of the Meads and Persians, that cannot be altered, no not by future Representatives; and among other, let this be one; That in case any Representative of the people, shall by the Major vote, alter or make void these or any of these first Fundamentals, they shall be lookt upon as violating the trust committed to them, and such act and acts of theirs, shall be deemed void and null to all intents and purposes, as if the same had never been, and shall be no wayes obleiging upon the consciences of the good people of these Nations. And moreover, that the person, or persons, who first moved therein, shall be judged Traitors to the Liberties of the people, & of their country in the highest degree, & proceeded against accordingly. 11. Eleventhly, That none of the free-born People of these Nations, shall be arrested, imprisoned, banished, condemned, or sentenced to the loss of Life, Limb, Estate, or Liberty, or be any otherwayes molested, or distressed, after a very short time prefixt, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by vertue of, and according to some known, approved, published Law, or Laws of these Nations. 12. Twelfthly, That all the Publick Revenue of these Nations, shall from time to time be brought into the Publick Treasury, as entire and with as little abatements and unnecessary charges and expenses as may be; and to the end it may be so, among other things, That there shall be special care used that all Persons who are or shall be imployed about the customes, and all other places relating to money, shall be such as have a clear and full character given of them, that they are indeed able provident men, men of truth and hating covetousness. 13. That for the more certain, speedy and thorow effecting hereof, whereby deeds may demonstrate, that these are resolves by the finger of God set on your hearts; Let it be in the fear of the Lord further resolved, That Seventy men shall be found out, pitcht upon, and set a part to be imployed, of a suitable Spirit to these resolves, with whom you will in the name and fear of the Lord engage to stand, or fall, live or die together, in a thorow pursute thereof, in order to the putting of all sorts of men into a better and more flourishing capacity then that wherein now they are; so that interest may engage them there to remain, and as one man to rise up and withstand a return; and also in order to the enjoying (as in ancient times) their free Representatives; That the Persons shall be according to Iethro's Counsel, able men, fearing God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and such as are in a good measure freed by the Spirit of the Gospel, from imposing upon the consciences of others, in things that relate to the worship and service of God, as having learned by experience, that it is not by might, nor by power, that things of that nature are carried on, and that the wrath of man doth not at all accomplish the righteousness of God. 14. That these Seventy Persons thus qualified, singled out, pitcht upon; and ingaged to carry thorow the former resolves, in order to the bringing the honest Conquering Party, yea, all the free-born people of these Na∣tions, into a fit Capacity, to enjoy (as in ancient dayes) their free Representatives, shall be called by the name of the great Council, and for the more speedy dispatch of that business, which by the whole Nation in a very short season, may be made sensible of the advantage thereby, they shall cast them into 10. Committees. That the first, shall be for the preparing, well ordering, and managing of the business that relates to the Poor; A second, for that which relates to the Law; A third, for that which relates to Tythes; A fourth, for Trade; A fifth, for finding out and removing the Relicts, and Props of corrupt Monarchy; A sixt, for find∣ing out and removing the Relicts, and Props of Superstitious Heirarchy; A seventh, for the finding out and rectifying the corruptions, and abuses in Prisons, and in donations for charitable uses; An eighth, for draw∣ing up some substantial, and fundamental Laws, which shall not be altered; A ninth, for Considering of grievances, and ordering the publick Revenues; And the last, for the Receiving of all Petitions that relates to the former resolves, or concerning any thing that may be presented, and to refer the Consideration of them to the several Committees to which they belong, and what cannot properly be referred to any of them, to let that be their care so to manage, and prepare the same, as the rest of the Committees, for the Consideration, and determination of the great Council. 15. That out of this great Council consisting of Seventy, Twenty one shall be chosen, and called the Council of State, of the most able, and most eminently qualified for this great work, wherein the Lord, his peo∣ple, and this whole Nation are so greatly concerned, that their work shall be to treat with forrain Embassadors, to have the management of the executive part of the Power and Authority of these Nations, and of the Do∣minions, and Territories thereto belonging; so that the placing, and displacing of all Officers, both Civil, and Military (the chief of both only excepted) shall spring from thence, Reserving notwithstanding a door of Appeal open to the great Council, in point of displacing the next great Officers both in a Military, and Civil capacity. 16. That singular care shall be forthwith taken by the great Council, to declare to the Nation, that these or such like, are the good things which they have resolvedly upon their hearts, by the help of the Lord, with all possible speed they can, to bring forth, for the putting the whole, and so far as is possible, every Member thereof into a happy flourishing State, and there upon to incite, and provoke the good people of these Nations, to a patient waiting for the effecting thereof, and to a chearful Concurrance therein, warning withal the unruly Spirited, and evil Affected persons of these Nations, against any tumultuous assemblings, risings, or actings to the disquieting thereof, or to the hindering, and retarding of so good a work as is on the wheele, which being perfected, will undoubtedly prove advantagious to all; adding this, that in case they take not warning hereby, they shall be punished with exemplary punishment. 17. That singular care shall be taken by the great Council, forthwith to put the well affected in these Nations, in such a posture of defence, placing also the Power of the Militia in confiding hands, whereby they may be incouraged, and also strengthened, as one man to joyn together, not only for the withstanding the common enemy (in case he prove turbulent) but for the bringing forth of common Righteousness, so that judgment, and justice, and mercy, may run down like a mighty stream, to the great refreshing and cheering of these poor Nations. 18. That singular care shall be taken by the Council of State, that able men so qualified as is above specified, shall be forthwith nominated, and appointed for the Office of Sheriff in every County, thorowout these Nations, whose care it shall be to keep the respective Counties to which they belong in peace, and free from risings, and commotions, and for that end shall proclaim, or publish the Declaration above specified in the most noted places thereof, and in case notwithstanding this, there should be risings, or tumultuous Assemblings, that then they shall call to their assistance, the County Troops, or the Power of the County speedily to suppress the same. 19. That singular care shall be taken, that able men so qualified, as is abovesaid, shall be forthwith, and so from time to time nominated, and appointed by the Council of State, for Conservators, or Justices of the Peace, in the several Counties thorowout these Nations, and that in case, such cannot be found among those that have their thousands a year, they shall be chosen out of those that have but their hundreds, and where such cannot be found among those that have their hundreds, they shall be chosen out of those that have but their tens, bearing in mind what the wise man saith, sci. That a righteous man [be he never so poor] is more excellent than his neighbour, [were he never so Rich.] That their work shall not only be to preserve the Peace among their neighbours, and to hear and determine their Controversies in the publick Sessions; but to be as Peace-makers, in a friendly way if they can by themselves, or by others whom the Parties shall chuse, to compose the differences without any further charge or trouble, and before they be brought to a pub∣lick debate. Lastly, That singular care shall be taken by the Justices of Peace, in their publick Sessions, that able men so qualified, as is abovesaid, shall be nominated, and appointed out of every Hundred thorowout the Counties, to serve in grand and petty Jnquests, who may be able to understand the matters brought before them, and give in a speedy, judicious and just verdict in the case: Thus shall judgment return to righteousness, and all the up∣right in heart in thess Nations shall follow it; which that the Lord of Hosts will graciously grant, is and shall be the humble, earnest, and constant Prayer and Request of His, Their, and Your unworthy Ser∣vant, I. C. Jer. 9 23, 24. Thus saith the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man, glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he under∣standeth, and knoweth me that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight, saith the Lord. Jer. 22. 15, 16. Did not thy Father eat and drink and do judgment, and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the Poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the Lord. Prov. 14. 34. Righteousness exalteth a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. 2 Chron. 20. 20. Believe in the Lord, your God, so shall you be established: believe his Prophets so shall ye Prosper. Consider what I say, and the Lord of Hosts give you understanding, Resolution, and Courage to do his Will. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Elephant and Castle near Temple-Barre, 1659.
