C6186 E300_13 99861063 113191
V.Answ. No doubt but they will do what they can to keep out all such as adhere to the one side, and we humbly beseech them, that they endeavour like∣wise to keep out them that adhere to the otherside: there is no Heretique that will hazard his life for the truth, nor any out-landish Souldier will sight principally for the good of England. VI. Answ. We cannot by any means agree to this submission. 1 For we are not by any sound argument convinced in our consciences that such a submission may stand with our Allegiance to our Soveraign. 2 By this submission we shall give His Majesty just cause to reject our Petition, which we intend to present unto him, and shall image him, and his Army against us to our utter ruine. 3 By this submission we shall give up our Liber∣ties and Estates to an arbitrary Government, which is one of our greatest grievances; We shall submit our selves to the weekly pay, excise, twentieth part, and the fifth part of our Estates, all which are al∣ready required by ordinance of Parliament; and if they require all the rest, we are bound to yeeld it by this submission. 4 By this submission we give up our under∣standings and consciences too (possibly) to an er∣ror, for it is possible that a Parliament may erre (and that foully) as well as a generall Councell, add yet what error soever this Parliament shall commit in Church or State (be it never so foule and horrid) we, by this Article must promise to submit unto it.
VII. Answ. If we go on ready and cetly accord∣ing to our Articles for making of Peace, there are none but Enemies to Peace, self-seckers, and Plun∣derers will oppose us, and against such we are confi∣dent, all honest men in either Army will assist us, if not, we hope God will enable us to defend our selves, and give us liberty to move according to our own directions. VIII. Answ. As we were thankfull unto Sir Richard Grenvile for the good government of his Army, so are we no lesse thankfull to Sir Thomas Fairfax for his good government, and we will continue Colonell Wel∣den, and Colonell Van∣drosse. our thanks, as most due to him, if he continue his good government, and do not, after a strict disci∣pline for a while, let loofe his Army to plunder, as some have done before him. By the Peace-making Army in the West of Sommerset and Devon, who have refused faires Propositions from the other side; and are resolved to stand to their first articles for Peace, and to assist one another in the prosecution of them.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of your Ma∣jesties most loyall Subjects of the County of Sommerset. Most humbly sheweth, THat for the space of these three yeers last past, we have miserably suffered under the Calamities of Civill Warre; and the Miseries Greaten so extreamly up∣on us, that without a speedy Accommoda∣tion we can expect nothing but utter ruine and desolation; In a deep sense whereof, being large sharers in the miseries, we do in the anguish of our souls, most humbly beg your Majesty once more, according to your former Princely compassion to your People, to invite the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, to the composures
of these unhappy differences by a Treaty; for which purpose we also intend to petition the Lords and Commons, hoping, by Gods blessing upon your Majesties pious endea∣vours herein, we may again enjoy a happy Peace; For which, together with the pre∣servation of your Sacred Person, we shall heartily pray, &c.
To the right Honourable the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the poor, miserable, and wasted People of the County of Sommerset. Humbly sheweth, THat we have a long time groaned un∣der the burthen of a Civill Sword, which hath brought this Countrey to ex∣tream misery, and threatneth both it and the whole Nation with speedy ruine and destruction, it being the unavoidable Fate of a divided Kingdom: for the prevention whereof we humbly pray you to be pleased to be Suitors to His Majesty, that the late Treaty, so hopefully begun, may be renew∣ed: And in pursuance of that great trust re∣posed
in you, you will vouchsafe your ut∣most ndeavour for a settlement of a happy Peace, that we may enjoy our Religion, our Laws, and Liberties; And we shall, &c.
The particulars which the Peace-making Armie stands for in the East; and thus farre we in the West are with them. 1 IMprimis, We stand for the true Protestant Religion as it was ob∣served and used in Queen Elizabeths time. 2 We are for to defend and main∣tain the King, and all the Preroga∣tives belonging to the Crown of Eng∣land. 3 We are for all the Priviledges of Parliament, with earnest desire to see the Kings Majesty and the Par∣liament united, as in former time.
4 We are for the Laws of the Realm, and liberties of the Subject. 5 To keep our Houses from burn∣ing, our Goods from plundering, and to take up all stragling and abusive Souldiers, of either side, and to give them the Law they deserve. Be it ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that all and every per∣son of what degree and quality soever, that hath lived, or shall live within the Kings Quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhering unto the Forces raised against the Parliament, or hath, or shall come to inhabite, or reside under the power or protection of the Parliament, shall Swear upon the Evangelists in manner following. I A. B. Do Swear from my Hart, that I will not directly nor indirectly adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause against
the Parliament, or any Forces raised without the consent of the two Houses of Parliament, in this cause or warre. And I do likewise swear, That my coming, and submitting my self under the pow∣er and protection of the Parliament, is without any manner of designe whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings of the two Houses of this pre∣sent Parliament, and without the direction, privity, or advice of the King, or any of his Councell, or Of∣ficers, other then what I have now made known; So help me God, and the Contents of this Book. ANd now let ny reasonable and ient an but compare this Oath now enjoyned by the two Houses, either with the Oath of Allegiance in∣joyn'd by Law, and taken by every one of the Members of both Houses respectively before they were admitted to sit as Members, or with that first Protestation made and taken by themselves, and by them Ordered to be taken by all the Subjects of this Kingdom, & then let him judge whether these desperate men, having so often forsworn them∣selves, have not by this, and other Oaths and Co∣venants devised and imposed by them since, endea∣voured to involve as many others as they can in the same crime of Perjury; which, together with Re∣bellion, is already the Great Burthen, and crying sinne of this Nation. FINIS.
