C6684 E2265_2 E1856_3 99862466 170474
A PROPOSITION For the ADVANCEMENT Of EXPERIMENTAL Philosophy. By A. COWLEY. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Blew-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1661.
To the Honourable Society for the Advancement of Experimental Philoso∣phy. THe Author of the following discourse, having since his going in∣to France allowed me to make it publick, I thought I should do it most right by presenting it to Your Considerations; to the
end that when it hath been fully examin'd by You, and receiv'd such Additi∣ons or Alterations as You shall think fit, the Design thereof may be promoted by Your recommending the Practice of it to the Nation. I am, Your most hum∣ble Servant, P. P.
A PROPOSITION For the ADVANCEMENT Of LEARNING. By A. COWLEY. VIRG. O Fortunati quorum jam Maenia surgunt! LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Blew Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1661.
The Preface. ALL Knowledge must ei∣ther be of God, or of his Creatures, that is, of Nature; the first is called from the Ob∣ject, Divinity; the latter, Na∣tural Philosophy, and is divi∣ded into the Contemplation of the Immediate or Mediate Crea∣tures of God, that is, the Crea∣tures of his Creature Man. Of this latter kind are all Arts for the use of Humane Life, which are thus again divided: Some are purely Humane, or made by Man alone, and as it were intire∣ly spun out of himself, without
relation to other Creatures, such are Grammar and Logick, to improve his Natural Qualities of Internal and External speech; as likewise Rhetorick and Po∣liticks (or Law) to fulfill and exalt his Natural Inclination to Society. Other are mixt, and are Mans Creatures no otherwise then by the Result which he ef∣fects by Conjunction and Appli∣cation of the Creatures of God. Of these parts of Philosophy that which treats of God Al∣mighty (properly called Divini∣ty) which is almost only to be sought out of his revealed will, and therefore requires only the diligent and pious study of that, and of the best Interpreters up∣on
it; and that part which I call purely Humane, depending sole∣ly upon Memory and Wit, that is, Reading and Invention, are both excellently well provided for by the Constitution of our Ʋniver∣sities. But the other two Parts, the Inquisition into the Nature of Gods Creatures, and the Appli∣cation of them to Humane Ʋses (especially the latter) seem to be very slenderly provided for, or rather almost totally neglected, except onely some small assistan∣ces to Physick, and the Mathe∣maticks. And therefore the Founders of our Colledges have taken ample care to supply the Students with multitude of Books, and to appoint Tutors
and frequent Exercises, the one to interpret, and the other to con∣firm their Reading, as also to afford them sufficient plenty and leisure for the opportunities of their private study, that the Beams which they receive by Lecture may be doubled by Re∣flections of their own Wit: But towards the Observation and Application, as I said, of the Creatures themselves, they have allowed no Instruments, Mate∣rials, or Conveniences. Partly, because the necessary expence thereof is much greater, then of the other; and partly from that idle and pernicious opinion which had long possest the World, that all things to be searcht in
Nature, had been already found and discovered by the Ancients, and that it were a folly to travel about for that which others had before brought home to us. And the great Importer of all Truths they took to be Aristotle, as if (as Macrobius speaks foolishly of Hippocrates) he could nei∣ther deceive nor be deceived, or as if there had been not only no Lies in him, but all Verities. O true Philosophers in one sence! and contented with a very Lit∣tle! Not that I would disparage the admirable Wit, and worthy labours of many of the Ancients, much less of Aristotle, the most eminent among them; but it were madness to imagine that the Ci∣sterns
of men should afford us as much, and as wholesome Wa∣ters, as the Fountains of Nature. As we understand the manners of men by conversation among them, and not by reading Ro∣mances, the same is our case in the true Apprehension & Judge∣ment of Things. And no man can hope to make himself as rich by stealing out of others Truncks, as he might by opening and dig∣ging of new Mines. If he con∣ceive that all are already exhau∣sted, let him consider that many lazily thought so hundred years ago, and yet nevertheless since that time whole Regions of Art have been discovered, which the Ancients as little dreamt of as
they did of America. There is yet many a Terra Incognita behind to exercise our diligence, and let us exercise it never so much, we shall leave work e∣nough too for our Posterity. This therefore being laid down as a certain Foundation, that we must not content our selves with that Inheritance of Knowledge which is left us by the labour and bounty of our Ancestors, but seek to improve those very grounds, and adde to them new and greater Purcha∣ses; it remains to be considered by what means we are most like∣ly to attain the ends of this ver∣tuous Covetousness. And certainly the solitary and
unactive Contemplation of Na∣ture, by the most ingenious Per∣sons living, in their own pri∣vate Studies, can never effect it. Our Reasoning Faculty as well as Fancy, does but Dream, when it is not guided by sensible Objects. We shall compound where Nature has divided, and divide where Nature has com∣pounded, and create nothing but either Deformed Monsters, or at best pretty but impossible Mer∣maids. 'Tis like Painting by Memory and Imagination which can never produce a Picture to the Life. Many Persons of ad∣mirable abilities (if they had been wisely managed and profi∣tably employed) have spent their
whole time and diligence in com∣mentating upon Aristotles Phi∣losophy, who could never go be∣yond him, because their design was only to follow, not grasp, or lay hold on, or so much as touch Nature, because they catcht only at the shadow of her in their own Brains. And therefore we see that for above a thousand years together nothing almost of Ornament or Advantage was added to the Ʋses of Humane Society, except only Guns and Printing, whereas since the In∣dustry of Men has ventured to go abroad, out of Books and out of Themselves, and to work a∣mong Gods Creatures, instead of Playing among their Own, every
age has abounded with excellent Inventions, and every year per∣haps might do so, if a conside∣rable number of select Persons were set apart, and well direct∣ed, and plentifully provided for the search of them. But our Ʋniversities having been foun∣ded in those former times that I complain of, it is no wonder if they be defective in their Consti∣tution as to this way of Learn∣ing, which was not then thought on. For the supplying of which Defect, it is humbly proposed to his Sacred Majesty, his most Ho∣nourable Parliament, and Privy Council, and to all such of his Subjects as are willing and able
to contribute any thing towards the advancement of real and use∣ful Learning, that by their Au∣thority, Encouragement, Patro∣nage, and Bounty, a Philoso∣phical Colledge may be erect∣ed, after this ensuing, or some such like Model.
The Colledge. THat the Philosophical Colledge be scituated within one, two, or (at far∣thest) three miles of Londòn, and, if it be possible to find that convenience, upon the side of the River, or very near it. That the Revenue of this Colledge amount to four thousand pounds a year. That the Company recei∣ved into it be as follows. 1. Twenty Philosophers or Professors. 2. Sixteen young Scholars, Servants to the Pro∣fessors.
3. A Chaplain. 4. A Baily for the Revenue. 5. A Manciple or Purveyour for the provisions of the House. 6. Two Gardeners. 7. A Ma∣ster-Cook. 8. An Under-Cock. 9. A Butler. 10. An Under-Butler. 11. A Chirur∣geon. 12. Two Lungs, or Chymical Servants. 13. A Li∣brary-keeper who is likewise to be Apothecary, Druggist, and Keeper of Instruments, Engines, &c. 14. An Officer to feed and take care of all Beasts, Fowl, &c. kept by the Colledge. 15. A Groom of the Stable. 16. A Messenger to send up and down for all uses of the Colledge. 17. Four
old Women, to tend the Chambers, keep the House clean, and such like services. That the annual allowance for this Company be as fol∣lows. 1. To every Professor, and to the Chaplain, one hun∣dred and twenty Pounds. 2. To the sixteen Scholars 20l a piece, 10l for their diet, and 10l for their Entertainment. 3. To the Baily 30l besides allowance for his Journeys. 4. To the Purveyour or Man∣ciple thirty pounds. 5. To each of the Gardeners twenty Pounds. 6. To the Master-Cook twenty Pounds. 7. To the Under-Cook four Pounds. 8. To the Butler ten Pounds.
9. To the Under-Butler four Pounds. 10. To the Chirur∣geon thirty Pounds. 11. To the Library-Keeper thirty Pounds. 12. To each of the Lungs twelve Pounds. 13. To the Keeper of the Beasts six Pounds. 14. To the Groom five Pounds. 15. To the Mes∣senger twelve Pounds. 16. To the four necessary Women ten Pounds. For the Manci∣ples Table at which all the Servants of the House are to eat, except the Scholars, one hundred sixty Pounds. For 3 Horses for the Service of the Colledge, thirty Pounds. All which amounts to three thousand two hundred eighty
five Pounds. So that there re∣mains for keeping of the House and Gardens, and Ope∣ratories, and Instruments, and Animals, and Experiments of all sorts, and all other expen∣ces, seven hundred & fifteen Pounds. Which were a very inconsi∣derable sum for the great uses to which it is designed, but that I conceive the Industry of the Colledge will in a short time so enrich it self as to get a far better Stock for the advance and enlargement of the work when it is once begun; neither is the continuance of particu∣lar mens liberality to be des∣paired of, when it shall be
encouraged by the sight of that publick benefit which will accrue to all Mankind, and chiefly to our Nation, by this Foundation. Something like∣wise will arise from Leases and other Casualties; that nothing of which may be diverted to the private gain of the Pro∣fessors, or any other use be∣sides that of the search of Na∣ture, and by it the general good of the world, and that care may be taken for the cer∣tain performance of all things ordained by the Institution, as likewise for the protection and encouragement of the Company, it is proposed. That some Person of Emi∣nent
Quality, a Lover of solid Learning, and no Stranger in it, be chosen Chancellour or President of the Colledge, and that eight Governours more, men qualified in the like man∣ner, be joyned with him, two of which shall yearly be ap∣pointed Visitors of the Col∣ledge, and receive an exact ac∣count of all expences even to the smallest, and of the true estate of their publick Trea∣sure, under the hands and oaths of the Professors Resident. That the choice of the Pro∣fessors in any vacancy belong to the Chancellour and the Governours, but that the Pro∣fessors (who are likeliest to
know what men of the Nati∣on are most proper for the duties of their Society) di∣rect their choice by recom∣mending two or three persons to them at every Election. And that if any learned Per∣son within his Majesties Do∣minions discover or eminent∣ly improve any useful kind of knowledge, he may upon that ground for his reward and the encouragement of others, be preferr'd, if he pretend to the place, before any body else. That the Governours have power to turn out any Profes∣sor who shall be proved to be either scandalous or unprofita∣ble to the Society.
That the Colledge be built after this, or some such man∣ner: That it consist of three fair Quadrangular Courts, and three large grounds, enclosed with good walls behind them. That the first Court be built with a fair Cloyster, and the Professors Lodgings or rather little Houses, four on each side at some distance from one another, and with little Gar∣dens behind them, just after the manner of the Chartreux beyond Sea. That the inside of the Cloyster be lined with a Gravel-walk, and that walk with a row of Trees, and that in the middle there be a Par∣terre of Flowers, and a Foun∣tain.
That the second Quadran∣gle just behind the first, be so contrived, as to contain these parts. 1. A Chappel. 2. A Hall with two long Tables on each side for the Scholars and Officers of the House to eat at, and with a Pulpit and Forms at the end for the pub∣lick Lectures. 3. A large and pleasant Dining-Room within the Hall for the Professors to eat in, and to hold their As∣semblies and Conferences. 4. A publick School-house. 5. A Library. 6. A Gallery to walk in, adorned with the Pictures or Statues of all the Inventors of any thing useful to Humane Life; as Printing,
Guns, America, &c. and of late in Anatomy, the Circula∣tion of the Blood, the Milky Veins, and such like discove∣ries in any Art, with short Elo∣gies under the Portraictures: As likewise the Figures of all sorts of Creatures, and the stuft skins of as many strange Animals as can be gotten. 7. An Anatomy Chamber adorned with Skeletons and Anatomi∣cal Pictures, and prepared with all conveniencies for Dis∣section. 8. A Chamber for all manner of Druggs, and Apo∣thecaries Materials. 9. A Ma∣thematical Chamber furnisht with all forts of Mathematical Instruments, being an Ap∣pendix
to the Library. 10. Lodgings for the Chap∣lain, Chirurgeon, Library-Keeper and Purveyour, near the Chappel, Anatomy Cham∣ber, Library and Hall. That the third Court be on one side of these, very large, but meanly built, being de∣signed only for use and not for beauty too, as the others. That it contain the Kitchin, Butte∣ries, Brew-house, Bake-house, Dairy, Lardry, Stables, &c. and especially great Laborato∣ries for Chymical Operations, and Lodgings for the Under∣servants. That behind the second Court be placed the Garden,
containing all sorts of Plants that our Soil will bear, and at the end a little House of plea∣sure, a Lodge for the Garde∣ner, and a Grove of Trees cut out into Walks. That the second enclosed ground be a Garden, destined only to the tryal of all man∣ner of Experiments concern∣ing Plants, as their Meliorati∣on, Acceleration, Retardati∣on, Conservation, Composi∣tion, Transmutation, Colora∣tion, or whatsoever else can be produced by Art either for use or curiosity, with a Lodge in it for the Gardener. That the third Ground be employed in convenient Re∣ceptacles
for all sorts of Crea∣tures which the Professors shall judge necessary for their more exact search into the na∣ture of Animals, and the im∣provement of their Uses to us. That there be likewise built in some place of the Colledge where it may serve most for Ornament of the whole, a very high Tower for observation of Celestial Bodies, adorned with all sorts of Dyals and such like Curiosities; and that there be very deep Vaults made under ground, for Expe∣riments most proper to such places, which will be undoubt∣edly very many. Much might be added, but
truly I am afraid this is too much already for the charity or generosity of this age to extend to; and we do not design this after the Model of Solomons House in my Lord Bacon (which is a Project for Experiments that can never be Experimented) but pro∣pose it within such bounds of Expence as have often been exceeded by the Buildings of private Citzens.
Of the Professors, Scholars, Chaplain, and other Officers. THat of the twenty Pro∣fessors four be always travelling beyond Seas, and sixteen always Resident, un∣less by permission upon extra∣ordinary occasions, and every one so absent, leaving a De∣puty behind him to supply his Duties. That the four Professors Itinerant be assigned to the four parts of the World, Eu∣rope, Asia, Afrique, and Ame∣rica, there to reside three years at least, and to give a constant
account of all things that be∣long to the Learning, and es∣pecially Natural Experimen∣tal Philosophy of those parts. That the expence of all Dispatches, and all Books, Simples, Animals, Stones, Me∣tals, Minerals, &c. and all cu∣riosities whatsoever, natural or artificial, sent by them to the Colledge, shall be defray∣ed out of the Treasury, and an additional allowance (a∣bove the 120l) made to them as soon as the Colledges Re∣venue shall be improved. That at their going abroad they shall take a solemn Oath never to write any thing to the Colledge, but what after
very diligent Examination, they shall fully believe to be true, and to confess and re∣cant it as soon as they find themselves in an Errour. That the sixteen Professors Resident shall be bound to study and teach all sorts of Natural, Experimental Philo∣sophy, to consist of the Ma∣thematicks, Mechanicks, Me∣dicine, Anatomy, Chymistry, the History of Animals, Plants, Minerals, Elements, &c. Agri∣culture, Architecture, Art Mi∣litary, Navigation, Gardening; The Mysteries of all Trades, and Improvement of them; The Facture of all Merchan∣dizes, all Natural Magick or
Divination; and briefly all things contained in the Cata∣logue of Natural Histories annexed to My Lord Bacon's Organon. That once a day from Ea∣ster till Michaelmas, and twice a week from Michaelmas to Easter, at the hours in the af∣ternoon most convenient for Auditors from London ac∣cording to the time of the year, there shall be a Lecture read in the Hall, upon such parts of Natural Experimen∣tal Philosophy, as the Profes∣sors shall agree on among themselves, and as each of them shall be able to perform usefully and honourably.
That two of the Professors by daily, weekly, or moneth∣ly turns shall teach the pub∣lick Schools according to the Rules hereafter prescribed. That all the Professors shall be equal in all respects (except precedency, choice of Lodg∣ing, and such like priviledges, which shall belong to Seniori∣ty in the Colledge) and that all shall be Masters and Trea∣surers by annual turns, which two Officers for the time be∣ing shall take place of all the rest, and shall be Arbitri dua∣rum Mensarum. That the Master shall com∣mand all the Officers of the Colledge, appoint Assemblies
or Conferences upon occasi∣on, and preside in them with a double voice, and in his ab∣sence the Treasurer, whose business is to receive and dis∣burse all moneys by the Ma∣sters order in writing, (if it be an extraordinary) after con∣sent of the other Professors. That all the Professors shall sup together in the Parlour within the Hall every night, and shall dine there twice a week (to wit Sundays and Thursdays) at two round Ta∣bles for the convenience of discourse, which shall be for the most part of such matters as may improve their Studies and Professions, and to keep
them from falling into loose or unprofitable talk shall be the duty of the two Arbitri Mensarum, who may likewise command any of the Servant-Scholars to read to them what he shall think fit, whilst they are at table: That it shall be∣long likewise to the said Ar∣bitri Mensarum only, to invite Strangers, which they shall rarely do, unless they be men of Learning or great Parts, and shall not invite above two at a time to one table, nothing be∣ing more vain and unfruitful then numerous Meetings of Acquaintance. That the Professors Resi∣dent shall allow the Colledge
twenty Pounds a year for their Diet, whether they continue there all the time or not. That they shall have once a week an Assembly or Con∣ference concerning the Affairs of the Colledge and the pro∣gress of their Experimental Philosophy. That if any one find out a∣ny thing which he conceives to be of consequence, he shall communicate it to the Assem∣bly to be examined, experi∣mented, approved or rejected. That if any one be Author of an Invention that may bring in profit, the third part of it shall belong to the In∣ventor, and the two other to
the Society; and besides if the thing be very considerable, his Statue or Picture with an Elo∣gy under it, shall be placed in the Gallery, and made a De∣nison of that Corporation of famous Men. That all the Professors shall be always assigned to some particular Inquisition (besides the ordinary course of their Studies) of which they shall give an account to the Assem∣bly, so that by this means there may be every day some ope∣ration or other made in all the Arts, as Chymistry, Anatomy, Mechanicks, and the like, and that the Colledge shall furnish for the charge of the opera∣tion.
That there shall be kept a Register under lock and key, and not to be seen but by the Professors, of all the Experi∣ments that succeed, signed by the persons who made the try∣all. That the popular and recei∣ved Errours in Experimental Philosophy (with which, like Weeds in a neglected Garden it is now almost all over∣grown) shall be evinced by tryal, and taken notice of in the publick Lectures, that they may no longer abuse the cre∣dulous, and beget new ones by consequence of similitude. That every third year (af∣ter the full settlement of the
Foundation) the Colledge shall give an account in Print, in proper and ancient Latine, of the fruits of their triennial Industry. That every Professor Resi∣dent shall have his Scholar to wait upon him in his Cham∣ber and at Table, whom he shall be obliged to breed up in Natural Philosophy, and render an account of his pro∣gress to the Assembly, from whose Election he received him, and therefore is respon∣sible to it, both for the care of his Education, and the just and civil usage of him. That the Scholar shall un∣derstand Latine very well, and
be moderately initiated in the Greek before he be capable of being chosen into the Ser∣vice, and that he shall not re∣main in it above seven years. That his Lodging shall be with the Professor whom he serves. That no Professor shall be a married man, or a Divine, or Lawyer in practice, only Phy∣sick he may be allowed to prescribe, because the study of that Art is a great part of the duty of his place, and the duty of that is so great, that it will not suffer him to lose much time in mercenary pra∣ctice. That the Professors shall in
the Colledge wear the habit of ordinary Masters of Art in the Universities, or of Do∣ctors, if any of them be so. That they shall all keep an inviolable and exemplary friendship with one another, and that the Assembly shall lay a considerable pecuniary mulct upon any one who shall be proved to have entered so far into a quarrel as to give uncivil Language to his Bro∣ther-Professor; and that the perseverance in any enmity shall be punish'd by the Go∣vernours with expulsion. That the Chaplain shall eat at the Masters Table, (paying his twenty pounds a
year as the others do) and that he shall read Prayers once a day at least, a little before Supper-time; that he shall preach in the Chappel every Sunday Morning, and Cate∣chize in the After-noon the Scholars and the School-boys; that he shall every moneth administer the Holy Sacra∣ment; that he shall not trou∣ble himself and his Auditors with the Controversies of Di∣vinity, but only teach God in his just Commandments, and in his wonderful Works.
The Schòol. THat the School may be built so as to contain about two hundred Boys. That it be divided into four Classes, not as others are ordi∣narily into six or seven, be∣cause we suppose that the Children sent hither to be ini∣tiated in Things as well as Words, ought to have past the two or three first, and to have attained the age of about thir∣teen years, being already well advanced in the Latine Gram∣mar, and some Authors. That none, though never
so rich, shall pay any thing for their teaching; and that if any Professor shall be convicted to have taken any money in con∣sideration of his pains in the School, he shall be expelled with ignominie by the Gover∣nours; but if any persons of great estate and quality, find∣ing their Sons much better Proficients in Learning here, then Boys of the same age commonly are at other Schools, shall not think fit to receive an obligation of so near concernment without re∣turning some marks of ac∣knowledgement, they may, if they please (for nothing is to be demanded) bestow some
little rarity or curiosity upon the Society in recompence of their trouble. And because it is deplora∣ble to consider the loss which Children make of their time at most Schools, employing, or rather casting away six or seven years in the learning of words only, and that too very imperfectly: That a Method be here e∣stablished for the infusing Knowledge and Language at the same time into them; and that this may be their Appren∣ticeship in Natural Philoso∣phy. This we conceive may be done, by breeding them up in Authors, or pieces of
Authors, who treat of some parts of Nature, and who may be understood with as much ease and pleasure, as those which are commonly taught; Such are in Latine Varro, Cato, Columella, Pliny, part of Cel∣sus, and of Seneca, Cicero de Divinatione, de Naturâ Deo∣rum, and several scattered pie∣ces, Virgil's Georgicks, Grotius, Nenesianus, Manilius; and be∣cause the truth is we want good Poets (I mean we have but few) who have purposely treated of solid and learned, that is, Natural Matters (the most part indulging to the weakness of the world, and feeding it either with the fol∣lies
of Love, or with the Fa∣bles of gods and Heroes) we conceive that one Book ought to be compiled of all the scat∣tered little parcels among the ancient Poets that might serve for the advancement of Natu∣ral Science, and which would make no small or unuseful or unpleasant Volumn. To this we would have added the Morals and Rhetoricks of Ci∣cero, and the Institutions of Quintilian; and for the Co∣moedians, from whom almost all that necessary part of com∣mon discourse, and all the most intimate proprieties of the Language are drawn, we conceive the Boys may be
made Masters of them, as a part of their Recreation and not of their task, if once a moneth, or at least once in two, they act one of Terences Comoedies, and afterwards (the most advanced) some of Plautus his; and this is for many reasons one of the best exercises they can be enjoyn∣ed, and most innocent plea∣sures they can be allowed. As for the Greek Authors, they may study Nicander, Oppianus (whom Scaliger does not doubt to prefer above Homer himself, and place next to his adored Virgil) Aristotles Histo∣ry of Animals, and other parts, Theophrastus and Dioscorides
of Plants, and a Collection made out of several both Po∣ets and other Grecian Wri∣ters. For the Morals and Rhe∣torick Aristotle may suffice, or Hermogenes and Longinus be added for the latter; with the History of Animals they should be shewed Anatomy as a Divertisement, and made to know the Figures and Natures of those Creatures which are not common among us, dis∣abusing them at the same time of those Errours which are u∣niversally admitted concern∣ing many. The same Method should be used to make them acquainted with all Plants; and to this must be added a little of
the ancient and modern Geo∣graphy, the understanding of the Globes, and the Principles of Geometry and Astronomy. They should likewise use to declaim in Latine and English, as the Romans did in Greek and Latine; and in all this travel be rather led on by fa∣miliarity, encouragement, and emulation, then driven by severity, punishment, and ter∣rour. Upon Festivals and play∣times they should exercise themselves in the Fields by ri∣ding, leaping, fencing, muste∣ring and training after the manner of Souldiers, &c. and to prevent all dangers and all disorder, there should always
be two of the Scholars with them to be as witnesses and directors of their actions; In foul weather it would not be amiss for them to learn to dance, that is, to learn just so much (for all beyond is super∣fluous, if not worse) as may give them a graceful comport∣ment of their bodies. Upon Sundays, and all days of Devotion, they are to be a part of the Chaplains Pro∣vince. That for all these ends the Colledge so order it, as that there may be some conveni∣ent & pleasant Houses there∣abouts, kept by religious, dis∣creet, and careful persons, for
the lodging and boarding of young Scholars, that they have a constant eye over them to see that they be bred up there piously, cleanly, and plenti∣fully, according to the pro∣portion of their parents ex∣pences. And that the Colledge, when it shall please God ei∣ther by their own industry and success, or by the benevolence of Patrons; to enrich them so far, as that it may come to their turn and duty to be cha∣ritable to others, shall at their own charges erect and main∣tain some House or Houses for the Entertainment of such poor mens Sons whose good
Natural Parts may promise either Use or Ornament to the Common-wealth, during the time of their abode at School, and shall take care that it shall be done with the same conve∣niences as are enjoyed even by rich mens Children (though they maintain the fewer for that cause) there being no∣thing of eminent and illustri∣ous to be expected from a low, sordid, and Hospital-like Edu∣cation.
Conclusion. IF I be not much abu∣sed by a natural fond∣ness to my own Concep∣tions (that  of the Greeks, which no other Language has a proper word for) there was never any Project thought up∣on, which deserves to meet with so few Adver∣saries
as this; for who can without impudent folly oppose the establish∣ment of twenty well sele∣cted persons in such a condition of Life, that their whole business and sole profession may be to study the improvement and advantage of all o∣ther Professions, from that of the highest General e∣ven to the lowest Arti∣san? Who shall be obli∣ged to imploy their whole
time, wit, learning, and industry, to these four, the most useful that can be imagined, and to no other Ends; first, to weigh, exa∣mine, and prove all things of Nature delivered to us by former ages, to detect, explode, and strike a cen∣sure through all false Mo∣nies with which the world has been paid and cheated so long, and (as I may say) to set the mark of the Colledge upon all true
Coins that they may pass hereafter without any far∣ther Tryal. Secondly, to recover the lost Inventi∣ons, and, as it were, Drown'd Lands of the Ancients. Thirdly, to improve all Arts which we now have; And last∣ly, to discover others which we yet have not. And who shall besides all this (as a Benefit by the by) give the best Educa∣tion in the world (purely
gratis) to as many mens Children as shall think fit to make use of the Obli∣gation. Neither does it at all check or enterfere with any parties in State or Religion, but is indif∣ferently to be embraced by all Differences in opi∣nion, and can hardly be conceived capable (as ma∣ny good Institutions have done) even of De∣generation into any thing harmful. So that, all things
considered, I will suppose this Proposition shall en∣counter with no Ene∣mies, the only Question is, whether it will find Friends enough to carry it on from Discourse and Design to Reality and Ef∣fect; the necessary Ex∣pences of the Beginning (for it will maintain it self well enough afterwards) being so great (though I have set them as low as is possible in order to so vast
a work) that it may seem hopeless to raise such a sum out of those few dead Reliques of Humane Charity and Publick Ge∣nerosity which are yet re∣maining in the World. FINIS.
