D66C E1710_1 99868441 170292
A DISCOVERY OF SOME PLOTS OF LUCIFER AND HIS COUNCIL AGAINST The Children of MEN. LONDON, Printed for T. Brewster at the sign of the three Bibles at the West end of Pauls. 1656.
A discovery of some plots of Lucifer and his Councill against the Children of men. 1. ONe that had some experience of the devices of Satan, and is not wholly igno∣rant of them, doth here in few words crie out to you all the chil∣dren of men to take heed, and be wise in Christs wisedome, and watch against this roaring, de∣vouring deep and dangerous lion; whose Jawes are the gates of hell, and whose interest is in all our na∣tures.
2. At first, when he saw God had made man after his owne I∣mage; (which similitude Satan himself had lost) he was so busie with the first Adam, that within 40 daies he fetched him, and in him all his to his owne element. And presently after when God promised Adam that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head (not seeds as of many, nor heads as of many, neither) then Sa∣tan fell upon Cain her first seed, and also kept fast all the old world (excepting a few that escaped out of his snares) in iniquity. 3. Then after this, Jehovah rai∣sed up Abraham as a common root to a spirituall nation, according to his faith, & as a publique spring to the most famous nation of the Jewes after the flesh. But the divi∣der rested not, till he broke off a∣bout
600000 men in the wilder∣nesse. Afterwards he cozened ten tribes from the pure worship at Jerusalem; and at length prevai∣led with the other tribes, to cruci∣fie the Messiah; for he vailed over the Lord of glory, that they did not know him, but killed him. 4. Now, when God seemed to be thus defoyled, and put back, he Creates a new people among the Gentiles. And this with a few Jewes, is called the primitive Church Apostolicall. But not ma∣ny yeares after, the old dragon, played another game, and divi∣deth those Churches by breaking them among themselves. So that the Apostacy and Antichrist, all in black and blood came up, and so for many hundreds of years the beast and dragon carried almost all before them; though all this
while God hath his children, and Christ was digging the tophet deep, for to cast the king and god of this world at last into that bottomelesse pit. 5. It is well known that of late yeares, as soone as any sort of peo∣ple, were comming out of Babylon and minding the way to Sion, the enemy hath by experience of ages found out many new Inventions to delude, & divide; & by teaching his doctrines, and applying his con∣clusions, he prevaileth with most of all man-kinde to submit to him as to their soveraigne. 6. Now, whereas truth (being but one) is scattered among all Christians; and one is taught in one part of it, and another in a∣nother, so that no one sort of men have but only a parcell of the truth, and it but a part of their
heart; the old dragon endeavour∣ing to make truth war against it selfe, as it doth fight against him who is the father of lyes, he coy∣neth new names for every party of people, that so they might dispute and wrangle among themselves; and when any good word is spo∣ken as a testimony, the vulgar de∣spise it, and say O he is such a one, of such a Sect; so truth is underva∣lued and Sects maintained. 7. And to secure his den of lyes, he rangeth his owne subjects into manifold forms, & makes them seem to fight one against another, that so he that escapeth one evil way or opinion, may greedily run into the Camp of another party of the devill, being still carefully detain∣ed within the verge of his court which is flesh and disobedience. 8. And further rather then faile, he
stirreth up a Theudas, and after him Judas before Christ comes, and possesseth the bodies of many, that so (besides the gaining of those deluded soules) he may pre∣judge Christ; that the people may say of Christ, he hath a devil and is mad; as them lately risen, and so tumble them over the stumbling stone. 9. Time would faile to enume∣rate his protects to vex Christ, and deceive the people; but this paper intends only a hint, that un∣stable soules, for want of compre∣hension of love, may not fall into the manifold intanglements of the Serpent. 10. Of any thing he cannot endure love, peace and purity. Therefore striveth he to set one Text, one Saint, one providence, one government, one Church, one
nation, and one man against ano∣ther; and delighting to fish in troubled waters, he setteth Chur∣ches on flames by disputations, and kingdomes by wars; and private Christians by envyings and evill surmisings. 11. O thou old Serpent, the day of God discovereth thee. Thy den is malice: Thy trade is sin∣ning: Thy recreation is war: Thy drink is the blood of soules: Thy food is dust: Thy trap is un∣beliefe: Thy disport is tempting: Thy haunt is in flesh and blood: Thy subjects are many, but thou and thy angels shall be broken for ever. 12. Now to overthrow this desperate enemy, the Lord ap∣pointeth man his whole Armour; faith to resist him, truth to pierce him, hope to get beyond him,
peace to outdare him, love to fret him, joy to sadden him, prayer to whip him, union to defeat him, and Christ himself to tread him under feet. 13. O wretched angell, thou accusest mee, and many more be∣fore God; I will also rip up thy de∣vices before the sons of men, ac∣cording to the law of retaliation, and will vex thee in thy family of sin. Thy kingdome as an abomi∣nable branch, is cut downe; Thy fall is as the lightning, Thy To∣phet is preparing, Thou thy self diggest it deep. The great chaine is in the great Angels hand to bind thee. Then shall the people have peace instead of war, and love for envy, and for injustice equity. And they shall on earth sing Hallelu∣jah to God and the Lambe that died for man, whilest thou art warming of thy selfe in hell fire.
14. O Ye children of Adam, Be not deluded by this serpent, let him not drive you to sin against your light, as Balaam did his Asse; fling downe this rider, and breake the bridle of your own wils, and affections, and be not ignorant of his devices; The day of God re∣vealeth them to you; love the light, and come out of darknesse. 15. Howbeit this enemy doth not so much desire your damnati∣on (wherein God will have glo∣ry) as he doth the disgrace and contempt of the king Christ who is his implacable antagonist. He hireth sinners & payeth these poore simple soldiers with the pleasures of their own lusts, to the end that they may fight against God that made them, and against Christ their friend. And he supplieth their corrupt natures with the in∣comes
of all pride, malice, lust, unrighteousnesse, discontent, un∣thankfulnesse, and woe. 16. His study is, how to discou∣rage the Saints, embolden the wicked, to divide the Churches, to make war in nations, to vilifie the Scriptures, to create discontent in families, and hard thoughts of God and men; and being well ac∣quainted with the constitutions of all bodies and influences of the stars, he quickeneth the sanguine complexion to lust & frothiness; He kindleth his owne fire in the cho∣lerick, & over the melancholick he spreadeth his owne black curtain of despairing of good; The fleg∣matick also he imprisoneth in earthinesse, sloth and fatnesse of heart. 17. If the Government of a nation be changed, It is his policy
to make his slaves free, to accept of places of trust, as magistrates under that present Government; for he well knowes that such will let his kingdome of sin alone, and not terrifie evill doers. In the mean time he createth scruples of the Governments in the consci∣ences of honest men, who (durst they take power) would overthrow his dominion and all licencious practices in their respective quar∣ters. And thus he layeth useful men upon their backs, so that by reason of their needlesse scrupulo∣sities to do good, as publique men, under such a government, they spend their short life in an incapa∣city of serving God, and their ge∣neration, and suffer Satan to swagger in all deboistnesse before their faces, and they dare not touch him. O Ye tender consci∣ences
be not guiled by the devil in this matter. Take all occasions under all to do good before, the river of your time emptieth it self into the sea of eternity. 18. It is sufficiently known that breaking bread and baptism were instituted by Jesus Christ to ex∣presse the love of his heart, and u∣nion of his saints. But now Satan hath learnt how to traverse these canons and Ordinances of Jesus, So as that water baptisme is the great text of uselesse disputes and endlesse janglings and awakenings of carnal wits, and galling one a∣nother, and rubbing on the weak∣nesse of their arguments; whereas love covers a multitude of sins, and a heap of mistakes. Yet these exercises (called Sacraments by some) are made occasions of wranglings and heart-burnings,
and at this also Satan laugheth and pipeth on the divisions. 19. Who seeth not by this time that all Ordinances and govern∣ments of Churches (and of nations too) have been, and still are made Imageries of jealousies. And like that Altar on that side Jordan (that great Altar to looke to, saith the Scriptures) which occasioned ho∣nest Phineas and others to seem to inveigh against their brethren, and threaten war too until they heard them speake for themselves; now the enemie with his bellowes of flesh and blood, stands near at hand to blow up all such animosi∣ties, in the wrath of God wherein he lives. His intent is to fret the sweet meeke Spirit of God, to burne up poore soules in this kind∣ling, and to warme himself with more of the coales of eternall
wrath. Yea if he were not mad with fury and pride, he would for his owne ease be quiet, and not be ever laying of snares for those birds he knowes he can never catch. 20. His malice will not let him alone. The violence of his nature makes him ripe for the judgement of the great day. He hath now been at his studie almost six thou∣sand years, and never slept a wink all that time, yea he studied and travelled too over all the earth, seas, and natures of things. He is a great schollar & proud one; and the father of all such conceited Linguists, or Gnosticks. To his shame and theirs, be it spoken, that their learning swels them as empty bladders, to increase their account before the meeke and lowly lamb.
21. Satan is so called from Sit∣nah Hatred; The flames of en∣mity are his bone-fires; envy, wrath, jealousie and malice are his trappings. Thence it is he also lo∣veth to feed on his own dung, and to feed others with amaritude and bitternesse. Now the devils filth is malice, which all that live therein, find more sutable to them then the Manna of God, or the Divine Na∣ture of Christ. 22. Inexcusable therefore is that soule, that chooseth Satans con∣cocted wickednesse (called kakia) rather then the flect and blood of the Son of God; unto such a poor soule it is more naturall to live in contention, sournesse and ha∣tred, then in love, sweetnesse, and peace. These are no other then the firebrands of hell, whom Satan
bloweth to keep himselfe warme; for the love of God is such a cold thing to him, he is ready to freez among them that walk in the love of the Lord Jesus. 23. Thence it is that Satan fils the courts of justice with litigious, cunning, venemous querimonies, and maketh one neighbour so apt to finger, and to scratch blood out of the scabs and deformities of a∣nother, that so provoking him to anger, he may have somewhat a∣bove board wherewith to charge and reproach him. 24. This subtile and yet foo∣lish vagabond whereof I speake, is discovered with his nature, by the names and titles given him. Hee is called Beelzebub, God of flies, be∣cause his angels are numerous and various, and flying thick in the Aire of nature; or Baalzebub be∣cause
he loveth the dung and filth of nature; Apolluon the destroyer, the serpent, the dragon; the lier, the sower of cares, the adversary of man-kind, and the enemy of all righteousnesse, holinesse and humi∣lity. 25. And because there be legi∣ons of these spirits ordered to quar∣ter in all ages, over several Coun∣tries, they therefore have observed thy Ancestors, & in what sins they most naturally wallowed, the same they will lay close to thee, and be∣fore thee as a net in thy nature, to bring thee to death. 26. But if thou wilt needs live in love, Behold (saith he) here is the pleasant love of the flesh or common love of mankind for thee to dwell in. If thou (saith he) wilt needs live in joy, get thee wine and strong drink, make thy
self merry, for that solace is bet∣ter then silver; spend them prodi∣gally away upon thy lusts. I see saith Satan, thou wilt live in peace, being so well natured as thou art; A quiet harmlesse man or woman; well, then be it so; Thy consci∣ence shall not trouble thee, nor re∣proofs awaken thee, but thou shalt be an easie-hearted sot or a volup∣tuous hog, of whom much shall be made in the Swine-house untill it be fully fattened for the house of slaughter. 27. Thus the cheater cozeneth Millions of soules, by affording them counters for gold, and the love, joy and peace of this world for that which is of God. And the cunning wit of hell for the wise∣dome which is from above: And the lying wonders and angelicall glorious flashes of deceit for the
true light of Paradise. And in these things he coucheth & hideth himselfe in the very heart and bosome of the sinner and hy∣pocrite, but he is not awaked, be∣cause he is not fully aware of the guest that dwelleth within him, 28. Now when we speak of this enemy, thou must by no means imagine him to be some outward∣ly visible bugbear or brickbrack a∣far off from thee. But rather a malignant powerfull, subtile and agile influence, that mingleth it self with the soules of people, as the smoake is incorporated with the Air, wherefore let man watch his own heart, for by nature it is become the devils quean. 29. Some he perswadeth to o∣ver-feed the spirits and nature, and to hoise up too great a saile for the
conscience and inner man, and by excesse and riot a sturdy, stern, proud, heady, quarrelsome, unrea∣sonable spirit, is distilled by Satan gradually into the hearts of all the drunkards, and lofty gamesters; for Satan shakes hands often with the proud men, women, and chil∣dren as with his neer kindred, and saith to their hearts, well plaid, brave fellows, I shall have your company, we shal flie high a∣bove the thrones of God, and his lambe, and get the honour a∣way. 30. But let not the children of Adam forget that God resisteth the proud & graceth the humble; In becoming nothing, we shall inhe∣rit all things. But by lusting to be all things, Millions become worse then nothing for ever. And while man would be something he expo∣seth
himself to the tempests of the devil, whereas the nothingized heart sinkes down under the crosse of Christ, & hides himself from all the whirlwinds of the enemy, and lives in the peace, love, power, tran∣quillity and life of God in Christ Jesus, and so keepeth himself that this wicked one toucheth him not. 31. Now finally my brethren, ye precious souls of the children of Adam, why should we not all joyne as one new man, against this common enemie of mankind? I have here saluted you in few words but with many thoughts and much love, & in fear & trembling, being desirous that we might joyne in a continued prayer of faith all our daies to whip away this cruel hun∣ter, in the name of Christ out of our earth.
32. The intent of this intelli∣gence is to awaken them that sleepe, to let sinners see whose worke they uphold in common, to admonish believers not to be cheated out of any good, to occasi∣on my fellow-souldiers to strike further home on this subject, to make Satan roare, and retreat for shame. Behold he is roaring, and retreating. Hallelujah, Praises be to our Lord the Conquerer. 33. Friends, watch, hold fast a little. He that cometh to our re∣liefe will not tarry. Study to be quiet and meek; live in love. Be active in good, and thereby over∣come all evill; above all, live by faith. Do not at all doubt but that God greatly loveth you, and that Christ belongeth to you, and that the Almighty spirit is alwaies with you, and shall be in you a
fountain of everlasting light of life, Amen. And work earnestly with God in the behalfe of your poor temp∣ted fellow-souldier who thus salu∣teth you in the good will of him that dwelleth in the bush, Now un∣to the Great Generall, The word of God, The King of kings, And our In∣finite great Lover be Victory and Glory, for ever, Amen, Amen. N. D.
The second charge written in 1655. printed in 1656. 1. IN the former intelligence of Satans plots, I have not done him the hundredth part of the Retaliation which I know is due to him, from mee; neither can I in this: I am wronged and op∣pressed by him, therefore I make out my complaint; I fall out with none of Adams children; They are all my kindred, but follow peace with all and purity, that so in the love I may see the Lord. I am an∣gry with none of them but as I am with my self, for that a part of our
selves is ready to joyne with the devill. 2. The corrupt nature within, is the fire; the devill is the wind that inflameth it; He is a spirituall strong malignant influence of the first Creation. He was fashioned out of the wrath and goodnesse of the father of all things, but he left the sweetnesse and humility of God & aimed at the dominion of the outward world (or created na∣ture) and since hath begotten many children of disobedience upon the minds that yielded to his lust∣full pride, who with him are disin∣herited of eternall light, love and life. This is his wofull pedigree, work and wages. 3. Paul (a lanthorne of the whole world, and a servant of Christ) useth divers words to dis∣cover this enemie, when he saith
(among other things) that Satan hath his darts, his depths, his me∣thods his subtilties and his snares. His darts are the sudden thoughts injected into mens hearts, that pre∣sently kindle up the passions in the lusts and humours into a flame of turbulency within. His depths worke most upon men of deep reason and penetrating fancy, whereby they are often touled on by degrees into silent Atheisme, de∣structive Heresies, voluptuous luxu∣ry, and incurable conceits of their owne learning and experience; his methods consist in the ordering of thoughts in man and affections in the world, where he presenteth first the fairest dish (easiest to be digested by reason) pretending meer sound religion; then another that nourisheth sensual spirits, and lastly the devillish dish of intolera∣ble pride, & his own sauce with it,
which is despair in the end after his feast. 4. His subtilties, or panurgia) is a conjunction of all his wits, be∣ing already at hand to deceive e∣very man, in every place, in every age, in every calling, and this at once. And his snares & devices are his forecasting projecting facul∣ties; whereby he foresees how one snare may be possibly avoided, and then how usefull another will be, if ready at hand (& herein he will not faile.) He is permitted to come in among the sons God, into the company of the holy Angels and Saints, (though he be there also in hell and wrath) but there he ga∣thers poisons (as the Snake doth among the green herbs, and grasse) and then stingeth the wizards, deboist or hypocriticall souls, that yield to him, and so
swels them up like himselfe. 5. He is never wearie in doing us mischiefe. Why should wee be wearie in resisting him? He laughs at the backsliders especially, yet his mirth they shall not perceive in this life; but they also shall laugh with him Now, and sweetly nible at his baites, and pleasantly feed on his sugar, which is the lust and pleasure of their own flesh. He well knoweth the influence of Ve∣nus, and loves to see the dishonest, wanton dallyings of male and fe∣male. He fiddles and makes sport, and merry placentias, to them, while they are selling their immortall soules for momentany delights. Al∣so Mars he well knoweth, and by that starry influence, he rouzeth up warlike or quarrelsome dispositi∣ons to be bloody, valiant, and re∣vengefull
untill he hath (by means of mans humours, which doubtlesse are subject to the Starry Influences) gotten mans poor spirit into that turbulent outward religion, to ha∣bitate it selfe there where eternity is hid, and then his desire is by some means or other to cut off the thread of mans life, that he may be beyond recovery, and without hopes of the remedy of repentance and retreat. 6. The other influences he per∣ceiveth (as a part or conjunct) And (as in Jobs case) he loves to pour down fire, so he knowes how to seeme mild and watery. If any one element drown soul or body, he hath his mind and sport. And finding poor man imprison∣ned in his four elementall fetters, he perswades him that its impossi∣ble to live supersensually in this
life, and will admit of no talk of breaking his prison. And if the poor soul once offers to goe out, he will set impossibilities before him, his pleasures or guilt, and behind him, all the world and his children about his ears, his own reasonings to dishearten him; God as unwil∣ling to receive him, Heaven but a sublime fancy, Hell but a child-frighting-bugbear, the world and things thereof as reall harmlesse comforts, that so by all or any of these means he might detaine the poor heart in his clutches, and powers of nature. And as the cat dealeth with the mouse, he also will let a soule loose, to pray, read, hear sermons, and give almes, but still keep him to live in selfe, unlesse the second David Jesus Christ snatch the poor lamb out of this lions pawes, by the effe∣ctuall
workings of his spirit in the new birth. 7. The young children are by him poysoned with vanity, scor∣ning wits, scoffing expressions, (as in Elisha's case) wrangling dispositions, proud carriages, ly∣ing excuses, fleering gestures, wan∣ton talks, disobedient spirits, i∣dle tales, revenging thoughts, pro∣phane oaths, contempt of the Lords day, lusts after Interludes, from thence often to the Ale-house, fighting, murder, gallows, and hell. O ye Parents (thou Father, and thou tender Mother) see here in time how the Devil of hell swaggers in your children, and it may be you laugh at their witty evils. This is to sacrifice your chidren in the fire to Moloch that bloody Devil. Moloch was a brasse hollow image, with the
face of an Oxe; and being made red hot, it had spring-arms to clasp the poor children that were cast in to them. (Hags hugs kill with kindnesse) and scared them to death; and while the children were shreeking or roaring, there were drums and loud musick made to stop the Infants cries from the Parents eares. Ah thus are the soules of many children still burnt with lust, and lost in Tophet, and the valley of Hinnom. O ye chil∣dren, be afraid of sin! sin the ug∣ly Idol of Satan. And ye Parents, be warned of your posterity, lest God curse them, and they curse you, and you them at the great day. Rather study the blessing of God, that turneth the soule from its wickednesse, and the hearts of the parents aright to the children, and both to the obedi∣ence
of the just. Parents, look to your childrens soules, that are Gods portion; you should be Pro∣phets, Priests, and Princes in all humble meeknesse of wisedom in your own Families. Teach the truth, and use the rod and pray∣er, lest God use his whip, and curse: Example not your children to wickednesse; find them honest occupations according to their natural Genius, and lawful mar∣riage when God requires it by the law of nature. And above all, let them not sit in the seat of the scornful while they are young, lest they come to the chair of an∣guish when they are old. Why should Satan by his vain spirit possesse your children, that may become heires of everlasting rich∣es? Bring them once heartily to be servants of God, and he will
take care they shall want nothing in this world, when you are be∣come dust and ashes under the earth. But forget not that Satan is busie in bending these tender twigs from God and Christ. 8. When children grow up to the state of men and women, to the flower and power and heat of the spirit of this natural world, then commeth forth the Mounte∣bank Satan, and sheweth them his tricks, dances, and musicks. First in fornications between single per∣sons; then of adulteries and un∣satiable lusts of the eyes, flesh, and hidden looks of the minde, and so drowns them in the quagmires of concupiscence (which is a lust of having more.) If these souls feel (in a sowre reproving conscience) that these wanton lusts are folly in Israel, and in the world; then
turnes he them over to peruse the lectures and lessons of the cares of this life, and make them sin by lending, borrowing, buy∣ing, selling, building, planting, providing; and (in all) hurries their minds to a neglect of God, and of the study of better things, and so hastens their end, and wears out their natures before they be made partakers of the nature of God. 9. But if any be given and de∣voted naturally to enquire into the secrets of nature or Scripture, and to reading, conferring, and prying into more excellent things; then he eggs them on in their stu∣dies to find out God in their own reasons, and saith, Here's all the glorious learning of this world, and the highest contemplations of things. This will I give thee if
thou worship. I would not thou should adore me as a black Devil, but admire thy selfe, wonder at thy own thoughts and attain∣ments, seek thy own glory, and then I shall meet thee time enough. 10. But O thou crooked & win∣ding fair Serpent! This will not doe with the thousands of the E∣lect of God. They have learnt, and will more, to deny selfe, and to take up the inward crosse that destroyeth the vain thoughts of the minde. Through Christs death they live above, and trample thy heighths and depths. They stand in the wisedome whence thou art fallen. They have seen thee in their own darknesse, and sublime selfish thoughts; but thou seest not them in the love and humility of Jesus. Their silence outvoiceth thy roarings; Their nothingness
overthrows thy brags; Thy winds work not on these nothings. They were dead to the life of nature. They are alive to thy death, and on them is written, These are the revived of the Lord. 11. Furthermore, If a man be∣come a Preacher (as so called) this Doctor, Satan, will accom∣pany him invisibly to his study and pulpit, and perswade him to flatter the great men, or at least passionately inveigh against them; and sooth up, or rock the cradle to the slumbring consciences, or sleepy Churches; or else let fly out his bitter bullets, and blind uses of reproofs against such as differ from his opinion: He shall sharply reprove that in publique, whereof he is guilty himselfe in private. He thinks that (as So∣lomon speaks of the muckworms,
saying, Money answereth all things) his wit, parts, & learned distincti∣ons will resolve all other consci∣ences, and they should submit to him and his judgement; and if that seem lame, he will be advi∣sed to acknowledge his weakness in all humble wise, and that also from hypocrisie, to fence and for∣tifie himselfe in his own will and way. And thus would Satan (the Rabbi of Hell) have Preachers learn the deceit of him, that the people also may be deluded, through such stalking horses. But God hath many, and will have more sincere powerful Preachers among men, who will neither de∣ceive, nor be deceived. 12. If a man be a Magistrate, Satan comes to him (within him) and saith, I am a Magistrate too, and a ruler over men, and over,
Angels, and properties of nature. Be thou as I am, and we shall glo∣riously sit on one bench. Keep up thy pomp gallantly; oppresse these silly moneyless wretches and widows: Thunder out by thy Warrants, and apprehend all those Fanatiques that walk by the spirit, as they say, but are un∣mannerly unworthy ideots. Then shalt thou be my fellow-Magi∣strate; doe as I doe, I shall be at thy elbow; I shall instruct thee in all gallantry and Magistratical de∣vices, excesses, and bravery of spi∣rit, in oppression, drunkennesse; sloth, and neglect of what is good. But let Satan be told, though he knoweth it already, and that with gnashing of teeth, that the Lord Jesus is fashioning to himself Ma∣gistrates that fear God; and hate covetousness, partiality, and pomp.
13. There is no trade, occupa∣tion, calling, imployment, or ma∣nufacture, whereinto Satan hath not not crept, and is become Ma∣ster of the trade, and Lord of the tradesmen also (for the generali∣ty of them.) And while the trade their spirits is sinning, and their practice deceit and falshood, he takes them for his fellow-tradesmen; and they that make a trade of any creature in this life, to let their lusts live thereby, have for their companion the enemy that trades in the heavenly firma∣mental, astral, and earthy nature. O ye tradesmen! let your con∣versations be in the Heavens; let Christ be your treasure, and your hearts thereon. 14. But besides all this, it behoves the children of men, and the sons God also, to remember and know
that Satans fort is never stormed and taken by the chafed, quick∣ned, or superlatived spirits of na∣ture; neither are this serpents scales pierced, or he offended or awakened by all or any of the pe∣netrations of mans wit, reason, learning, writing, preaching, threatning, praying, or procking of him in all the strength of na∣ture. He laughs at those bullets, and scorns the arrows of such bowes of men. But the true bow of steel striketh him through. That bow is the word or spirit of God in man, and in mans doings, pray∣ers, preachings, and writings. Thus the Prophets, Apostles, and Servants of the Lord, both small and great, have wounded the dra∣gon; and he that bendeth this bow, denieth himself, blusheth at
the weaknesse of his endeavours, and yet trusteth in God that whatsoever he doth, it shall pros∣per. 15. The comfort and conquest lieth in this, that a great chain in the great Angels hand is now preparing (with all her links) to bind this old Drgaon in the dun∣geon of the bottomlesse pit. O ye Sons of Sion, and Inhabitants of Heaven and earth, sing Halle∣lujah, and praise God and the Lamb; for the burning of Beel∣zebub, and Babylon his Whore, is to your joy. And it may work upon Satan somewhat to hear such songs: And as he is hopelesse for himself, so he may despair of your souls condemnation. But whate∣ver he thinks, he must shortly be bound; and when he is loosened; it is for his woe. Therefore pray
earnestly in faith, and hasten that blessed time, that long-looked for day of God wherein righte∣ousnesse shall bud forth, and mer∣cy take her throne, wherein the e∣verlasting Gospel (that discove∣reth eternity) shal be heard by the Trump of God, and the dead spi∣rit released. Hasten that day where∣in all Saints shal be united, when all truths shall be believed, that day wherein all shall be judged within and without by one spirit of holi∣nesse & power of love; for that day of the Spirit of the Lords mouth discovereth all darknesses, and ha∣steneth to chase all clouds and tempests off from all Saints speedi∣ly. Amen, Amen. 16. In the mean while until Sa∣tan (this Achitophel) hath erected his owne gallowes high enough, let the poore soule be skilfull in
resisting him in faith. He comes to thee through thy owne thoughts, and saith, Thou wretch art guil∣ty as well as I, read over the booke of all thy guilts, turn over the leaves of thy wofull conscience. Dost thou not remember, how bea∣stial & devillish, vain, wicked and unworthy thy conversation hath? been yea thou art more guilty then I, because the Messiah hath taken the nature of man, & not of Angels upon him. Come then away with me, and thou shalt lie under me (for my ease) in the bottomless pit. Now when the accuser thus chargeth thee, what wilt thou poor soul do? Tell him, I do read over my guilts and unworthinesse, I am naturally the foulest of all wretches in the world. I do con∣fesse it; notwithstanding the blood of Jesus washeth me from all sin.
But now I will no more live in sin because it is pardoned. I throw it away from me, and that thou canst not do; Therefore it shall be thine; and Christs Righteousnesse, and Holinesse too shall be mine. I ex∣communicate for ever from me that vile nature which I had, that was the mother (as thou wert the father) of my corruptions. Take thou that Bride; and then what is left in me but the life and love of my Lord Jesus? what canst thou say to this? I am clothed with change of raiment; I will have nothing to do with sin any more; It is not mine; I will have fellowship with Jesus, for he is my portion and potentate. 17. Now when thou hast thus answered the devil, watch over thy will; Never give thy consent to a∣ny sin, keep thy will pure and ear∣nest
to God; slack it not; expect and draw within thee, the migh∣ty Power of God to carry thee e∣very minute beyond and above thy own lusts. Thy spirit is like a bowle. The byas is thy naturall corrupt disposition. If thy course in good things be slacked, then thy own byas will turn thee round (as it fareth with a bowle in bow∣ling) but while thou givest all di∣ligence to finish thy course with mighty energy in all good, thy cor∣ruptions are contemned, crucified, & over-born to the land of oblivi∣on; for to be spiritually minded is life and peace, but to be carnally minded is death. Therefore whilst soule and body are together, there re∣maines not one spare minute of time to be carelesse, loos-hearted, or diffident in Christ. 18. This also is added to en∣courage
thee, the world is full of books on this subject, but not of soules that wrestle against the de∣vill; howbeit whereever Christs souldiers are, they have heavenly provision made for them (food, ar∣mour, and pay) And if by reading of this (whoever and wherever thou art) thou be in the least mea∣sure refreshed of God in the great campe of Israel, Praise the great Generall (the living sweet Eternall and Almighty Word of God) and I shall rejoyce with thee; farewell. N. D.
A Chapter to this People, and to the World, written in 1655. printed in 1656. 1. O Ye children of Adam in all the corners and habitations of the Earth, upon whom the end of this World, and the Day of God is dawning, and hastening to discover and judge all Natures and Nations, Hearken, and awake, and look a∣bout you; yea look into your self, that you may behold God in your self, and your self in God and in his Son and Word, who is his Love
and his all how long must the chil∣dren of men run on as beasts, they know not where, nor yet whence, nor yet in what they move, and breath, and subsist! Lord God Almighty, put a stop to their minds by the flaming sword of Truth in the hand of thy Cove∣nant-Angel, whom the Asse seeth, and the Oxe knoweth: O that the thousands of Israel, and milli∣ons of the Gentils, might now all at length under thy fifth, sixth, and seventh Seal, Trumpet, and Vial, know and understand thy own Per∣sonal Being and appearance in the glasse-windows of their own spi∣rits; for thou art not far from any of them: But many are far from thee, so as that they neither see thee, nor hear thee, nor feel thee, nor smell thee, nor taste thee the Only God who fillest all. And I poor
worm am naturally as senselesse as any man living, and as dark, as black, as unworthy as any child of Adam, according to this out∣ward Man: But the new Adam within (which is thy new crea∣ture and thy child) waiteth on thee daily and silently, to heare what thou (Lord) sayst and com∣mandest to be spoken or written. 2. My heart is boiling in sor∣row and fear, yea in indignation and love, when I am made to see my brethren and sisters, according to nature, sunk into the deep pit of corruption: And there is scarce above water as much as the crown of the head & the haire, yea their breath is stopped: The spirit of crying to God is gone, and but a form of prayer left for a carcasse of Religion; and a wave of some filthy worldly lust or another
comes one in the neck of another, over the head of the conscience, and over the crown of the lear∣ning of the souls of the people. My spirit within me is baked and parched in the furnace of my se∣cret sorrows and fears, crying out, Woe is me, I cannot help any. I my self want help of God as much as any. I am scarce above water, yet I am swimming towards the shore, by believing in Jesus, to the obedience of the eternal will. But O how gastly is it to see (all a∣bout) so many hairy scalps floa∣ting on the top of the great deep, as so many sure symptomes of dead souls, dead hearts toward God, and yet immortal spirits; All such are the men, women, or children, drowned in selfe and flesh. O ye friends that are per∣fect in Christ Jesus, pity, pity and
help both them and me; I am al∣most arrived and landed, and sometimes allowed to stand on a bank in Sion. 3. Now when in spirit I am helped to stand on Mount Sion (above) out of the waters and de∣luge of Babylon, I see the dead world generally, and the people of divers opinions particularly, burying themselves in blood, and warring one with another, and persecuting their brethren, and yet making truce and peace with sin it self in their own closets. E∣very one in the common rode of nature crying out, Here is Truth, follow me and my judgement, for it is solid, it is according to the rule, the word of God, the Scri∣ptures, the Orthodox best Inter∣pretation; My Ware is the best Ware. Buy it of me, or else it is
just with God to leave you to er∣rours, and then it is also fit that men should make war upon you. O my fellow-friend, say not so; not so; the treasures of Truth are won∣derfull: God is good. There is but love in him, though there be wrath eternal by him. Do not kin∣dle up a fiery flame by working up a whirlwind in thy own spirit to∣wards any. Look about. How many millions of lives perished in a blinde War? How few follow Peace, and pursue it in God? Where be Gods children (like Him) that requite good for evill, love for hatred, peace for war? How easily mast thou slip into this malicious or passionate pit? But when thou art once in, and hel-fire is kindled into flames, canst thou tell when thou shalt come out of this wickednesse, cruelty, and evill
surmisings of heart? Also O ye stern austere people, that are so zealously hot, and rigidly censori∣ous, be warned, lest ye be swal∣lowed up in this gulfe, this dark womb & principle of wrath. John the Baptist (the morning star) must give way to the pleasant Sun: Ter∣ror, trembling, & shaking is indeed the end of flesh, but not of Godli∣nesse. But while ye are afraid of the invisible one, ye know not fully of what spirit ye are. Howbeit o∣thers (in the interim) live in boa∣stings, mockings, and scoldings, and scufflings about outward things. They project, and under∣mine, and deceive, and war, to to gain a name, to get Scepters and Nations, gold and silver, plea∣sures and preferments, and care not who they kill that stand in their way.
4. Man setteth up his own mind and judgement. And when he saith the Scripture is the word of God, he himselfe takes upon him to judge the sense of that word, and so he will needs judge his own Judge. And if any other mans conscience strikes not saile to his opinion, he passionately gives him a broad side, and desireth to have him sunk as an heretick or forma∣list, and so send him quick to hell. And all that while the children of Adam thus violently act and di∣spute, they are as divers sorts of birds fighting on the top of the same tree, and not under∣stand nor revere that one root of this tree which bears them all up. O ye opinionists, goe up to this Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; The false Prophets in your hearts have deceived you: But they that
feed onely on the true bread and water, and are meek in heart, have told you the truth; but ye will not hear them, till the arrow from God strike through your harnesse; and the end will be this, The dogs shall lick up your blood that was shed amongst you by one another. Yet we say, God is one, Truth is one, Love is the chief grace, there should be but one Church. The holy Scriptures are venerable, and to be admired. But who shall in∣terpret the Scriptures, and say, This is the meaning? You will say, the Church, or rather the ho∣ly spirit in the true holy Church. But your neighbours ask you, what Church doe you mean? Is it the Baptised, or Independent, or Pros∣byterial, or Shaken, or Episcopal, or Lutheran, or Popish, or Eastern, or Western Church? The answer
from God in ye is, There is none of these righteous, there is none of these perfect, no not one. The Baptised are narrow thoughted; The Independent is corrupted, the Presbyter and Episcopal are dead and swollen up; the shaken too much, mistaken in their censures and justifications; the Lutheran too sparing in the Doctrine of the New Birth; the Papal people Jewish, looking out too much through the spectacles of corrupt Reason, to dote on vain glosses in Divine worship; the Eastern and Western (both named Christian) not yielding to one another the time of the day, devoured the one the other, and were caught and swallowed by the spirit and appe∣tite of Antichrist. The Seekers also are unstable, and the prating Ranters sensual and beastly. All
these are judged as far as the light of God doth convince, or may re∣prove them: And let every one of them attend to it as far as they know. Not that these all are dead, but death striveth to prevaile in all. The same spirit of Deceit and Errour worketh in some more visibly and fully, and would be in others privily, and is in or with all these in measure. 5. Where then dwelleth know∣ledge? And how shall the diggers meet with understanding? Cer∣tainly, there is a vein for the sil∣ver, and a place for the hidden treasures of gold. Ye must turne your swords into plowshares, and first cease from your false Mines; ye must no more dig with your weapons into the bowels of one a∣nother. The golden Mine is not there. Nor must ye goal and gore one another with bitter words and
envenom'd expressions, lofty loud words heard in the streets: what profiteth thee, or any, to speak e∣vill of any mans whole person? (but rather strike at the evill na∣ture now predominant in him.) Neither mayst thou wisely com∣mend any mortal changeable man in his whole bulk (for man, whose breath is in his nostrils, is deceit∣ful) but magnifie God onely as far as to thee he appeares in every one. For as there is but one day and night, darknesse and light, good and evill, and no further or other distinctions that shall long stand (And this difference is visible in every man that is enlightned, and not perfected by the light in him:) So untill ye come to this dividing of waters, and see both natures striving hard one with another in all the Crea∣tion of God, and in every crea∣ture
in its kind. Ye may talk much of Religion, Grace, or of Sin and Scriptures also; but ye shall be scorched with the fire of your own mouth: Ye may write out your volumnious Controver∣sies, but to the fire of God ye shall be a Sacrifice (as the Ram was in the bush to Abraham.) Ye may make Parties and Factions upon grounds religious and judicious, (as ye baptize them) but your Fa∣ctions will be broken to pieces a∣mong themselves, as sure and as far as they have broken themselves off from the One God of Truth. Ye read books, and know many things: Ye may read this with the rest with a frothy carelesse heart (if such you be) but you shall sure∣ly call to mind the sheep and goats for ever. Now some are so wise as to say that these sheep and goats are
not the persons of people, but the qualities and properties that ope∣rate in all mankind. But such may know that one of the two quali∣ties of light and darknesse shall swallow up every person, and so the persons & natures are eternally in∣corporated in one. Each one in his own nature shall lie down or sit up for ever. For where the tree of mans nature inclineth in this world, there it falleth at death; and where the tree falleth, there it must be. Now I beseech you consider, that while one language continued with Hebers seed, they went on and prospered, but the pride of Babels tower scattered them all abroad. And when man cuts and divides where God would not, God will divide where man is loth to see a breach. Gods division is but one in all, but mans divisions
are many in one (in almost every one) yet he himselfe is naturally none that would be thus torn in pieces in himselfe. Howbeit he himselfe must be thus rent asunder in his own spirit, to be a broken contrite heart to God; otherwise he will seek to rend and teare all things (if it were possible) the di∣vine nature, rather then his owne base disposition. And all this while he lives in himselfe, but is still looking out of himselfe to o∣thers. He dwells in a chamber of his own opinion, and paints it with words of holy Scriptures, and with his owne deceits; but he considereth and reverenceth not that one true light that shineth more or lesse upon all the inhabi∣tants of the Earth. 6. The Turke is established in a Religion patched with his owne
Reason, and passeth the time of ignorance in pleasures, peace, and oppressions. As the whale is lord of the fish of the Sea, so is he among his fellow-creatures. This Levia∣than hath scarce been awakened, but kept in the deeps of the multitudes of his hosts & treasures; His night hath been a long, dark, and strong night, in the spirit of this world, the Reason and fair goddesse of the first creation whom the unlear∣ned despise & utterly reject, because they know it not; for the ignorant contemneth the knowing, and thinks him a foole; but the learned pittieth the ignorant and knowes him to be out of the way; for that without knowledge the heart cannot be good, saith a wiser man then many. Now this science is not the heavenly, as the Moone is not the Sun. The Turke learn∣ed
in reason rationally mocketh a them called Christians and high∣est professors of the good, that kill murther and devour one another, for want of reason. Yet deeply blinded is he him selfe, and that justly, for that he hath limitted God himself to his Moonish reason; as if he that made the Sun (and is Infinitely brighter) should have the use of no light, but that of the lowest planet, in which the Ma∣homettan tricks & deceits are cove∣red, but by the day are made mani∣fest. Now we easily find that spiri∣tuall learning & true Philosophy is the apprehension of the invisible naturall world, and of the origine primitive instrumentall cause of all things, (which is prudence) If any enjoy her, shee is the daughter of God, and the Philosopher said well and right, we are his off-spring,
and live, move and have our beeing in his own essence, or in him. But they knew not, or consider not the Primogenite, The Eternall word of the Infinite God, even his heart and Son, who was Eternally before ever nature was made, or created or begotten. That infinite word (besides whom there is no true God, and that word was come into our flesh) The greatest part of the world acknowledge him not to this day. Howbeit he made the house of this world (and feeds it by his Virtue invisible) and he will short∣ly make all his family heare his voice in this pallace of his owne building, even that thundring voice that soundeth in all parts the earth. And no other prea∣cher wiil convince the Turke, or any other, but he that is the first
and last preacher, who is this Word of God. Their Alcaron is an imagi∣nation of their own braines; (as others have formed directories in all nations to themselves, out of their own heads, and hearts) but God is pleased only with the worship of his owne will & heart, viz. when mans will lives in his only; That, and that solely plea∣seth him. But wo is to the will of man; and to the flesh of the chil∣dren of men. Woe is the world. The world in Turky, The world in Christendome; for there is but one world, under Satan in all, & in all hearts opinions Churches & a∣gitations. The same body of sinne and mystery of iniquity works in them called Christians; for with God there is not a jot (not a whit) of difference, nor respect of persons. He delights not in a Chri∣stian
more then a Turke, if that Chrian be not more like Christ Jesus (his love) then the Turke is; for if the Turke be as honest, as just, as diligent in the use of his talent as the nominall Christian is, he is as acceptable as he with that God that rewardeth every one according to his deeds. And the Almighty hateth the sins of all equally, and is a lover of all soules as they are spirits branched forth out of him. All soules are mine, saith the Lord; yet by the fall all soules are not his as he is love; but many are children of his wrath, and thereun to appointed. 7. But as the Sodomites sought Lots door, so the Christians sought for the sepulchre in the holy land (so called) and their retreat is shamefull, and much noted by the major part of this habitable world.
Howbeit, the Papists generally remain very presumptuous of their cause, and confident of their way. And as they did in Sodome, it is e∣ven so now in the universall Sodome of depraved flesh. Mens fleshly minds seek for Lots doore, to at∣taine to the angelicall seed, and beauty for their own self ends. And God in his Just power strikes them blind, so that they never so enter through his gate into his City, but fume and quarrell, and babble and divide about opinions and texts of Scriptures and Churches, Sacraments and doctrines and du∣ties right, governmen and head∣ships (and in many vanities and vexations of the Holy Spirit, who all the while waiteth within; for the resignation of their own wills unto him) But thus they will still certainly certainly continue what∣ever
shall be written; and this I see beforehand, nothing shall a∣vaile untill the fire of God devour, divide or convince them in their bold blind and filthy contentions. Man would fain finde God any where but in his own heart, and walk about in all streets professing to enter to Lots doore, but he wil∣fully or carefully shuts the doore of his own heart within him, and barrs and bolts it fast with his own wilfull conceited corrupt principles; opinions and self inte∣rests. He would goe into Paradise, but not out of himselfe. He thinks to bring his beasts into God, and the flesh of his minde into the spiri∣tuall Kingdome. And so the self∣ish praying, preaching and dispu∣tings become meer pratings, bab∣lings and scoldings, before the Spirit of God. He that witnesseth
this hath had a tast of most religi∣ons or opinions in the habitable world, & a prospect of the lamenta∣ble diversities among men called Christians, Jews & Turks; and cer∣tainly knoweth that this approach∣ing Generall or Catholique Day of God shall swallow up and rule so a∣mongst all, that the combustible pieces of all religions shall be con∣sumed by the Lord, the spirit, and by the breath of his mouth, with his impartiall over-flowing to the very neck. He shall divide and cut asunder the light from the dark∣nesse at the last, as he did the day and the night at the first. And God will sharply reprove and con∣demne that of man, which would have others to follow his light and his judgement, when he himself in many other things walketh con∣trary to his own conscience and
Vnderstanding. He will have o∣thers be of his opinion, contrary to their owne conscience, and best knowledge, when he himselfe im∣prisoneth the Truth in his know∣ledge from practice. God will fire that Beame which the hypo∣crite will not see in himselfe, and so his whole building must fall up∣on him, and the weight of his own thoughts he shall not be able to beare; with himselfe he could have patience, but others he rashly cen∣sured. And the only True Judge will have pitty on the weeping eye, that had the moate in it, and put an end to his long-suffering to∣wards the censorious hypocrite. 8. What a noise doth Magistra∣cy and Ministry make in the Chri∣stened world, and how have they hitherto kissed and clasped hands in blood and blindnesse together?
The clergy must preach up Magi∣stracy, and the sword of Authori∣ty must seem heathenish, if hee doth not only protect, but also forcibly use his Authority for the defence of his own opinion in Christian Religion; what∣soever that be, he must be judge himself. I may not, (I do not) denie the one nor the other (Ma∣gistracy or Ministry) but I must proclaime that there is a Bill of di∣vorce written by the Lord Jesus his owne hand which he himselfe will shortly explain. Among the children of Adam there hath been but two lawes of God in all since the beginning; though men have coyned many, or at least would mixe these two into one. The law of nature for to rule men (as the Moone by night) and the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus to
Saints (as the Sun by day) The in∣terest of Antichrist hath been to marry these to one another, that they might engender an impure seed, of doubts difficulties and wars; bloodsheds and hellfires, and all under pretence of religi∣on by the Magistrate and of covercive Church-discipline by the Ministers of the Gospel (so called.) For saith the Magi∣strate, My sword shall force dif∣fering consciences to that forme of form of knowledge or Church-government which I judge most agreeable to the rule of Christ. And the clergy also solicited the Magistrate to strike them with the fist of punishment, whom they thought erroneous, in their judgement. Moreover when these two concurred in opinion, then were alwaies the best peo∣ple
the world had persecuted, as Hereticks, as Schismaticks, and unsound. But when these diffe∣red and varied upon humoursome and ambitious grounds, thence also came forth treasons, wars, Jealousies, combinations and evill concussions in States and Common-wealths. And just it was with God, to let them both (Magistracy and Ministery) thus to wrangle to much blood in the dark, when both mistooke their own bounds, or neglected their proper respective charge. Now when I say that a Magistrate (as he is a Magistrate) hath nothing at all to doe with the regulating of mens opinions and consci∣ences, I finde him allowed and stinted to his owne statute-booke, which is the law of nature. And I challenge that Magistrate or
officer of State to answer that hath learned the measure of the cir∣cumference of the law of nature, though he should as man attain to know his own nature in par∣ticular. And yet where is the man that hath known himselfe in all naturals? Now the great law of nature is but in part expressed in the Judiciall law of Moses, and not fashioned in all particulars to all nations. But let the Magistrates study this law that takes notice even of mans long hair (as Paul saith) and he shall finde that drun∣kennesse, fornications, idlenesse, turbulences, oppressions, wrongs, slanders, thefts, Murthers, riots, Rantismes, Prophane-oaths, Cur∣sings, Tiplings, yea and propha∣nations of the first day, and imposing peremptorily a worship upon others, and blasphemy also
are all judged and condemned by the light of the very law of nature. And a Magistrate need not, yea he may not take cognisance (qua Magistrate) of any other law to judge and punish by. Hereby he becomes all things to all men for good, but convicts them of evils out of their own mouths, out of their owne consciences, if he himselfe be ingenious, compre∣hensive and blamelesse. But where can be found a Magistrate as yet that doth not himselfe transgresse in many things, even the law of nature? Now when Ministers (as spirituall men) take this naturall law into their hands, they are truely Antichrist, and deale with wrong weapons, (for the spirituall armour on the right and left hand is sufficient for them in God) so when the Ma∣gistrate
so presumes on spiritual to drive on and impose as a Ma∣gistrate his judgement of religi∣on upon others consciences (though as a Christian he may do it and ought to the uttermost) he also fights against Christ and inter∣meddles in that which belongs not to him (as Magistrate) to his danger or ruine. 9. Now though there be six sorts of Magistrates (according to Isaiah the Prophet) in the world. The golden Magistrate, the silver, the brazen, the iron, the wooden, and the stony Magistrate, (and also lawful for a man sent of God to tell the Magistrate his condition, as also for him to deale with such a man againe in love with serious∣nesse, and as men and brethren not incroaching, but speaking to the mans conscience) so let both en∣deavour
in the faith and love of Christ, to get out of the iron, or wooden, or stony state, to that which is more excellent in their generation. But still bear in mind, that untill both these act distinctly and apart in their proper sphears, & well acknowledge that each hath taske enough imposed on him by his owne proper law, there shall (I say againe there may) be no true lasting settlement in any nation of the world. For while the State boweth to the Church (so called) or the Church (representative) to curry favour with the state in flattery and much hypocrisie, the family of the whole earth will be tossed as a ship in a tempest. Not that the one is to be superiour to the other, but both are good in the sight of God as far as they keep their place, and well use their
talents. Wherefore O ye Magi∣strates, Ministers and people (as yee love your soules, and peace with truth and righteousnesse) lay this one distinction to heart, that you may no further feel yoaks of miseries upon your necks, nor confusions, differences, desolations & calamities; for no peace everla∣sting is there, til yee come to the bot∣tome of peace in God the root of all. Study therefore your selves, and how that Christ is in you, unlesse ye be reprobates; a light of Heaven that sheweth man what is good. Hee doth not say that a Magi∣strate should forbeare to take his liberty (as a knowing Christian man, as before asserted) to con∣vince mens consciences, to promote and zealously promulgate the truth as far as he knowes it by the force of the spirit of the holy Scriptures,
and by that only. This he must doe if he be a Sanctified one (as a Saint) but as a Magistrate he must act only by that law that accuseth man of his evill, and commendeth him for good, or may and should convince him in his owne cogi∣tations. Again therefore I say, let Magistrates, as men, study the law of men, and fulfill it too, and they shall be blessed in their work. 10. Also beyond and besides this, many thousands cry out that the Christians are divided among themselves more then the Turks, Indians or Jewes. The Christe∣ned Papists are almost in three hundred pieces in their opinions amongst their learned; The com∣mon Catholique Protestant (whose Religion is to run far enough from Papistry in some par∣ticular Articles) is all to shivers in
his own Episcopal reformed do∣ctrine (as he calls it) government and discipline (as abundantly it appears in the Nations.) Also the Reformers of these Reforma∣does are scorned and laughed at by men that are called learned, as meer fools both in naturals and spirituals. Enquire and finde where is there any sort of people that are not more or lesse to flitters among themselves; if their secret discourses and lives were manife∣sted? I could mention many names, persons, opinions, Churches, interests, parties, engagements, and particular books, treatises and con∣templations of men mixed in self; but I forbear. I feel and find al∣most every one hath bad thoughts of some evil in his Neighbour, and is gnawing some bone or o∣ther in his reserved thoughts. None
of all these Sects and factions in Christendome doth good, all, and alwaies, no not one. Therefore should all their mouths be stopped before the face of the Throne of God, and their lips also stayed from uttering words against o∣thers. But every man (excepting a few) forgets the great mountain of his own fins that is alwaies be∣fore the door as the dunghil of his own house, and (as before is said) almost every childling of Adam would be pulling out either the mote or eye of his brother; many wise men are yet to learn to reconcile these differences, nei∣ther know they much of the deep ground, nor yet the end; for many study the middles in the Alpha∣bet, but the Alpha and Omega is hid from their eyes.
11. Many of them also that are called Preachers of the Gos∣pel, and Ministers of Christ, that should be peace makers, (men comprehending all things in Christ) and in the true wisedome should come to the people, as the woman at Abel came to Joab Captain of Davids Hoast, and so end all the matter of stir and strife, (and nor be behind a woman that composod all differences at Abel) Many (I say) of these Preachers rather kindle a blind and an evill fire; they speak evil of what they know not, busie their brains to build high Towers in Babel, envenome and exasperate one par∣ty against another under pretence of zeale for Christ, and bring up∣on themselves a swift witnesse, a heavy judgement at the day of God, when all the blood of such
as they packed on to wars and slaughters, or evill-speakings, shall stare them in the face, and make them then starers also. Their ex∣cuse then (which will not serve) will be, Lord, I thought I con∣tended for thy truth, and for a right Religion, as much as against Errours, Heresies, and Atheism and oppressions of Adams chil∣dren. But what will the Judge say? O thou blind guide, thou hast led the poor eternal people in the dark, and hast made them leap out of this world they knew not whither. Thou mightest have known that I loved peace, pati∣ence and overcoming all evill by love; but when the Bible and my Spirit commanded love, peace, si∣lence, and consideration; ye were all for war, noise, turbulency, and humoursome contrivances; ye cal∣led
light darknesse and darknesse light. Now therefore friends be ye all muzled by your own con∣sciences before ye be cast into ou∣ter darknesse, for ye have not on the wedding garment of special fellowship with the true Bride∣groom in love unto him, and to his pure Spouse, to an abhorring of selfe. And thus when they are first thrust out of the Bridegrooms inner chamber (where the light and warmth is) they shall be bound hand and foot, and sit without at the threshold in the outward form of the house, where will be weeping for things past (past beyond remedy) and gna∣shing of teeth for very anger and coldnesse in Religion. Wherefore O ye Preachers (or Priests that know not the anointing, the Christ) be warned, be convinced that ye
are very unlike the Bishops men∣tion'd in Timothy; take not upon you the trade of hypocrisie, nor the burden of the soules of others. The guilt of your owne secret pranks and publick sins is burden enough, and more then ye can bear. See to the saving of your own poor souls first before the face of the burning and living spirit of God, and leave off a while stu∣dying of Brain-sermons for others, when as your selves are to be cast away. 12. Few clear visions are there in the Countries and Nations, but Teachings and Preachments seem mixed and disturbed for the present, so that few can say (if a∣ny aright) Lo here, or lo there, in publique or in private, in this o∣pinion, or in that, in this Parish, or in that Church. And the lear∣ned
(as they esteem themselves) as also the unlearned, cannot (to this hour) attain to the unclasp∣ing and reading of the Book of the invisible God. What shall poor soules doe before their can∣dles be quite out, they being in great streights, divisions, and dif∣ficulties? O ye precious immor∣tal soules, do not sleep any longer; let not your minds grow dull and heavy as ye look upon eternity. Whatsoever darkeneth you, is of the Devil and self; examine your hearts often. Dwell not abroad. Be not as the harlot, whose feet cannot be kept within her owne doores (being she is a stranger at home, and overmuch acquainted abroad in the streets of deceit;) a wandring mind every one hath in heart by nature. Make haste to gather quickly together all the
thoughts that are to goe with you out of this life (for when a body falls as a leafe to the grave, the thoughts of the heart are the in∣timate fruits thereof.) Notice take of your light and of your practice. Compare both together, how much knowledge thou hast, or what light hast thou within thee? How far followest thou thy conscience? Wherein murderest thou the true light of the righteous One within thee? How often dost thou any thing doubtingly, thy inward principles grumbling at thy allowance of evill thoughts, and also at thy sloathful perfor∣mance of good? How oft dost thou condemn, and sharply judge in others, that which thou dost se∣cretly and silkenly allow in pri∣vate practice thy selfe? What canst thou say thou hast done
wherof thou needest not to repent before the Throne of Christ, and the face of the seven Spirits of the immortal impartial God? How oft hast thou with thy owne thoughts made thy selfe drunk, not knowing the sobriety of God, and so hast been passionate, and in thy vain mind been censuring things and persons, opinions and Churches, when at that instant the assembly of thy own wicked thoughts, and the Church within thy own breast, and multitudes of imaginations were all out of or∣der? How oft also hast thou li∣mitted the eternal and holy one of Israel to thy own thoughts and at∣tainments of a light? How fre∣quently hast thou done, spoken, or thought that which thou know∣est was not for good to thy spirit, nor others, but probably for hurt
and slaughter to thy poore soul? How much time dost thou spend in vaine, which thou mightest bestow on other things? How many affe∣ctions dost thou scatter upon the creatures, which to gather up a∣gain will be a great taske at the houre of death? There is no hea∣ven or happinesse but God; no way to God but Christ; no fel∣lowship with Christ but what is spiritual; no enjoying his spirit but within (in the heart within) no comfort within thee but of what within thee is within God also. Therefore thou poor wandring wailing soule, keep within, but believe not thy imaginations with∣in. Try the spirits; first try thy own thoughts; what is of love, lowlinesse, peace and purity is of God. Mock not thy soul, and be not deceived by others.
13. There must appear now in this last Nunc of dayes unheard-of motions, with words, works, & won∣ders beyond all former Presidents. The Antiquaries, and all that look back only to former Ages, wil say of these, This is new to us, away with it, not understanding that it is the old renewed with advan∣tage. Let such remember in their day, that as the great natural Cor∣poration of this whole world growes old, that it may be changed as a garment by the Creator that wore it (as his vesture of time) so also towards the end of dayes, the se∣cond Creation (which alwayes is within this world) shall appeare from within, and be furbished and made brighter. Then shall the Son of Man (who is the Son of God by the eternal nature) bring to death of a Consumption
the first Adam (that now is) who indeed was by a secondary nature, or kind of propagation, the Son of God. Consider and under∣stand, There are two Natures; the eternal, and after that the tempo∣ral; which temporary nature is again swallowed up by the Eter∣nal. In the Eternal, Christ was (and is) begotten as the first-born of every thing. In the temporal, was Adam made a center and com∣pendium of all Heaven and Earth. In the first is Election and Reje∣ction laid in the depths of God. In the second both doe appeare to the creatures sight, and therein he is active. Now when Eternity is brought forth in the fountain-heart of any child of Adam, then is time (as to that birth) swal∣lowed up. But divers boast here∣of in vain, who mind earthly or
firmamentall things; yea they are worse then mortal beasts, because they live below their created na∣ture, though they were made to rule over it. O ye off-spring of Adam, open your eyes, and see where you are: Ye marry Time, and trifle with Everlastingnesse; ye study to be somwhat for a time, and cannot stoop to be nothing, that ye may comfortably lodge in Eternity. But turne about and see how all under the Sun is vani∣ty and vexation, and how life is seated only in the Sun of Righte∣ousnesse. In his light we may find all old things passe away, and all things become new. And if ye are, or will indeed be in him (as Angels standing in the Sun) you will find the substance of your selves renewed in glory in this life. And then ye will clearly discerne
what Adam was, how he fell, and we in him, and what Christ was, is, and will be, and what the Saints were, are, and will be in him also. 14. The first Adam sinned, in him all fell; but all are not eter∣nally lost. The second Adam suf∣fered, in him all were raised, or made alive, as Paul saith, but all are not saved therefore. God elected some in the first, and reje∣cted others in the second. O the depth of the immense opera∣tions, or rather looks of the na∣ture of eternity! The Eagles of the heavenly rock are allowed to see more in the Sun of Righteous∣nesse then they may lawfully utter among men (as long as men con∣tinue dogs and swine.) But this is is safe and common, that God made Adam an upright man,
(changeable if himselfe pleased) but man found out innumerable inventions; the flame of Adams candle was wholly put out in Pa∣radise by the Fall, but some fire of that same candle still remain∣eth in the wick unextinguished, capable of flaming again by a new birth in this life (and such the devils and damned souls have not, for they are passed out of time and life) yet such is that fire in a natural man, that it cannot re-kindle (nor the spirit of the mind (and understanding which is darkened) be renewed, with∣out the inspiration of the Al∣mighty upon that spirit or candle in Man (which Elihu and Solo∣mon mention.) And that spirit of life (in his sevenfold breathings) floweth with force on what spirits he listeth; and yet its gale from
heaven is upon all spirits more or lesse in this life. He that yield∣eth to Gods wind, is renewed; the other shuts it out of himselfe by his own wilfulnesse or negli∣gence. O ye Freewillers, and ye Anti-freewillers (so called) look into that glasse, cease from end∣lesse disputes and vain janglings. Use to the uttermost the will and power God giveth you in time; for mans spirit or will in this life remaineth so proxime and neighbouring to the essence and nature of God (as Princes before the Monarch) that a free choice is left him, but such a one as is worse then nothing, if the eter∣nal spirit of grace overshadow him not▪ for it is not of him that willeth or runneth, but of God that holdeth the scales and ballance in his mighty hand, and
weigheth the spirits, and in man preponderateth as he pleaseth. The soules eternal estate is at his beck: Feare him therefore, and please him, as far as by him thou art enabled (which as yet thou mayst see thou hast neglected;) but in so doing thou shalt know the mystery of his Will in thy own selfe; otherwise thou shalt reprobate, reject, or neglect thy own soul and life for ever. 15. The only way to inward order, is to follow the uttermost light God hath given man of his will; and he that will doe his Will, shall know of the Doctrine. This spiritual regularity shall al∣so lead to the outward, and set Adams posterity in their due pla∣ces. Now as I have spoken for a righteous impartial Magistrate (who is the image of God the fa∣ther)
so I plead in God for a right Minister of the Gospel (who is also the image of Christ the Son) loving, knowing, condiscending, pure, wise, deep, diligent, wea∣ned, trained, tryed, tempted, and watered every moment, and such as have by Christs order the van∣guard in knowledge, humblenesse, and power. Such Ministers, Pa∣stors, Elders, and Teachers as these are such as the Son of God and his Apostles owned, and will confesse before the father, as co-workers (not against Christ, but for him, at least as willing Nethi∣nims, and hewers of wood, and drawers of water, and the true Preacher is well content with the lowest office in Christ.) Such as turne many to righteousnesse and obedience of the just in their hearts (not to a private lane of
mans opinion) they shall shine for ever and ever, as the stars of God in the invisible world. Now ye may know such Teachers as these by this; they are like Christ, they doe what they teach, and teach what Christ doth in them. They are Innocents, they hurt none by word, by example, or by mental influence. They seat not them∣selves in this world in Palaces, Gardens, Pleasures, Sports, Pre∣ferments, and such vanitie of va∣nities; for the true Preacher fin∣deth no time to be trifled away in this life, because he beholdeth and eyeth the pleasures at Gods right hand, and so forgetteth these delights of goats on his left hand. Such Shepherds of the sheep overlook great livings on earth, and are ravished with the living immortal in God. Now such as
approve themselves thus the ser∣vants of the living God, receive them, and scorn them not, though they use not your tone, words, and gesture; for who art thou that wilt bear but with one branch on one tree? Thou spirit, proud spirit, ignorantly boasting of thy light, must one tree eternally bear but one branch, one leaf one ap∣ple? Silence thou proud flesh, that wouldst silence all flesh but thy own, and seek not to stop the mouth of truth, though an Asse speak it. But for the Scribes and Pharisees, that love in their hearts the highest seats (which are not alwayes counted the pul∣pits) in the Synagogues, they love to judge all, and be judged of none, that's the high Pew. In that judgement the spirit of truth fitteth as Judge, but not any o∣ther
forerunner; nor did John Baptist, nor John Evangelist dare sit in that high seat in the Chri∣stian Synagogue, yet in them he that sits on the circle of the earth is sternman there. Now all such Priests, all such Ministers, Bishops, Pastors, Rulers, and Administra∣tors, as are proud covetous, dor∣mous, lustful men pleasers, false accusers, living-lovers, belly-grooms, time vain spenders, idle loytering recreators, State-contri∣ving Foxes, unjust wrangling, suing neighbours, and the like; such as these (whoever they be) are all dogs barking, and swine tumbling themselves in the dirt; how then can they save them that hear them? A whip of Gods ma∣king shall drive all these dogs out of the Church. They are the sons of Eli, and of Balaam; of Aaron,
and of Levi in their wickedness: These follow not the good, but the evill of their Predecessors, therefore shall they wither and suddenly come to nothing. Note also, that so long as any conti∣nueth and abideth in that most excellent spirit of God, so long he is a Minister of Christ in God, and no longer; for who is he that is a Minister of Christ to day, may not speak for Antichrist to mor∣row? As Peter spake from heaven and from hell too in the same houre, saying, Lord, thou art the Son of the living God, but Ma∣ster spare thy selfe. Now so long as the two natures are competi∣tors within man, so long he shall and must necessarily be in doubts. But when the new nature is aloft and uppermost, and as long as it keeps under the vain spirit, so long
he hath joy and assurance, and no longer; for to be spiritually min∣ded is life and peace. Therefore the Lord Christ doth call and cry to all Preachers and hearers, Give me to drink that which is pure, without the mixture of your spi∣rits with it, even such as hath no selfe in it, such will doe good. I will blesse it to others. That is the true Physick to poore soules. Give them that, and they shall be well. But if ye administer to them mixed teachings, and their soules die upon it, who shall an∣swer think ye? O ye publick Speakers, look to your mixtures; for a pure River of God is come out of Sion; in it shall all the beasts of the field of God drink up the water of life, and leave off the broken cisternes and disturbed pooles that have much mud and
mire in them. The true Ministers are followers of Christ (that is, they are like him) and the false are enemies to the crosse of Christ that destroyeth all sin and vani∣ty. Down with all that nourish wickednesse, and up with Christ in the rest: I say up with Christ in them, rather then with them to honours in this life, lest pride blossome again, and self-conceit bud forth. These last daies will not long suffer any proud sprigs on the trees; for now the Tem∣ple of God in Heaven is about to open, and there are voices, thun∣drings, earthquakes, lightnings, and great haile upon that evil ge∣neration of self-seeking Christi∣ans. O that we had hearts to stand out of the way of Gods ar∣rowes, out of the way of sin and hypocrisie! then should not the
soul feel within it that plague here mention'd without it. 16. The time runneth out, and is great and marveilous; the grave gapeth for man, let not man then gape also after the dunghill of this world. Hunger after Heaven, and that is to say, long after the Lord Jesus. If thou didst expect to find in this Chapter matters of know∣ledge, eloquence with acutenesse, thou hast deceived thy selfe. But here is mourning, warning, and woe to the world, and also dire∣ctions to them that understand; and they that seek the Lord shall understand all things. None of the wicked perceive it, but the wise shall understand, saith Da∣niel and Solomon. This Genera∣tion is under the sixth Trumpet of God, and the fire, smoke, and
brimstone are felt & smelt in souls and Nations eminently. Now the se∣ven Thunders utters their voices in some, and make mortal men trem∣ble at the thoughts of the Great day. The next Trumpet must sound, and then will be the finishing of the mystery of Gods Being and Will. Now is the houre, the day, the moneth, and the yeare for thee to beg of God, and to eat the little little book which was in Gods hand, and is in the hand of his Angel. The knowledge thereof shall be as honey in the mouth of thy mind; but when that Lords candle shall search the inward parts of thy belly, and discover thy great corruption, it shall put thee in bitter paine (as of a wo∣man in travaile) And that voice of the Lord shall make thy kind
to calve, and cause thee to cast off thy lust as an untimely fruit. Howbeit, cease not O man to beg of God that thou mayst swallow down that book; for untill then thy soule shall not rest indeed, nor shall the Nations and Chur∣ches be quiet untill that Book be known. That Book is in and through the Bible, the Creation, and the heart of man, and yet properly it is either of the three. It is the Hidden word, and yet revealed counsel of God in him∣selfe, and in his spirit in the chil∣dren of the new birth. The name of this Book is Nothingnesse be∣fore the creature, and All things before the Throne of God. When thou art nothing to thy self, then shalt thou read it, and not before. No wit or learning of man are sufficient spectacles; they are lof∣ting
up over the lines of this Book. But in selfe denial and yielding to Gods will in thee, thou shalt become a Scribe and Schollar of the Kingdome of Heaven, and no other way. Forget not this verse of the Chapter sent to thee and to the world. 17. One Verse more, and then no more of this present Testimo∣ny. The houre is in sight, when time shall expire and be no more; when day and night, heat and cold, summer and winter, seed∣time and harvest, shall no more for ever take their Turnes. And whereas now day and night, joy and sorrow passe over us (grief in the evening, comfort in the morning) goe on friend a little, and it will become with thee all
day for ever, or all night, with∣out mixture of the comforts of nature (as the eternal day or night prevaileth in the spirit.) Therefore be entreated againe to strive to spend thy short time a∣right, and one quarter of an hour in four and twenty at least to be∣gin to mind Eternity whither thou goest. If thou sayest, That is a small time (as indeed it is) see first whether in that quarter of an houre thy thoughts will not steal away to some creature or other, and to the things of time, of va∣nity, and of vexation. And know, that while thou livest in the sieve of vanity (which is the course of nature in thy own will) it is im∣possible for thee to have a steady mind to look on Eternity. And miserable art thou whilst thou li∣vest
a cripple at Bethesda in the five gates of the sensual life, till Jesus bid thee take up thy bed and walk. And this he doth when he makes thy will to cease, thy thoughts to stop, thy working fan∣cy to sink, thy apprehensions to be darkened in dimnesse of an∣guish, thy pleasures to wither, thy righteousnesse to putrive, and thy self-hood to stoop, and yield, and die, as Christ Jesus did. This is best effected by the power of his love in thy heart, which love is light and life to thy spirit, but death to thy flesh. When I speak to thee (honest Reader) I speak to my selfe also herein; for I have learnt that sharp expressions to o∣thers, are as weights of lead to our selves, if we be guilty of the same evils: But when we testifie
with truth, mildnesse, and earnest∣nesse, we shall be accepted of the Lord, however men censure us as they please. This I leave with thee in perfect love, and thee also with that God who will shortly speak forth his own mind with Power, Authority, and great Glory to the whole World. Peace be unto thee. Amen. N. D. FINIS.
These Books are lately Printed, and sold by T. Brewster at the three Bibles neer the West end of Pauls. THE retired mans Meditati∣ons, or the Mystery and Pow∣er of Godliness, &c. by Henry Vane, Knight. A brief History containing most of those notable Occurrences and Revolutions that happened in those late Contests betwixt King and Parliament; being a short mention of things from 1637. to the Kings death 1648. Written by Thomas May Esquire. The Excellence of a free State,
or the Right Constitutions of a Commonwealth. Objections an∣swered, together with some Rules of Policie and Errors in Govern∣ments, as laid down by Machavel and others. A Confession of Faith of seve∣ral Churches of Christ in the We∣sterne Counties, viz. Somerset, Wilts, Devon, Glocester, and Dorset, (signed by T. Coller, and others. A Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel, and an inquire Christian, about the work of God upon the Soule, the Authority of the Scriptures, the Principles of the Quakers, and the work of the present Generation: By Tho: Col∣ler. Lazarus and his Sisters discourse of Paradise; or a Conference a∣bout the excellent things of the other world.
A Discourse betwixt 3 Neigh∣bours about the present Govern∣ment, viz. Goodman past, Good∣man present, and Goodman fu∣ture. A Dialogue between 3 Bords in Welsh, with other Welsh things.
