E1226 669.f.12[45] 99869590 162838
THE ANSVVER OF The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, to the Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of SUSSEX. Die veneris 9. Junii, 1648. THe Lords have commanded me to return thankes to the County of Sussex for the good affections which they have expressed to the Parliament and Kingdom, and they take notice, and are well satisfied, with the complyance of that County to the directions of Parliament, in the way of the delivery of this their Petition. They have already made some proceedings▪ which they hope may bring his Majesty to a safe Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament, for the set∣ling of a secure and well-grounded Peace, the which they will prosecute with all care and diligence. And they desire you to be assured, that they will use their ut∣most endeavours, that our sad differences and divisions may be speedily and happi∣ly composed; that so the Laws and Fundamentall Constitutions of this Kingdome may have their free course and full vigour: Neither will they be wanting to con∣tribute their utmost help for the freeing that County and the whole Kingdom from all those Taxes and Impositions, that the necessity of the late Wars have occasio∣ned, as soon as the safety of the Kingdome shall permit. Iohn Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Die veneris 9. Junii, 1648. THe House being informed that divers. Gentlemen of the County of Sussex were at the dore, they were called in, and Sir William Culpepper Barronet, pre∣sented a Petition in the name of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Commonalty of the said County; and after they were withdrawn, the Petition entituled The hum∣ble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of Sussex, was read. The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the command of the House, gave them this Answer. Gentlemen, This House takes notice, and approves of the Petitioners conformi∣ty to their Declaration, in the peaceable manner of their addresse, and have under consideration such means as are most conduceable to the speedy settlement of the peace of the Kingdome, and easing the Burdens of the People, and had (by Gods as∣sistance) made a further progresse therein, had not some late Tumults and Com∣motions unhappily interrupted their proceedings. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.
