E1413 669.f.5[124] 99870311 160836
Tudor rose royal blazon or coat of arms fleur-de-lys harp A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, For the defence and preservation of Hertfordshire, and other places and Counties adjoyning from the barbarous cruelties of Papists and other il-affected persons who being in actuall War against the whole Kingdome, have now drawn their Forces to Brill in the County of Buckingham, and threaten to over-run all places thereabouts. WHereas great forces of Papists, and other ill affected persons are now in actuall War against the King, the Parliament, and the whole Kingdome; and part of those Forces being now drawn to Brill in the County of Buckingham, and other places adjoyning, have according to their usuage, plundered, robbed, pillaged and murthered divers good Protestants thereabouts; and threaten to march into the County of Hertford, and other Counties that way, there to commit the like outrages, and barbarous cruelties, as they have done in places where they have formerly been. The Lords and Commons in Parliament, being most desirous to prevent these mi∣series, and to suppresse the Authors of them; For the better effecting thereof, do hereby desire all well affected persons of the County of Hertford, and other Counties and pla∣ces adjoyning, forthwith to raise all such Forces of Horse, and Foot, as they can make; and to march with them to Alesbury in the County of Buckingham, or to such other place as they shall be directed by order from hoth Houses of Parliament, or from the Earle of Essex Lord generall, and to joyn with, and assist the Forces raised by authority of Par∣liament, for the defence of themselves, their families, and estates, and the true Prote∣stant Religion, and for the suppressing and punishing those Forces at Brill, and all other their adherents, notorious enemies to the King, and Kingdome; And such wel affected persons as the County of Hertford, or any other Counties, or places whatsoever, that shall joyn with, and assist the Forces raised by Authority of Parliament, for the purpo∣ses above mentioned, shall therein doe a very acceptable service to the Common∣wealth, and shal be assisted and protected by the power and authority of Parliament. Die Lunae, 2 Januar. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith printed and published. I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. London, Printed for J. Wright in the Old-baily. 1642.
