E1898 669.f.9[4] 99870821 161102
official insignia AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For prevention of the Adiournment of the Courts of Iustice, without Consent of both Houses of Parliament. THe Lords and Commons taking into their serious consideration the great inconveni∣ence that hath come to his Majesties Subjects by the late frequent adjournment of the Courts of Iustice, and by Spies resorting to the Cities of London and Westmin∣ster under pretence thereof; for the prevention of the same for the future, doe hereby Order and Ordaine, That in case any person or persons shall at any time hereafter de∣liver, or cause to be delivered to any of the Iudges of any of His Majesties Courts to be held in Westminster, or to any of their Clerkes or Servants, or to any Officers of a∣ny the said respective Courts, or any others, to be delivered to any the said Iudges, a∣ny Writ, Proclamation, or other Thing whatsoever, sealed with any great Seale, other then the great Seale of England now attending the Parliament by Ordinance of both Houses, all and every such person and persons shall be proceeded against by Law-Martiall as Spies; and the Lord Generall is hereby desi∣red forthwith to proceed against every such person accordingly. And it is further Ordered and Ordained, That none of the said Iudges, nor their Clerkes, Servants, or any Officer or Officers of the respective Courts aforesaid, shall presume to Receive, View, or any wayes meddle with any Writ or Proclamation sealed with any great Seale, without first acquainting the Speakers of the two Houses therewith, and receiving and pursuing the directions to be given thereupon from both Houses of Parliament, upon pain of Imprisonment of their persons, Sequestration of their Estates, and such further punishment as shall be thought meet by both Houses of Parliament, And that no Iudge, Officer, or other person whatsoever, presume to carry, or cause to be carried, any Records, Writings, or other Memorialls from any the Courts at Westminster, or other places in or about the Cities of London or Westminster unto the City of Oxford, or other place where the Kings forces are, under paine of incurring such, or the like Penalties as aforesaid. Die Martis 30. April▪ 1644. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this Ordinance shall be reprinted and set up upon Posts in Westminster-Hall and other publique places in and about the Cities of London and Westminster. Io. Browne Cler. Parliament. Imprinted at London for Iohn Wright, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Old Baylie, 1644.
