E2283 669.f.9[37] R2248C 99870882 161135
RULES AND INSTRVCTIONS To the Muster-masters of the Army. THat the Commissaries of the Musters, doe attend the Commander in chiefe, for his Warrant to Muster, Hee being to Assigne the Time, and Place; And that the whole Army be Mustered in one day (if possible) and the Officers and Souldiers are hereby required to appeare in their Armes. 2. That the Commissary at every muster, call over each Company, or Troope, by the Rolls of the former Muster, and note how many Officers or Souldiers be dead, absent, or Recruited since the last Muster, and betwixt every Muster, view the persons Recruited, before he enter, and be admitted into the new List; After which, at every Muster, the Commissary is to certifie upon the Roll, the day where∣on such Recruits were entred to the Treasurer of the Army, Who is hereby required to pay those Re∣cruits, according to the time they have beene upon Duty, for no longer time then from their entertain∣ment into the service. 3. That Musters be made once a moneth at the least, before Payments be made, if it may bee done without prejudice to the Designes of the Army, And that the Muster-masters of Horse, and Foote, at the request of the Commissioners, or any of them, (or in default thereof, such persons as the Commissioners shall appoint) shall cause any particular Regiment, Troope, or Company, the Trayne, or any part thereof, to be viewed, and Mustered, at such time, and place, as the Commissioners by consent of the Commander in chiefe, shall thinke most convenient: And the Commissaries of the Musters, and their Deputies, are to admit no Souldier upon the Muster, but such as shall appeare upon the Place, before the beginning of our Generall Muster, in case hee be absent through his owne neg∣lect, or not attested for, in such manner as is hereafter expressed, viz. That the Physitian, the Apothecary of the Army, and the Chirurgion of the Regiment, or Traine, or any one of them, doe give Attestation of all such sick, or wounded Souldiers as lye within the Quarters of the Army, The Minister and Constable of the Parish for such as are sick, woun∣ded, or absent upon Service, without the Quarters▪ which absent Souldiers from their Quarters, the Commissaries of the Musters shall continue in their Rolls, and certifie them every Muster to the Treasurer, and the Treasurer to reserve their severall Payes, till such time as the parties them∣selves returne to the Army, or otherwise can receive their owne Money, in such a way as (upon Certificate thereof made) the Commander in chiefe shall approve of; The Muster-masters, are hereby Commanded, that the Attestations after any Generall, or particular Muster be limited to the third day, and the Attestations to be certified under the hands of the persons Attesting upon the Roll of every Company, or Troope so Mustered; Or in some sheet fairly written, and annext to the said Roll. 4. That the Commissaries take care, that no Captaine, or other superiour Officer be absent from the Army without Lycence of the Comman∣der in chiefe, nor any other inferiour Officer or Souldier without Lycence of his Collonel or next Officer commanding the Regiment; Nor any Officer, Souldier, or person belonging to the Trayne, without Lycence of the Lievtenant Generall of the Ordnance, which Lycences, and every of them, are to expresse and Limit a reasonable time for the returne of such Officer or other persons (so Licenced) to the Army, and subscribed by the respective Officers Authorized as aforesaid▪ And after entred with the respective Muster-masters, who is hereby required, that every such Officer, Souldier, or other person as shall be so absent, or beyond the time allowed him, shall not passe the Muster during such absence, But shall Forfeit his pay, and be further punished at the discretion of the Commander in chiefe. 5. That every Captaine, Livetenant or Ensigne of every Troope, or Company, shall once in sixe daies, give notice in writing under one of their hands, to the respective Muster-Masters of the names, and surnames of every Officer, or Souldier of the Troope or Company that shall absent himselfe from his Colours for any time and how long, betweene Muster and Musters without such Attestation or Licence as aforesaid; And if upon due proofe of the Commissioners for the Army, it appeares that the Captain, Lievtenant, Ensigne, or Cornet, doe wilfully neglect or re∣fuse to Certifie such absent Officers or Souldiers within the time aforesaid, That then the Captain, Livetenant, Ensigne, or Cornet, shall each of them forfeit a dayes pay, to be charged out of their next pay; Which said forfeitures shall be disposed of by the Commissioners, and distribu∣ted by the Muster-Masters to the Inferiour Officers or Souldiers of such Troope or Company, or such other as shall give true Information of false Musters, Neglects, or absence as aforesaid. 6. That at every Muster, the Muster-Masters shall take speciall notice of defective Horse and Armes, and to represent them duly to the Com∣missioners aforesaid, who are hereby authorised to dispose of such unserviceable Horses, and unfixed Armes for the best advantage of the publique service. 7. That every Captain, Captain Livetenant, Cornet, and other Officers of Horse, shall Muster such spare led Horses as are allowed him upon the Lyst, And no Officer shall have pay for any more spare or led Horses then he shall Master from time to time over and besides his Troope, nor any Trooper that is unmounted at any Muster, shall be allowed more then twelve pence per diem for so long time as hee remaines unmounted. 8. That the Muster-Master, nor any of his Deputies, or Agents imployed under him, shall directly, or indirectly take any Reward or Gratuity for Mustering or making up of the Rolls of the Muster, upon paine of severe punishment to be inflicted by Parliament or by a Coun∣cell of Warre. All which Rules and Instructions the Muster-Masters are enjoyned to observe, and the Commissioners for the Army are hereby authorised and required to Supervise, and to the uttermost of their abilities see performed. Io: Browne Cleric. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for Edward Husband. 1645.
