E2745 669.f.3[44] 99868635 160602
A TRUE AND EXACT List of those persons nominated and recommended by the House of Commons to his MAJESTIE, As persons fit to be entrusted with the Militia of the Kingdome: wherein they desire the Concurrence of the House of Peeres. Feb. 12. 1641. Published to prevent the printing of false Copies. Barkeshire—Earle of Holland. Bedfordshire—Earle of Bolingbrooke. Buckinghamshire—Lord Paget. Cambridge shire and the Isle of Ely—Lord North. Cheshire, & the Coūty & City of Chester Lord Strange: Cornwall—Lord Roberts. Cumberland—Lord Gray of Wark. Derby—Earle of Rutland. Devonshire, and of the County and City of Exon—Earle of Bed. Dorsetshire, and the County of the Towne of Poole—Earle of Salisbury. For the Isle of Purbecke Com. Dorset Sir Iohn Bankes Knight, Lord chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, and Constable of Corffe Castle. Durham—Sir Henry Vane the elder. Essex—Earle of Warwicke Gloucestershire, and of the County and City of Gloucester—Lord Chandois. Hampshire, and of the Towne and County of Southampton, and of the Earle of Penbroke. Isle of Wight— Hertfordshire—Earle of Salisbury. Herefordshire—Lord Dacres. Huntingtonshire—Lord Mandevile. Kent, and the City and County of Canterbury—Earle of Leicester. Com. Lancaster—Lord Wharton. Leicestor—Earle of Stamford. Middlesex—Earle of Holland. Com. Northampton—Lord Spencer. Nottingham, and of the Towne and County of Nottingham—Earle of Clare. Northumberland, and of the Towne and County of Newcastle, and of the Towne of Barwicke—Earle of Northumberland. Norffolke, and of the County and Ci∣ty of Norwich—Earle of Warwicke. Oxfordshire—Lord Viscount Say and Seale. Rutland—Earle of Exon. Salop—Lord Littleton, Lo. Keeper of the great Seale of England. Somerset—Marquis Hortford. That the Lieutenant of the County of Worcester shall be nominated before Somerset. Staffordsh. and of the County of the City of Leichfield—Earle of Essex. Suffolke—Earle of Suffolke. Surrey—Earle of Nottingham: Sussex—Earle of Northumberland. Warwicke, and of the County of the City of Coventry.—Lord Brook. Westmerland—Earle of Cumberland. Wiltes—Earle of Pembroke. Wigorn, and of the County of the City of Worcester—Lord Edward Howard of Eserig. For the County and City of Bristoll—Master Denzill Hollis. Yorkshire, and of the County of the City of York, and of the County of the Town of Kingstone on Hul Earle of Essex. Of the parts of Restaven and Hol∣land, and the County of the City of Lincoln—Earle of Lincolne. For the parts of Lindesay, in the County of Holland—Lord Willoughby of Parham. Monmouth—Lord Philip Herbert. Isle of Anglesey—Earle of Northumberland. Brecnock—Lord Philip herbert. Cardigan—Earle of Carbery. Carmarthen, and Carmarthen Town, Earle of Carbery, Carnarvan—Earle of Pembroke. Denbigh—Lord Fielding. Flintshire—Lord Fielding. Clamorgan—Lord Philip Herbert. Montgomery—Earle of Essex. Merioneth—Earle of Pembroke. Pembroke, and the Town of Raver∣ford West—Earle of Northumberland. Radnor—Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England. That for the levying, ordering, and exercising the Militia of the Citie of London, power is given unto Sir Iohn Gaire, Sir Iacob Garret, Knights and Aldermen, Thomas Atkin Alderman, Sir Iohn Wollistone Knight and Alderman, Iohn War∣ner Alderman, and Iohn Towse Alderman, Serjeant Major Generall Skippon, or any three or more of them, Randolph Manwaring, William Gibs, Iohn Fowke, Iames Bunce, Francis Peck, Samuel Warner, Iames Russell, Nathaniel Wright, Wil∣liam Barkley, Alexander Norminghton, Stephen Estweek, Owen Rowe, Citizens of London, or any six or more of them. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Franke, and are to be sold at his Shop next doore to the Kings head in Fleetstreet. 1641.
