E3734A R225947 99895651 153204
EXAMPLES FOR LONDON Or a Paralell betweene the evill-af∣fected Malignants of this City, and the seditious Jewes in Jerusalem. Also Declaring the miserable estate of this City if this warre should continue, there being so many potent Enemies within the Confines of the said Citie, which seeke to destroy the same. printer's or publisher's device London Printed, for Henry Hatton 1642.
Examples for LONDON SEverall sayings of Gods chosen servants in whom the Holy Ghoast it selfe speaketh, are worthy perpetual remembrance, and if they be not re∣garded, the godly are taken away to their rest and joy, and then fol∣loweth a plague unto ye people, the miseries and calamities that before was threatned by the mouthes of those his messengers, so after the death of St. mbrôse, followed the vastiga∣tion of Italy, after the death of St. Augustine, the Vandals entered Affricke, and then sprung up the Ari∣an-Herisie after the death of Iohannes Huz, the fierce Battels of Bohemia, after the death of Martin Luther what terrible troubles and cruell callamities hapened who in his life time amongst all other of his Workes left in memoriall This notable pophesie, that these 3. things would be the destruction of Christian religion.
The first is forgetfullnesse of benefits that we reseved at Gods hands by the Gospell, and unthankfullnesse for the same. The second is Carelessnesse. The third, that we lke better of the worlds wisdome, then of Godly wisdome, within the compasse of our foolish braines we would Comprehend the Reason, Rule, Order, and end, of every thing, ungodly counsell is aprop and stay unto our determinations, we depend not upon the Lordes providence we aske not counsell at the mouth of the Lord, if the Lord guide not the world after our owne will we like no longer to be governed by him, we forsake the Lord, we fly straight to flesh and blood, the prosperity of the world is our delight, and therefore we say simply as did the prophet Ieremiah we remember what we have done and lived merrely by it, when we sa∣craficed to the queene of heven, now we live in lack and fele much woe, even so say we, if we should live ac∣cording to the Gospell we should leave of our crafty cuning in getting, and perchance become beggers, wee should leave our fase swearing, and not sell our wares. We should leave our accesse in vanity, which is our cheife delight. We should labour ernestly and leave our slloathful rest. We should give to those that want and have no cer∣tainety our serves. But still waight untill the Lord shall give us more Flesh and blood is our delighr the glory of the world is our joye, and this is contrary thereunto. Thus we forsake the Lord, and cast of the yoake of of Christan profession, nay of Christian Religion, I may say, for we professe somewhat, but expresse nothing in our lives and conversations, but Envie, Hatred and Mallice, and all uncharitablenesse, we professe purity, but our hearts are fraught wirh Hipocrisy.
Tis horible to be feared, because of the ungodly, who for all they have so many labonrers from the Lord with his directions to teach the way to Heaven, who I am sure with earnest groanings, pray that his blest spirit would teach them what to spake, but they, by their neglect and slight regard, the nerears I do meane, for∣ces them often to prenounce this woe, to have the Kingdome of Heaven taken from us, to have the gra∣cious Gosspell the emmortali seed and spirituall foode of our soules taken quite a way from us, so long as I thinke on it, I feare and tremble to thinke how soone that terible hunger may come, for now us set on foot, then we shall go, rune, and seeke earnestly, and yet not finde the foode of our soules wherewith to be com¦forted: If we will fully forget Gods glory will he care for us. wherefore for Londons example, there was ne∣ver a godlier City on the earrn, then was Jerusalem, and yet when they refused to be Obedient unto the Lord, and begane to wax forgerfull of his great bene∣fits, when they left of to aske counsell of the Lord, and trusted to mans vaine strength, even then they were destroyed. Even then they were begirt with death and Desolation. Even then did all their Channells flowe with Blood. Her STREETS were filled with Scar∣let. Her precious palaces was filled with groanes and howlings. Her Temple Doores were blockt up with Priests, deckt in their Golden Coapes. Fired were their Barnes and Garners stuffed with Corne.
Their young Babes tossed upon their Enemies Speares, Balls of wildfire hurld upon their lofty spires prided with goulden weines, this City seated by the hand of Heaven, and fixt upon the Navell of the Earth, by her owne discention was thus destroyed, her Nobles for∣ced dayly to labour like the porest slaves, no more ac∣count there was then made of them, but thirty there was sould for one pore penny, the rest were forced to live in woe and want, pinched with pennury, oppressed with labor in most cruell boncage and perpetu slave∣ry. Oh London, take example, first by this glorious Ci∣ty Jerusalem, whose unnumbred Towers were built so nigh, that they seemed to touch, nay kisle the cloudes, and now all lies flat, and not one stone left standing upon another? Wilt thou not pitie Her. But to come neerer unto our selves, how gallant and glorious a City was Antwerpe of late dayes, how flou∣rished some part of Germany and Flanders, but when the voice of the Gospell is not obeyed, when the King∣dome of heaven is not sought first, and before all things when Gods mercy is despised, and his Gospell no more imtated, when the Spirit of the Creator is resisted and refused, then indeed we must needs looe for tat which Martin Luther, that chosen Testament of the Lord, foretold us, That the Gospell should be raslated from u, to some other Nation, or rater returned backe from us Gentills, unto the Iewes, from the new chosen refusers to the old chosen proffessors. It hath a hid and a most a darke mistery, that many that proffesse themselves to be Christians, yet deny the Sacrament of Baptisme, and some at all Isralits-and carnall Jewes, have erenestly desired e Benefit of the same doubtlesse it is true that Christ said, you shall not finish all the Cities of Iudab, untill the comming againe of the Son of man. Somwhat willbe to doe among them. God hath a worke that he will doe, he hath a remnant
that he will call home, whereof Pull speaketh saying blindnesse is partly hapned unto Jsraell untill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be accomplished, and so Jsraell shall be saved, hereof speaketh Hillarius all is not yet doneth Jsraell, after the fulnesse of the Gentiles is come , there is a remnant yet left in Jsrael that shall be gather∣ed unto the Lord. Our loosenesse of life is to any Christians conscience a terrible feare or rather ach part of any long continu∣ance of the gospell amongest us that we are so different in shew that it is hard to find many of one colour, of one Consent, or of one ike Dsposstion some are white, some are blacke, some are dunne, some ate blew, some are Yellowe, some are Red, but aboundance browne, some are spoted, but some unspotted. On the other side one wolfe is like another, seeking to deface Gods glory blot out his name, and let up whome you will, let God and Moses be forgotten in the Mount; al  will pluck of their special Iewis and ornament to ma e a molton Image, in this case helpe all you that are true protestants, lament all you good hristians, for reverent vse of his name, spare no labour, speake, sue, intreate, incourage, your Knights of the Sire, the Burgessecs of the parliament, the Clarkes of the Convocation shew your zalo what you may to move, to procure sonne Godly law whereby the customary evill use, vain aue of our sacred God, his most mighty name may be reformed. The force of Papistry, with all their wisdome and power they labour to beate downe our lacke of good Life is still the gretest losse, the strongest op, the unhappiest hinderance that now remaineth against the funesse and plentiousnesse of Gods Kingdome, whose Kingdome if we build not to the end, whose spirit if we resist and refuse as heretofore (a fruit of infidellity) we are quite given over, the devill shall every where
the terrour of Conscience appeare and shew himselfe unto us (which God avert) and London be thou war∣ned, oh thinke upon fernsalem, that was so faire, so beautious, and so populus, her severall Sects brought her to that confusion, which God defend but that thou shouldest live and flourish, and maintaine the Churches glory, and be so hed upon England, that the other Congregations in other Lands may confesse the to be no whit inferiour to any in the world, but rather a light and lanthorne unto the rest, and tread cowne them that seekes to raze out the. And last of all, to prompt the towards the imbrace∣ing of an unity (the onely meanes to obtaine a religi∣ous peace) thinke of the late flourishing estate of the Kingdome of Ireland, there thou mayst see as in a glasse the misery of Warre, the cosideration of which, I hope will prove a motive to repentance, and cause an union in Religion, and then we have no cause to feare but that God in his good time will give a period to all our feares, and rurne our mourning into a religious joy. FINIS
