E3949 E1902_2 R209968 99868812 170540
The Church-Sleeper AWAKENED, OR A DISCOURSE On Act. 20.9. being the Substance of two Sermons Composed and Preached at Corke in Ireland. By Joseph Eyres Master of Arts, and a Servant of God in the Gospel of his Son. . Mat. 26.40. LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Kings-Head in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1659.
To his much Honored and dearly beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of Cork, both Magistrates, and People; those especially that are his usual Hearers at Christ-Church: JOSEPH EYRES Dedicateth this insuing discourse, as an expression of his thankful∣ness for their owning of him in the worst Times. And wisheth in∣crease of grace here, and fulness of glory hereafter. Worthy and Christian Friends, TIme was when men of Anti-Magistratical, and Anti—Ministeriall
Principles were ve∣ry imposing, and imperious, being as sharp thorns in the tender eyes of those to whom set∣tlement and order in Church, and State were very dear: yet in Times of greatest Ataxie, Apostacy, Confusi∣on, the Lord-hath still had a remnant in this place, that have sighed in se∣cret for all the abo∣minations,
blasphe∣mies, and boisterous oppositions against the Truth that have been in the midst of us. Some of those melting mourners the Lord hath called home, and taken to himself, and for the briny brook, that they have drunk of in the way, hath given them to drink of the river of his pleasure. Others have lived to see better
dayes, and are not without some bud∣ding hopes that it shall at length go well with Sion, which they have performed before their choicest com∣forts, and their chiefest joy. O how welcome is that hand of hea∣ven that begins to lift up the poor out of the dust, and to wipe away the teares from the
swolne eyes, and blubber'd cheeks of the Daughters of Jerusalem, giving unto them beauty for ashes, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heavi∣ness! Your condition you looked upon as deplorably sad, whilest without power in your own hands to reform the abuses, and redress the evils you labou∣red
under. Provi∣dence hath resto∣red unto you your Charter, with your several Ornaments of honour, and Badges of authori∣ty, and hereby put you into a capaci∣ty of being Refor∣mers, Repairers of breaches, and Exe∣cutioners of justice; so that if you will but quit your selves like men, appear against the grow∣ing
and prevailing corruptions of the Times, and give a check to the inso∣lency of mens un∣ruly lusts, you may expect to be carri∣ed as on Eagles wings, to be pre∣served under the shadow of the mightiest grace, and to have the blessing of peace within your wals, and plenty within your pala∣ces.
Let not your present outward meanness in the world, and want of an incouraging Revenue to support your state, retard your motions, dis∣courage you in your duty, make you loth to inter∣meddle much in matters of Govern∣ment, and take you off from an Hero∣ick and Magnani∣mous managing of
that High Trust that is reposed in you. Do but lay out your selves wholly for God; be warm and vigo∣rous in the prose∣cution of those de∣signes that tend to his glory; execute justice impartial∣ly upon offending ones; that the mouth of iniquity may be stopped, the most daring transgressors daunted, and con∣strained
to hide themselves through fear and shame; and you shall find that the Lord will sweetly smile, and shine upon your Ta∣bernacles, 1 Sam. 2.30. and com∣passe you about with his loving kindness, as with a sheild. 2 Chron. 15.20. The Lord will honour those that honour him. The Lord will be with you, whilest you are with him. Besides,
I charitably hope, and am verily per∣swaded, did the State but hear of your renowned zeale, severe refor∣mation, and tho∣rough owning of the wayes of God, their hearts would be much drawn forth to mind your concernments, and to incourage you in the Lords work, by bestowing upon you some signal ex∣pression
of favour and respect; and the rather, because of your former, ne∣ver to be forgotten kindness in seaso∣nably opening your gates to receive and releive their Army harassed and worn out with wants and weakness. A few words of wholsome advice I shall intreat you candidly to inter∣pret and accept.
You who are now incorporated into a Civil Society, la∣bour to be incor∣porated into Christ, and to be free De∣nisons of the new Jerusalem that is a∣bove. John 8.36. If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. Purge your own Hearts, and reform your own Families, and hereby give a good example unto others to do the
like. Let your Houses be little Churches, in which God shall be duly worshipped, and his name dayly called upon. Live in sub∣jection to the Laws of Christs King∣dome, and call up∣on others to stoop with their neck to the same Yoke. Your incorpora∣tion and conjuncti∣on cals loudly on you for union and
unanimity. Keepe therefore the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephes. 4.3. Let your hearts be sea∣soned with the salt of grace, and be at peace among your selves. Beware of being divided in your consultations, and transactions. It was well observed by Nazianzen, That Dissolution is the Daughter of Dissen∣tion. As the con∣flict
of contrary hu∣mours causeth di∣seases and destru∣ctive distempers in the body naturall: so the clashings and contests of men, who are armed with contrary principles, and aime at diffe∣rent ends; and in stead of promoting the good of the Community, make it their business to advance the interest of a Faction, will
prove fatal, and of dangerous conse∣quence to the body politick. Maintain a cor∣diall, close, and comfortable cor∣respondence with your Church-Guides, whom you see a clear Providence making your Over∣seers. Peoples ta∣king liberty to themselves to dis∣own and desert at pleasure their own
Pastours, and han∣kering after novel, both Preachers, and Opinions, hath turned the Church into a confused Chaos; discompo∣sed Christs mysti∣cal Body, and af∣flicted its members with distortions and dislocations. Time was, when the breath of a Minister was ab∣horred, and would hardly be indured
in Corke, and his coming to the City as much dreaded as the Invasion of an enemy. Blessed be God that your eyes do again be∣hold your Teach∣ers; that the num∣ber of them in this County is increa∣sed, and they in∣couraged with the refreshing influence of Authority. You cannot be ignorant, how long you were
constrained to wait, and how many difficulties were wa∣ded through ere an Order could be procured for my establishment, and setling among you, by reason of the undermining sug∣gestions of some whispering Contra∣sentients. For the space of six years I have been your unwor∣thy Teacher, and
preached the Go∣spel unto the Inha∣bitants of this City; I hope not altoge∣ther without suc∣cess. Though I must pofess, that I cannot but with grief take notice of the fewness of those sheaves that are gathered into Christs barn. How hard are mens hearts under the continual beating of the hammer!
How do they har∣den their hearts like the adamant against the clear convictions of the Word! How do men stand out a∣gainst Christ, when summoned to come in, and entertain his Message with perpetual quarrels, and endless contra∣dictions! This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamen∣tation.
Let me passio∣nately beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, your Lord, and mine, to be wise in this your day, and mind the things that do be∣long unto your peace. Let the sound∣ing of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel awaken you, and cause you to shake off that
unweldy frame of spirit that makes men dull and indis∣posed to the duties of Religion. Let your hearts be upright with God, and be you faithfull to the Truth in giddy and declining Times. Buy the Truth at any rate; Prov. 23.3. but part with it at no rate whatsoever. It will be your safety and
honour to retain and hold fast the form of wholesome words delivered to you, and to remain unshaken in your Principles, though stormy winds of temptation and per∣secution should a∣rise, and blow upon you with a formi∣dable and affright∣ing fury. Though all men should for∣sake Christ, yet do
not you forsake him. There are many windfals in Christs Orchard; be you like those few remaining ber∣ries in the top of the uppermost bough, abhorring disunion and de∣fection, and resol∣ving not to be rent (though with a vi∣olent hand) from your Renowned Root. Mortifie
throughly, and be∣times all itching desire after novel∣ty, lest it break forth into the sprea∣ding and crusty scab of Apostacy. Beg wisdome of God, whereby you may be able to di∣stinguish betwixt the voice of Christ, and the voice of a stranger. Be not taken with the flaring light of eve∣ry
blazing Comet, and ignis fatuus, that would slock you into by-wayes, and dangerous paths. Keep your heads and hearts from being fly∣blown with the unsavoury breath of every rotten∣hearted Preacher. Take heed of go∣ing forth, and dancing after their delusive pipe, who
(the better to de∣ceive, and draw you into the snare) pretend to rare and rich discoveries; lest you come home with a vertigo in your heads, and be troubled with the staggers in Religion ever af∣ter. I shall conclude with pressing upon you that serious and savoury advice,
which his Excellen∣cy the Lord Depu∣ty, when at Corke in his late Progress, gave to the Chief of you, with some Justices of Peace of the Coun∣try that were then present. You may remember that you were commanded, and incouraged, 1. To put a stop to the overflowing flood of prophane∣ness,
by putting in execution the se∣verall wholesome Lawes that are in force against swear∣ing, drunkenness, uncleanness, and the like enormous pra∣ctises. 2. To provide for the sanctificati∣on of the Sabbath, by making use of that power that is put into your hands, in punishing and
suppressing its too frequent, and A∣theistical violation. Let it not lie as a reproach on Corke, that Ordinance-de∣spisers, and Sabbath∣breakers cannot be so secure from the stroke and dint of Justice in any place in Ireland as in this. 3. To make use of provided and proscribed means
for the conversion of the Popish Irish within your Juris∣diction. The work is desirable, and of grand concernment, conducing where∣unto among ma∣ny other are the following expedi∣ents. 1. The bringing of the Natives to the Puklick Wor∣ship. Compel them to come in, that Gods
house may be full. Bring them within the compass of the net, if ever you expect they should be caught. Let not their rooted and peevish loth∣ness to attend up∣on the Ordinances deterre you from doing your duty. They that now quarrel and con∣tend with you, as being too severe
and harsh, will in the day of visitati∣on glorifie God, and call you bles∣sed. 2. The remove∣ing and transplant∣ing of such as (to use his Excellencies own words) are stiffe and sullen in their way; and are not only possessed themselves with grinning prejudices against the Prote∣stant
Religion, but do likewise make it their design to create and continue the like prejudices in the rest of their Brethren, who pos∣sibly might other∣wise be reclaimed, and brought unto the knowledge of the truth. Remember the Oath of God with which you are bound to act and
rule according to Law, and be you faithful unto your Trust. Yield O∣bedience to his Excellencies Com∣mands in the ex∣pressed instances, and buckle in good earnest to the busi∣ness of Religion and Reformation, that so we may at length become a∣mountain of holiness, an habitation of righ∣teousness,
in which the Lord will de∣light to dwel, which shall be promoted by the prayers and indevours of From my Study in Corke Sept. 7. 1658. Your Servant in the Lords work, JOSEPH EYRES.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, A Christian (how plausible soe∣ver his pretences may
be) cannot be right at root, so long as the bare bulk of duty satisfies, without regard had to the manner of the per∣formance. The ini∣quity of holiest things, and the sinful adhe∣rencies of the best duties are highly provoking, and suffi∣ciently ponderous to depress and sink the soul into the lowest hell: so that it neer∣ly
concerns us to en∣ter upon spiritual employments, and in∣gage in holy services with much caution and circumspection, for fear of a miscar∣riage. It's not with∣out cause that the Spirit adviseth us to keep our feet when we go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools.
The eare is the cun∣duit-pipe thorough which grace comes flowing in to the soul, and therefore should be kept open, which cannot be done whilest the eye is shut. My design is to apply the smarting eye-salve of the Spi∣rit, that so the pec∣cant and concerned may be cured of the wonted winking of their eyes.
The Subject in hand seems to be or∣dinary, and to have little of sublimity in it. But when I con∣sidered that every Pew almost hath its Eutychus; and that our Congregations do generally abound with luke-warm Laodice∣ans, and are little better (many of them) than so many Con∣sorts of snoring Sleepers, which make
sweet Musick in the Divels eares, whose designe doubtless in mens present snort∣ing is their future howling; I thought it my duty, as a Watchman, to do something that might awaken. I am wil∣ling to stir up and startle those, who whilest they should be smiting on their thighs, and laying their hands upon their
hearts, are in a yaw∣ning posture, and rub∣bing their eyes, being ing possessed with a confused stupor; and it's a pretty while ere they can recover themselves, and un∣derstand where they are, and what about. I wish this small Treatise may prove a mote at least in the eye of the sleepy Hearer, and make it water, which is the
way to be more watchful. Christian Reader, be a diligent Hearer, and I have my end, who desire to approve my self Thy faithful Monitor and Soul-Friend, Joseph Eyres.
THE Church-Sleeper Awakened. ACT. 20.9. And there sat in a window a certain young man, na∣med Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third Loft, and was taken up dead. THE Apostle Paul, after much toilsome travel, and various agi∣tations is now at Troas,
a City in the lesser Asia; where not having long time to tarry, (for he made it his design (if possible) to be at Jeru∣salem the day of Pente∣cost; and much ground was to be trod, and ma∣ny places to be passed thorough, and some∣thing for the furthe∣rance of the Gospel, to be dispatched in those places, ere he could get thither) he is resolved to do as much good as he can in a little time. We may not conceive him, idle any day; but surely on the Lords day he was more then ordi∣narily
diligent and in∣dustrious. The Disciples, or the owners of the way of the Christian Religion, be∣ing on the First Day of the Week met together in order to the hearing of the Word, and par∣taking of the Ordinance of the Supper, Paul con∣tinued his discourse un∣til midnight, being here∣unto incouraged and ur∣ged: 1. By the peo∣ples raised and unwea∣ried attention. 2. By his own resolution to de∣part on the morrow, ver. 7. In these Primitive
Times the Lord was wont to accompany the word of his mouth with the wonderful works of his hand; witness the many Miracles then ef∣fected, whereby the Lord would, 1. Con∣vince Aliens. 2. Con∣firm Disciples, to whom such props were of great advantage, because the Doctrine embraced was, 1. Novel, and there∣fore attended with squint-eyed suspitions. 2. Contrary to car∣nal reason, and there∣fore invaded with puz∣ling Objections. 3. Destructive to the
interests of the flesh, and therefore assaulted with a keen and desperate opposition, not only from without, but also from within. A considerable, and seasonable Miracle was this in the Verse suc∣ceeding the Text, of which Paul was the mo∣ral cause or instrument: Eutychus the recipient Subject, who whilst a∣sleep stands in need of a bed; and being now dead, is fit for nothing but the grave. But the Lord had mercy on him, and did not only awaken but revive.
This young man was quite tired out with Pauls protracted, and uninterrupted discourse; which being spun out to an unexpected length, deep sleep seizes on him, and he fals from such an heighth, that there remains nought else of the man, but a breathless trunk. There is no reason why we should bitterly inveigh against him, un∣der the notion of a lazy Lozel, and muddy hea∣ded Disciple; for he sought not out a blind nook, and obscure cor∣ner, wherein unobser∣vedly
to take a nap, and by this means gratifie the flesh; only through the infirmity of the flesh he is overcome. How∣ever, he is not wholly to be excused. The acti∣vity of grace must op∣pose and make head a∣gainst the inclinations of nature: and doubtless had he not been wanting unto himself, he might have been inabled to hold up his head as well as others: at least, he might have prevented a total overwhelming and succumbing under this drouzy distemper. The Point that I would
hence observe, is this: Sleeping in Church-Assemblies is a great sin, and of dangerous conse∣quence. Many are mens mis∣carriages about the word. Heb. 10.25. Some forsake the assembling of themselves together, and turn their backs upon the Ordi∣nances, as if they were not worth the attending on: Ezek. 33.21. Others indeed come as the people cometh, and with their lips they shew much love; Esay 29.13. They draw nigh unto God with their mouths, and honour him with their lips, so that the address seems to be
accompanied with a fla∣ming affection, and a deep devotion but their hearts are far from him, going after their covetous∣ness; there is some base lust or other doted on, and cockered with wan∣tonnest indulgence, not∣withstanding the clear convictions of the word, and their own professed subjection to it: Others again entertain the word with a slighting unbe∣lief, Jer. 44.16. peevish contradicti∣ons, and a desperate, de∣clared resolution, not to stoop to its authori∣ty, and yeeld obedience to its commands. But
it is the sleepy Hearer, whom I have to deal with at this time, and against whom I must spend some arrows, and discharge some cannons to awaken him. In the prosecution of the Point in hand, I shall only do these two things. 1. I shall propose severall considerations by way of diswasion from the sin, and provocation to the contrary practise. 2. I shall propose seve∣rall directions by way of remedy and preven∣tion. The considerations are these that follow.
1. Well weigh with your selves in whose presence you are. First, you are in the presence of God, who though he be from no place exclu∣ded, yet surely he is in the Assemblies of the Saints especially pre∣sent. Exod. 20.24. In all places where I record my name, I will come un∣to thee, and I will bless thee. In acts of worship we are said to draw nigh him, Lev 10.2. There are severall things in God which be∣speak your attention. 1. His transcendent excellency, and incom∣prehensible
greatness: The presence of Maje∣sty doth awaken mean∣ness, and keeps all the faculties intent upon so furpassing an Object. If the awe and dread of an infinite, and all-glorious Being were upon us, it would not only some∣what affect, but even affright, and cause you to lay aside all deadness and drouziness of spirit. Me thinks the bright∣ness and splendour of that royal throne before which you present your selves, and lie prostrate, should awaken you even to astonishment and
consternation, and keep your eyes open beyond all possibility of putting them together. 2. His Omniscience: Though you sleep, yet God doth not so much as slumber; though your eyes be shut, yet his are not: Though you sneak behind a pil∣lar, or sink down to the bottome of the Pew, yet you are still in his eye. The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, and his eye∣lids try the children of men, Psal. 11.4. He beholds the frame of
your souls, and takes exact notice of the po∣sture of your bodies. What servant would dare to sleep, whilsth is Master stands by and looks on? One sleepy Hearer cannot scape Gods observation in the most condensed and crouded Congregation. 3. His Holiness, whereby he must needs be highly displeased with the undecent and unbeseeming behaviour of those who are inga∣ged in his worship. The sleepy Hearer is a mote in Gods bright eye, and very offensive to his sight.
4. His Justice, which being awakened by his holiness, is wont to make deep dints and impressions of revenge upon the objects of his displeasure. Will a Lamb dare to sleep within the paw and reach of an inraged Lion? In the next place consider the ends, on the account of which you come into Gods pre∣sence. 1. To speak to him in Prayer. I have heard of some that have tal∣ked in their sleep: I doubt whether these drouzy dreamers we are
speaking of, do or can pray in their sleep. A Prince would look upon it as an unsufferable af∣front, if a Subject should be found sleeping in the Presence-Chamher, when he should be pre∣senting his Petition. Christs Disciples were sleeping, when they should have been pray∣ing: now Christ bids them watch and pray; He knew full well, that if they did not watch, neither could they pray, Math. 26.41. 2. To hear him speak∣ing unto you by the Ministery of the Word.
Our business is not only to poure out our com∣plaints and requests into Gods bosome, but like∣wise to receive answers and tidings of peace into ours. Now the sleepy Hearer stops up the pas∣sages thorough which the Lord is wont to con∣vey his grace into the soul. I hope you are not of the opinion, that the Lord now speaks to his people by dreams, and that therefore there is no need of a waking attention. Thus you see how the intercourse be∣twixt God, and sleepy souls is interrupted and
dammed up. Surely that must needs be a very great sin, that doth obstruct duty, and ren∣ders the Ordinances of God frustraneous and ineffectual. Secondly, you are in the presence of the Angels, who are wont to frequent the solemn and sacred As∣semblies of the Saints, (which seems proveable from 1 Cor. 11.10.) and to take notice of any disorders in sacred Conventions. You can∣not make a wry mouth, laugh, fleere in the Mi∣nisters face, take a nap, be guilty of a lascivious
glance, wanton look, or any other immodest be∣haviour, but it is done, not only in the presence of the God of heaven, but also in the presence of the Angels of heaven, who are strict observers of you, and have a watchful eye upon you. Besides, the Angels do with much wonder and delight make inspection into the profound My∣steries of the Gospel, Eph. 3.10. manifested and made known to and by the Church, 1 Pet. 1.12. if you did so too, you would not be possessed with such a spirit of
slumber as you are. Thirdly, you are in the presence of the Church. You are now in Gods family, not your own. You may not take liberty to do that here, which you would make no scruple of to do at home. Any publick Assembly, especially of Saints, and they inga∣ged in a worke of the highest nature, requires an aweful and respective behaviour in such as do attend it. We may not offend any, much less the Church, 1 Cor. 10.32. We may not offend a single Saint,
much less a Society of such. Besides, the Church is an orderly Society; all things in it, should be done decently and in or∣der, 1 Cor. 14.10. Whilst one is singing, another should not be snoring. 2. Consider, whose work it is that you are about. We are not only in Gods presence, but are also employed in Gods work. Now we are commanded to be fervent in spirit, whilst we serve the Lord, Rom. 12.11. It becomes not Gods servants of
any, to be of a drouzy disposition; especially, when they should be di∣ligent and intent upon their Masters business. Its hard if you cannot watch with Christ one hour. Christ did watch and pray in the Garden; the Disciples should have done so too, and have kept him compa∣ny, Matth. 26.40. It was a patheticall expostulation that of Christ, Could you not watch with me one houre? q. d. If any of your Friends and neer Rela∣tions were pained in body, and perplexed in
minde, if they lay under the thousandth part of that agony and anguish of spirit that I lie under, you would have watch∣ed with them, and why then can you not watch with me? Yea, you would have watched all night with them untill the dawning of the day, and is it possible that you can not watch with me one houre! I could pray for you in a Moun∣tain, and cannot you pray with me in a Gar∣den! I could spend a great part of the night in prayer for you, and can you not spend an
houre of the night in prayer with me! Me thinks it should not be such a tiresome task and intollerable. The service of God doth deservedly require the utmost ardour and intenseness of spirit; the most elevated, in∣larged, inflamed affecti∣ons, that creatures are capable of. Whatsoever our hand findeth to do, especially in matters spirituall, should be done with all our might. 3. The work that you are emploied about, is of loftiest consequence,
and concernment. Your souls are concerned in it: Life and death are before you. We should hearken to the word of God, as for our lives, for it is our life, Deut. 32.46, 47. VVhat a man doth for his life, he will do with the utmost vi∣gour and vivacity. VVith what panting and pressing earnestness doth an almost famisht and hunger-bitten beg∣ger cry for bread! VVith what awake∣ning, heart-penetrating expressions doth a Priso∣ner at the bar plead for his life! Not a word
passeth unobserved by him, he doth with much greediness of attention hearken to the Evidence of VVitnesses, Ver∣dict of the Jury, Sen∣tence of the Judge; and no wonder, for his life lies at the stake. He must be either acquitted and live, or else con∣demned and dye. You who are here this day, must be tried by that word which you hear; by it your eter∣nall estates and conditi∣ons must be cast. Now, whose eares would not be tickled with extraor∣dinary delight at the
hearing of the promises of life! and whose eares would not glow and tin∣gle at the denunciations and threatnings of eter∣nall death! But the mischief on it is, the Church-Sleeper is like the Smiths dog, whom neither the hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling round about him, can awaken. 4. You are not wont to sleep whilst you are about your own work. You rise up early, and sit up late, and do with much eagerness and un∣weariedness prosecute
your own affairs. The Husbandman doth not sleep with his Plough in his hand; neither doth the Pilot sleep, whilst he is at the helm, guiding the Ship. Though you sleep in the Church, yet you do not sleep in the shop, whilest you have any thing to do, and custo∣mers to attend. How contentedly will you re∣frain from eating, drin∣king, sleeping all the day long, nay and a great part of the night too, provided the merry penny may be coming in thewhiles.
You can sit chatting and discoursing with your Friends many hours, and its very late many times ere you can part: but when you come into Gods pre∣sence to enjoy fellow∣ship and communion with him, you are nod∣ding presently, and there you sit like so many liveless logs and senseless statues. I have heard of feasts that have lasted four or five hours; but hardly of any Guests that were sleeping whilest others were eating. But when people come to feast
with God, to make a meale upon an Ordi∣nance, they cannot hold open their eyes for their hearts. You are not wont to sleep whilst the naturall glass is before you; but when the pure chrystall glass of the Law is by the Minister held forth unto you, and set before you, (as loth belike to behold what manner of persons you are) you wink with the eye. 5. VVicked men do not sleep whilst they are about the Divels work. If Judas have a treache∣rous plot in hand, out
of doors he will, though in the night, and put his black guard in order: a soft downy pillow is no place for his working contriving head: Being hurried and harassed by the Divel, he cannot by the darkness and silence of the night be flattered into the least slumber. The eye that is full of adultery, doth not sleep in the Congrega∣tion, but is continually roving about to find out objects for a foul and frothy fancy to work upon; and being found out, they are gazed on with much greediness
and delight. The A∣dulterer will be waking, and walking abroad in the dark and black night, that so he may give his Drab a meeting, Prov. 7.9. Ahab lies tossing and tumbling upon his bed, and cannot take any rest, untill he be possessed of Naboths Vineyard, 1 King. 21.4. And Amnon is in little better plight till he have his will on his Sister Tamar, 2 Sam. 13.2. How usual a thing is it for the Divels Imps, I mean the roaring Ruf∣fians, and Bacchanalian
Roysters of the times, to spend whole dayes and nights in quaffing, carousing, gaming, &c. They have not the least lust to sleep in the midst of so much mirth, Mu∣sick, and madness. VVith what whickering attention do they hear∣ken to a roguish Fidler that will sing them a sordid and filthy Song! Any Musick keeps them waking, a mid∣night Mask, or paltry Poppet-play, how doth it affect, and make men dance an unwearied at∣tendance, who yet are no more affected with
the admirable contri∣vance, and sublime dis∣coveries of the Gospel, then so many stocks and stones, save the Musick of the Temple! 6. It's a sin that is mightily promoted by the Divel He knows of what fatall consequence it is unto his kingdome, for people to hearken unto the word of life, which is as an hammer to knock off the bolts from the galled feet of his chained Captives: and therefore he ende∣vours by all wayes and means imaginable to
distract, divert, and take you off from the present work and business that is before you. He will be sure to sit very heavy on your eye-lids, and close them if possible. The Prince of darkness startles at the approach of light, and therefore will be sure to draw the curtain, and shut the window to keep it out. The nodding head leans on the Divels bosome. The sleepy Hearer is rockt in the Divels cra∣dle, and dandled on the Divels knee. 7. A sleepy eye is a shrewd sign of a sleepy
conscience, and a sottish insensibility of matters spirituall. A fat heart, a deaf eare, and a closed eye, go hand in hand, Esa. 6.10. A waking conscience is usually at∣tended with a watchfull eye. They who work out their salvation with fear and trembling, will look about them. 8. You may out-sleep that truth wherein you are neerly concerned, and which if attended to, might prove success∣fully instrumentall for your conversion, conso∣lation. There is no one truth
to be slighted, disregar∣ded; but surely those truths that reach your particular condition, should be entertained with exactest observa∣tion. You know not when that plaister will be spread and applyed, that is most suitable to your sore. You know not at what time that me∣dicine will be admini∣stred that is most likely to cure those spirituall maladies and distempers that you labour under, and therefore it's wis∣dome to be wary and watchfull.
Possibly there may be some way of wicked∣ness, which you secure∣ly walk in; some ne∣cessary duty, which you live in the neglect of; some griezly tempta∣tion, with which you are assaulted: now if you should be sleeping, when these things are pathetically and power∣fully spoken to, you may still live in the practise of that sin, in the neg∣lect of that duty; and be overwhelmed with that temptation to your ruine. 9. This may be the last Sermon that ever
you may hear; and I am confident, could you be assured of it, that it would be so, it would mightily startle. There will be such a thing as the last prayer that ever you shall put up; the last Chapter that you shall reade; the last Sermon that you shall hear: it be∣hoves you therefore with utmost industry to improve the present opportunity: Hearken to the voice of God whilst it is called to day; you do not know whether ever you may hear that voice again behind you,
saying unto you, This is the way, walk in it, shut not your eyes a∣gainst the light that now shines, for you do not know whether ever your eyes may again behold a rising sun, and disper∣sed beams. 10. The Lord may take you away in your sleep. The instance of this young man in the Text (one would think) should make you trem∣ble. You that come alive into the Congre∣gation, may be carried out dead. You that do not attentively hear∣ken to what the Mini∣ster
hath to say unto you, may be suddenly struck dead in the place, snatcht out of your seats, drag∣ged to Christs Tribunal, and there constrained to hearken unto what the great Judge of heaven and earth hath to say unto you, who will speak in such language, and in such a tone, as will make your souls to shake and shiver. It's more dreadfull to dye whilst asleep in Gods house, than to dye whilst asleep in your own. 11. There is no sleeping in hell. There will not be the least
minutes rest taken to eternity. The smoke of wicked mens torment ascendeth up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night, Rev. 14.11. You that can so confi∣dently sleep in the Church, shall not be able to sleep in the fiery lake: The extremity of torment, the conti∣nuall gnawing of the never dying worm, and the hideous howlings of Divels, and fellow-dam∣ned wights, will keep you waking in spight of your hearts. How welcome would a few houres sleep be to
those, who are sweating and sweltring in seave∣rish flames, and for many nights together have been full of tossings to and fro until the daw∣ning of the day? But O! how transcendently and surpassingly wel∣come would a minutes rest and repose be to those, who for millions of years have been rost∣ing and roaring in the everlasting flames? But alas! it cannot be. Who but a fool and a mad man would for a little present sinfull ease and rest, plunge himself into an intollerable, restless
state and condition that knows no end! If this prove not an awakening consideration, I know not what will. 12. There is no sleeping in heaven. That which is the mi∣sery of the damned, is the happiness of the saved. Rev. 4.8. They rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. The Angels do not want sleep; neither shall the Saints when they are translated to the upper Patadise. Whilst we are in this
animall state, nature cannot bear up under continued watchings, refreshing, and rest. Christ himself did not spend all his dayes in acts of immediate wor∣ship, he consumed not every night in prayer and holy meditations: We reade as of his eating and drinking, so of his sleeping. But when these naturall Bo∣dies shall be raised spi∣rituall Bodies, the sub∣lime employment of eternal Hallelujahs will not tire, or cause in us the least inclination to a drousie despondency.
It should be our desire and endeavour to serve God here, as Saints and Angels serve him in heaven, without weari∣ness and deadness. Having thus dispatch∣ed the considerations by way of motive, I now come unto the di∣rections by way of re∣medy and prevention of this sinfull distemper de∣clared against. 1. Set your selves as in Gods presence. La∣bour to see him by the eye of Faith, who is invisible to the eye of sense. Being not aware before whom we are,
and with whom we have to do, we are the more easily overtaken. If in the Congregati∣on, we were in the pre∣sence, and close by the side of earthly majesty, and were surrounded and observed by Prin∣ces and Nobles, I dare say, there would be such an awe upon us, that we should not dare to sleep, or be guilty of the least incivillity and undecency of deport∣ment. O then, why doth not the approach and presence of the God of glory, before whom the Divels trem∣ble,
ble, and the Angels veil, not daring to be∣hold with unmasked faces, worke in us far deeper impressions of awefulness, and ingage us to the utmost attenti∣on and watchfulness. The truth of it is, God is not minded, and hence it is that his work is so slightly slubbered over. If God were in our eye, our eyes, eares, hearts, would all be open to attend and entertain him. 2. Bring your Bibles with you; and that not for a vain shew, and
ostentation, to be taken notice of for a pious devout respect to sacred Writ; but keep pace with the Minister, whilst he reades the Word; and turn to those Texts of Scripture that he quotes. If this lauda∣ble course were gene∣rally and duly observed, Truths delivered would better be remembred, and the unhansome in∣convenience of sleeping in Church Assemblies would be prevented. It's reported of the Scots, by those who have been present at their Assemblies, that
when the Preacher names a place of Scrip∣ture, the people pre∣sently and nimbly turn to it, so that there is heard in the Congrega∣tion a rushing noise or sound, like the flutte∣ring of a mighty flock of birds, that are hastily rising, and getting upon the wing. But many may say unto me, Alas Sir! woe and alas! what shall we do? we for our parts can not reade a word: O! how willingly would we make use of the Bible both in publick, and in private, provided
we were book-learned as others are! And cannot you reade in∣deed? the more to blame are those who have had the charge and care of your educa∣tion: and the more to blame your selves, this ignorance of yours be∣ing possibly the pro∣duct of a lazy neglect, and lothness to take pains. And here now, be∣cause 'tis seasonable, let me lay a strict charge, and severe injunction on Parents especially, and Masters of Families, to provide for the in∣struction
of their chil∣dren, and servants, that so they may be able to discern a difference be∣twixt a Bible, and a Block, not only by the shpe and external fi∣gure, but also by the in∣ternal and comfortable contents. 3. Be exhorted to write Sermon-Notes, you that can; and you that cannot, learn to do it. It prevents not on∣ly a sleeping eye, but a wandring eye. It has been my ob∣servation of some, that whensoever they have omitted taking notes,
they have been as sure to sleep, as if high noon were midnight, and their Pew a soft bed. Flatter not your selves with a vain con∣ceit, that your extraor∣dinary, and almost in∣vincible proneness to sleep, by reason of your natural temper, shall hold you excused, so long as you obstinately refuse to make use of Bible and Pen, by which this so great a mischief might undoubtedly be be prevented. I hope you do not count it a disparagement and un∣dervaluing to you to
take notes after the Mi∣nister? King Edward the Sixth did not; and to peruse them, and medi∣tate on them afterwards, for the fixing and ingra∣ving of truth in his mind, and memory. 4. Have you not houses of your own? there you may sleep with lesse scandal, and inconveni∣ence to your selves, and others. If there be no no remedy but you must needs take a nap in the day time (which some can hardly refrain, be∣ing thereto necessitated by a continued custome) it's better you should do
it in private, then in publick. But because men are too prone to gratifie the flesh, and indulge the ease of the outward man, I shall intreat you to be very spare, and temperate, and allow your selves as little li∣berty as may be. Far be it from you, that you should be of the number of those Swine, rather then Saints; those Hogs rather then Christians, who lye grunting, yawning, stretching in their beds the forenoon of the Sab∣bath, and are hardly up
and drest by dinner time: or of the number of those sordid slow bellies, who are wont to reserve the afternoon of the Lords day for rest, and a lazy retire∣ment. 5. Principiis obsta, stop the beginnings. When you perceive in your selves an inclina∣tion to nod, and that a soft slumber begins to seise upon you, present∣ly start up as one asto∣nish'd at the apprehen∣sion of some grand ap∣proaching evil; stand upon your guard, and keep the incroaching
enemy at a distance. 6. Feed sparingly, especially on the Lords day. Great Eaters are usually great Sleepers. From an over full sto∣mach ascend obnubila∣ting fumes, which op∣press the brain, and lock up the passages of the spirits, and thereby dispose to sleep. Where the heart is overcharged with drunkenness and excess, it produceth sadness, searedness, stupidity, blockishness, inadvertency, forget∣fulness, dulness in duty, and a supine negligence in soul-concernments.
They that fast much, can watch best. Hence sobriety, and watchful∣ness are joyned together. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant. 7. Let not sorrow too much seise upon you, and prevail over you; it's of a stupifying, and besotting nature: the Disciples in the Garden found it so. Luk. 22.45. Griefe contracts the heart, and hinders the egress of spirits to the several Organs in which they move; yea it exhausts the spirits, and hinders concoction, so that
gross and black vapours invade the brain, which are the cause of sleep. Gerherd in his Harmony is of the opinion, that Jonah's profound sleep in the side of the Ship was occasioned by grief, he knowing full well that for his flying from the presence of the Lord, the tempest was raised, and the Ship in∣dangered. 8. Take heed of a lolling, and lazy posture of body; it argues irre∣verence, and doth dis∣pose to drouziness. Standing I would com∣mend as a more watch∣ful
posture, and to be preferred before sitting, especially in Prayer. They that bow down their heads, and rest them upon their hands, will not long be awake. 9. Let your eye be much upon the Mini∣ster. It's said of Christs Hearers, Luk. 4.20. That their eyes were fastned on him. A good help against distra∣ctions. Trap in loc. Our hearts are fickle and fugitive, if not hard held to it. The sight of the eye affects the heart. It's the Prisoners seeing, as well as hearing of the
Judge, that makes him attentive to astonish∣ment. When the heart is stirred, and awakened, the eye cannot easily be closed. 10. Ingage your neigh∣bour that sits by you, to have a watchful eye up∣on you, and to pluck you by the sleeve, if occasi∣on be. Its pity that any should be in danger of sleeping the sleep of death for want of a faithful friend to rouse up and awaken. If your Brothers Oxe be fallen into a ditch, you will put to an help∣ing hand, and pluck it
out: and shall your Brother himself lye lolling and snoring in the Divels lap, and you not so much as jogge him by the elbow, and make him sensible of his danger? 11. Betake your selves to rest the night before, in good time. Sitting up late the Sa∣turday nights doth wonderfully deadden, and indispose to the duties of the following day. Sleep in your beds, that you may not sleep in your Pews. Sleep in the night, that you may not sleep in the day.
Coming home at midnight from dis∣patching businesses, visiting Friends; or which is worse, from drinking, gaming, re∣velling, puts the body and mind out of order, and is a bad preparative for the approaching Sabbath. 13. Come to the word with expectation. Whensoever you attend upon the Ordinances, look for something, yea, for greater things from the hands of God. They are vigilant who are in a waiting posture. Beggers are not wont
to sleep before the gates of those from whom they expect an almes. The eyes of ser∣vants look unto the hand of their Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistriss, when some boon and bounty is expected, Psalm 123.2. If out of a clear sight, and deep sense of our own unworthiness, weak∣ness, wretchedness, we came unto God for supply of wants, assist∣ance in service, satis∣faction in doubts, assu∣rance of his love, solace in midst of sorrows, or
the like, we should be more yare, and full of life in managing our addresses than we are. 14. Pray hard unto God, and be very im∣portunate with him: 1. That he would chain up Satan, and rebuke the Tempter, who sneakingly, and maliciously haunts the Assembles of the Saints, as a sligh observer, and busie disturber, standing at their right hands ready to resist them. 2. That he would affect your hearts with truths delivered. Stir∣ring
affections are at∣tended with a sharp at∣tention. Men do not look upon themselves as highly concerned in the commands, promi∣ses, menaces of the word, and hence ariseth that listless, and slug∣gish frame that is upon them. If with Peter's Hear∣ers, we had the keen ar∣row of conviction stick∣ing fast in our sides, and making us to blush, and bleed, the flood-gates of our eyes would be open, for swelling streams of penitential teares to come gushing
out amain; and in stead of sleeping and snoring, there would be sighing, sobbing, lamenting, moan-making, smiting on the thigh, and curi∣ous inquiring after a remedy for this malady. On the other side, if at the hearing of the word the Spirit should be pleased to come in and breath upon us with a fair and fresh gale of comfort; if the love of God should be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost; if some bright beam of heavenly light should be darted into
the inner man after a dark, dismal, stormy, tempestuous night of temptation, desertion, disconsolation, dejecti∣on, it would undoubted∣ly scatter those clouds of sleep and security that are wont to hang upon our dull and de∣pressed browes. A warmed heart is a wa∣king heart. Sorrow duls the eye, but joy makes it lively, and sparkling, I have read of a gra∣cious woman, Mr. Clarks Mirror. pag. 508. who at the Supper-Ordinance, being abundantly re∣freshed with the joyes
of the Spirit, gat home (as she professed) she knew not how; and for the space of a fort∣night these raptures and ravishing joyes continu∣ed, and filled her mouth with Songs of praise, so that she could neither sleep, nor eate more then she forced her self to do out of con∣science of duty. It's impossible we should sleep with a full cup of consolation in our hands, and at our mouths. 3. That he would bestow upon the Mi∣nister a quick and power∣full delivery, which is
wont to draw forth at∣tention, and affection. A dull, heavy, unchear∣ful delivery in the Mi∣nister, doth little better then invite a drouzy disrespect, and is atten∣ded with a careless and undecent oscitancy in the Hearers. 15. If prone to mis∣carry in this kind, and to be oppressed with a spiritual lethargy, you shall do well to humble your selves before God with fasting, and prayer: possibly this sleepy Divel will not go out, but in the use of such means, which do
not infeeble and render unfit for service, but rather strengthen, and exhilarate. FINIS.
