F877 E70_1 99872793 125239
COLONELL FIENNES His REPLY to a Pamphlet ENTITVLED, AN ANSWER TO Colonell Nathaniel Fiennes RELATION concerning his Surrender of the City and Ca∣stle of Bristol by Clem. Walker. Which said Answer is here Reprinted verbatim. Ordered to be Printed. London, Printed for Thomas Vnderhill, 1643.
The Epistle to the Reader. HAving taken notice of a printed Pam∣phlet (so the Authour himselfe calleth it) set forth in answer to a Relation which I made in the House of Com∣mons, concerning my surrender of the Castle and City of Bristol (which hath long walked in the darke, and now at length is peeped out, when the Authour might have an ex∣cuse to say, that his witnesses that should justifie it are gone away with Sir William Waller.) I earnestly desired the House that this businesse of Bristol might be heard at a Councell of Warre, whereupon it was ordered accordingly, I having for∣merly desired the same of my L. Generall, who granted my request, but it could not be done till such time as his Army returned to a setled Quarter, but now I hope upon the return of his Excellency, the Order of the House of Commons, and a Petition of my selfe, and most of my chiefe Officers to that purpose, this matter shall be shortly heard at a Councell of Warr, and therfore shall content my self with a few Margi∣nall Notes, in answer to that lying Pamphlet, referring the full tryall of the truth to a Councell of Warre, till when, I doubt not but every wise man will suspend his judgement, and then he shall clearly see who hath bin the lyar, and who hath bin the Coward. Nath: Fiennes. Die Sabbati 25o. September, 1643. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That it be left to my L. Generall (at the Request and desire of Col∣lonell Fiennes) to heare and examine the busines concerning the Sur∣render of Bristoll. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Mr Walkers Epistle to the Reader. Reader, THough this Answer cost but few houres to compose it, yet was it a worke of some dayes to collect the materialls thereof out of the severall Reports of many principall Gentlemen and Commanders present in Bristol, when it was besieged; And when this Pamphlet was ready for the Presse, I found the Presse obstructed, whereby I was enforced to keepe it in a moneth be∣fore I could be delivered of this Birth, Some malicious Iuno sitting crosse legged at the labour. This is a lye, if meant of Col. Fiennes or any of his friends to his knovv∣ledge. This is the reason it commeth out so late after the Relation, that it may seeme to rub over an old sore, whose smart is almost past. But Truth is a sluggard that uses to lie long in bed, after her base sister False∣hood is up and stirring: Yet when Truth riseth, with her sober constant pace, she will soone overtake Falshood, and tread on her heeles. Reader, it is in thy discretion that Truth lose not her grace for want of novelty. Although she come forth with this further disadvantage, that almost all those Gentlemen and Commanders that should wait upon her justification, are going out of Towne with Sir William Waller, yet let Truth be wel∣come without attendants, without ornaments, it being one of her most naturall ornaments to be starke naked. Thine, Cle. Walker.
An Answer to Col. Nathaniel Fiennes Relation concerning his Surrender of the City and Castle of Bristol. With Col. Fiennes his Reply to the said Pamphlet. SInce the heart of man is deceitfull above all things, and none can know the issues thereof, wee will not search over-curiously into the desires of the late Governour of that unhappy City of BRISTOL, Colonell NATHANIEL FIENNES, Whether he affected the Government or no? Yet seeing it is a point controverted by himselfe, in his Relation, pag. 3. we will be bold to say, FIrst, His undermining Col. Thomas Essex, whom hee struck in∣to the box, and laid himself in his roome: In this manner Colo∣nell Fiennes brought a letter to Bristol, from my Lord Generall, authorizing him to seize on, and send up prisoner Colonell Essex, then Governour of that City, and this was so under-hand carried, that the Deputy-Lieutenants and Committee of Parliament, then resident in Bristol, to assist Colonell Essex in the Government, were never consulted with to know what cause of suspition they found in him: This was an affront put upon the Deputy-Lieutenants in point of integrity, or discretion and industry. A lie and scandall cast upon my Lo. Generall and his Order. Secondly, His putting Creatures of his own (neither Souldiers, nor men knowne in those parts) into Bristol Castle, to make the go∣vernment more intirely his own, contrary to the desires both of the Towne and Countrey, which were to have a Gentleman of honour and integrity, such as both the Towne and Country could confide in, placed there. Two Lye. Thirdly, His many artifices, to lessen the Reputation and abridge the power of the Committees and Gentlemen of the Country (whereof more afterward.) A Lye. Fourthly, His underhand indeavours to draw a Territory of
twenty miles compasse as annexed to that City, to be within his sole command, and to make it independent upon the rest of the ad∣jacent counties, thereby to exclude Sir W. Waller and all others. A Lye. These considerations (we say) make us think he was as jealous of his Government there, as any man is of his wife, and that he would brooke no rivall therein; nor can his letters sent to his Father oversway our beliefe; Father, and sonne being Testes Do∣mestici, in the neerest degree; But to take off this conceit (in his fourth page) he tells us he made certaine Propositions to the Gen∣tlemen of the adjacent Counties for the setling and maintaining a Garrison there, to which most of the Gentlemen consented; It is answered, he made a certaine Proposition in generall to that pur∣pose, to the Gentlemen of Somerset and Gloucester, and the Letter dated the 20 of March, 1642. (published in the Governours Re∣lation, page 13.) was sent to the Lord Say, and the like to his Ex∣cellency the Lord Generall, to see how the said generall Propositi∣on would take: But when the said Gentlemen expected to be againe advised withall for reducing the said generall into particu∣lar Propositions, he having got the start of them, secretly sent up particulars of his owne framing, (the same (it may be) which he hath published in his Relation, page 17. intituled, A draught of the Ordinance) whereby he indeavoured to weaken the power of the Deputy-Lieutenants and Committees, and to make Bristol, and the Countries adjacent for 20 miles compasse his Territory, himselfe in all matters of moment, being of the Quorum: A Lye, As shall be proved under his own hand, and the hands of divers Gentlemen both of Somerset and Glocestershire. For ex∣ample, in his said draught of the Ordinance, he projected, that First, the Garrison which should have consisted of 3 Foot Re∣giments (besides Horse) (whereof one to be raised in the County of Somerset, under the command of Colonell Alexander Popham, another in the County of Gloucester) should be raised by the Go∣vernour onely. Secondly, the money raised in the Easterne-Division of Somer∣set, in Barkely-Division in Gloucester, and in the Cities of Bristoll and Bath, upon the weekely Assessment, Twentieth part and Se∣questration; nay and upon Excises and new Imposts, should be assigned only for the use of that Garrison, A Lye, If there was a surplissage it was to goe to other uses. with further provision in the Ordinance, that if all this be not enough, it should be made up out of the said Counties respectively: and the Committees
appointed to pay the charges of the said Garrison and fortificati∣ons being valued and made known to them by the said Governour of Bristoll, whose Warrant and Receipt should bee a sufficient discharge. Thirdly, The Treasurers of the said Divisions not to issue out any moneyes without the concurring warrant of Col: Fiennes Governour. A lye, Only such monies at were to be employed upon the Garri∣son and Fortifi∣cations of Bristol. Fourthly, The Trained-Bands and Voluntiers of the said Divi∣sions not to be drawne forth upon service, either into the City of Bristol or Country, but by the like warrant. See now what power was left to the said Committees or Deputy Lieutenants even in their own Counties, and over their own men and moneyes, upon which Colonell Fiennes had not incroached in this his draught of an Ordinance; Again page 4. he complaines that Sir William Waller drew forth Colonell Essex Regiment, and all the Troopes of Horse: we conceive Sir William Waller drew forth only Col: Essex his Troope of Red Coates, being not above 30 or 40 and his foot Regiment being incompleate, the one halfe whereof never marched out of Towne, and were entertained by the Governour still: page 5. 3 Lyes, 1 Captain Longes and Cap∣tain Coxes Troops were drawn out, and Major Lau∣grishes also com∣manded out. when Sir Ralph Hoptons Army drew towards Somersetshire: Colonell Alexander Popham moved by letters from my Lord Generall, would have gone forth with his whole Regiment, to joyne with Wilts and Dorset, and the We∣sterne forces of Somersetshire, but was Countermanded by Colonell Fiennes, who then first produced a letter from my Lord Generall, whereby Colonell Popham and his Regiment were reduced un∣der his command, which letter untill then he had concealed and would not suffer Col: Popham to march with above six Compa∣nies: Sir William Wal∣ler told Col: Fien∣nes before Col: Popham, that he desired only 6 Companies. It is true that Col: Popham was rented through the default of Major Langrish and his horse; 2 Lyes, Langrish was cleered by a Counsell of War at Bathe. but the foot Armes were not above halfe lost; In answer to his 1200 men, lent Sir William Waller, It is confessed, we all importuned him to enable Sir William Waller by an addition of 1200 foot, to take the field for preserva∣tion of the Country (which is no more then Col: Fiennes in his propositions to my Lord Generall and Parliament undertook, namely, * to defend the Country for 20 miles adjoyning) * Not against an Armie, though he had received the benefit of those propositions, which he never did, and that was one maine cause of the losse of the Towne. And Col: Fiennes himself when he gave consent to this motion, did declare that if the fortune of the Field went against Sir William Waller,
yet with his forces remaining in the Towne; and the men which would be recollected and rallied out of his defeated Companies, hee made no doubt, but to make good the said City: And Col: Fiennes after the defeate of Sir William Waller did declare that hee hoped to make good the Towne with 2500 men, and that he hoped to make up that number, by arming those men, that fled from the defeate into the Towne, and by taking Armes from the Townesmen, and put∣ting them into other hands, page 6. 2 Lyes, He never declared any such thing. Sir Arthur Hazelrigg, Co∣lonell Burghill, and divers gentlemen after Sir William Wallers de∣feate, thought fit to withdraw themselves: these Gentlemen did not leave the Towne upon apprehension it was not Tenable, It shall be proved that some did it upon that ground. but out of a desire to raise men else where to supply it, A lye, They went to fetch supplies round about by the Lands end. and out of a con∣sideration it was not fit for them in time of warre to stay under his command, who in time of peace had plundered some of them for not paying such taxes as he put upon the City of Bristoll, not with∣standing they paid in the Country, and resided in Towne only to doe publike service, upon their own purses: and for lodging in the Castle it is confidently affirmed, that no lodgings there were ever offered to any of the Gentlemen, nor any former respects shewed to them, could incourage them to hope for any, and so many meane fellowes of the Town were suffered to shelter them∣selves and their goods there, that there was no roome left for the Gentlemen, insomuch that when Colonell Stephens with his wife and family retreated into the Castle, they could not endure their bad en∣tertainement, and the Princes Trumpeter (then a prisoner) had better lodging then he and his whole family, whereupon he retur∣ned into the Town againe. Page 6. Col: Steevens ne∣ver acquainted Col: Fiennes, and his brother affir∣meth that he bid him take his choice of any roome in the Ca∣stle. He tells us he had but 700 men left in the Towne, and never a penny of money to pay them: Col: Fiennes had left in the Towne halfe his owne foot Regiment, halfe Col: Pophams Regi∣ment, the new begun, though not yet compleat Regiment of his brother Iohn Fiennes, being about 300 or 400 men, besides 300 or 400 foot remaining of Sir William Wallers, and 1000 or 1200 foot he newly (by his own confession) raised and Armed in the Town, so that he had neere upon 2500 foot, besides his Regiment of horse, and his Company of dragoons, which is the number he un∣dertook to keep the Town with as aforesaid, 3 Lyes: There were only 3 Companies of Col: Fiennes his Regiment, not a man of Col: Po∣phams, and the 300 or 400 remai∣ning of Sir Wil∣liam Wallers were part of the 1000. If M. Walker that was a Sommerser∣setshire Gentle∣man, and con∣stantly resided in the Town before, had not most va∣liantly runne out of the Town when the enemy came before it. and many more men he might have had, if hee had not as aforesaid so much lessened the
Reputation of the Committees in the Country, that they, who by their Warrant had called in neere upon a thousand men in Februa∣ry last, when Prince Rupert was before the Towne, could not now call in a hundred, so much was the Countrey distasted with taking free Quarter, Horses, disorderly plundering even from the best affe∣cted, and all these abuses, A base lye all a∣long. with many more, were imputed by the Countrey people unto the Committee and Deputy-Lieutenants re∣sident in Bristoll, because being in place they did not redresse them, although it were not in their power so to doe, being over-voted at the Councell of Warre, by Captaines purposely chosen and new made by the Governour, that he might have the sole power and countenance of that Councell to serve his ends, and being likewise overborne by the Governours accesse of power gotten from time to time by Commissions and Letters under hand from the Lord Generall, or the Parliament, which he kept sleeping by him, never shewing his additionall authority but upon speciall occasion, and then so cursorily and privately, as did easily declare he meant not to have his authority so well understood, as to draw it in danger to be examined and limited; A base lye, and scandalous to the Parliament and my L. Generall. Hereupon the Gentry forbore to inter∣meddle with affaires, and the whole Towne and Countrey Were filled with jealousies and indignations; and where he affirmes he had not one penny of money to pay his souldiers: This causeth admiration in all men, who have observed what strange and unheard of wayes were used, and what number of spunges and horse∣leeches were continually imployed to suck both from the Towne and Countrey, some devices to raise monies we will set downe, all is impossible. 1. A tax of 500 l. or 600. pound a week upon the Town, which was afterwards drawn down to a far lesse summe, we know not up∣on what consideration, since it is apparent the Towne was able to beare a far heavier burthen. But he would beare no part of it himselfe. He doth not at all seeme to deny it in that Letter, and this tax was laved and disbur∣ced by the De∣puty-Lieutenants themselves, not a penny of it came to Col: Fiennes his hands, not of that of the twen∣tieth part, he ne∣ver received any within 20 miles, or within halfe a mile. 2. A tax upon Somerset and Glocestershires towards the fortify∣ing of so much of Bristol as stood in these Counties, yet this Rela∣tor concealeth, and in his Letter the 17 of June, seemes to deny that he had any speciall levy for his worke, both from the Towne and Countrey. 3. The weekely assessment, and the 20 parts within his verge of 20 miles, which though they were not duely rased, amounted to
a considerable summe, if an accompt had bin kept thereof. 4. The plundering of S. Thomas Bridges, S. Maurice Berckley, and many other mens estates in the Countrey, without any warrant from the Councell of Warre, or the Deputy-Lieutenants, contrary to an expresse Order made by the said Councell, all which were carried into the Castle without account; A Lye. And when complaints were made for undue plundring, they were never heard by a Coun∣cell of Warre, but privately referred to Langrish or his equals, and the complainants just request choaked with delayes, as in Mistris Millers case and others. A Lye. 5. The letting and setting, or the stocking with plundred Cat∣tle, the said Delinquents and other mens estates, and sequestring their Rents with account, and without the concurrence or privity of the Deputy-Lieutenants. 6. The consiscated estates of the Conspirators in Bristol, and the secret compositions made with many of them, are thought to be very considerable, a the rather, because when it was move d, that all compositions might be made openly at a full Councell, and entered into the Councell booke, it would not be hearkened unto: a A Lye. All these shall be proved to be Lyes at a Coū∣cell of Warre. Yet Colonell Fiennes in his Letter to his Father, dated June 17. 1643. (see Re∣lation, pag. 25.) saith, he shall never make 3000. l. of the Conspira∣tors estates: It may be he meant upon compositions besides their plunder, which he could set no probable value upon. 7. Divers loanes upon the publike faith to a great value, estima∣ted b at 7000. l. b A Lye by 6500. 8. Divers supplies from Parliament, which were alwaies c con∣cealed from the Committee; c What had the Committee of Sō∣mersetshiere to do with it. he had received 4000. l. before the 12. of May, 1643. by his own confession, (Relation p. 23.) and we heare he hath received at the least 3000. l. or 4000. l. since, quaere whether he hath received any mony from Sir Gilbert Gerrard? 9. Licences to trade with the Enemy ( d even contrary to his Ex∣cellencies Ordinances of Warre) not granted for nothing. d A base Lye. 10. e Custome mony 1700. l. e Another Lye. Col: Fiennes hath received together with the 1700. l. of custome mony, in all 6688, and shall give a very good account of that, and all other re∣ceits that this Pā∣phletter or any other can charge him withall. 11. If we may believe common fame, many Tradesmen (with whom we formerly told you the Castle was cumbred) f were drawne to give 10. l. a man, to have themselves and their goods secured there, f Another Lye. g and yet no sufficient caution is made in the Articles of Surrender, g The 9th Article of the agreement was framed pur∣posely for it. to restore the said goods to them againe, many of
them not being to be found, and the poor men are put to compound with the enemy for getting them out, as formerly they did with their friends to get them in; Besides, whereas his horse were to have 2. s. 6. d. a day pay, Colonell Fiennes gave them free quarter in the Country, and but 1. s. the day pay; g quaere what became of the rest. g It was discoun∣ted to the State, as may appeare by the Captains ac∣coūts given in be∣fore this Pamphlet came forth. This we set downe to shew how good an Oecononist our Go∣vernour was, and how able to raise mony, having so rich a shop as the Towne of Bristoll to worke in; h certainly, it was very possible fr such a thriving Governour to maintaine the Garrison out of so rich a Towne, without the assistance of the adjacent Counties, (contrary to his tenet, page 4.) h How doth this agree with what was said before of the many and un∣heard of devices to get mony? How many pounds or pence did his Go∣vernour Col: Essex to whom he was assistant raise out of that rich City. and this we demonstrate by the pre∣sent practise of the Kings Forces, who make that Towne, not on∣ly maintaine their whole Garrison, but man forth and maintaine a good sleete of Ships, find Gunpowder, and pay a great fine besides. If Co. Fiennes had been a Comm an∣der of the Kings Forces, or that the Parliament world let their officers doe what they do, he could have rai∣sed as much mo∣ney as they, and yet sure this de∣monstrator is mi∣staken in the hy∣pothesis of his de∣monstration And for the better understanding of this money businesse, know that Colonell Pophams Regiment of Foot, and Colonell Coles Regiment of horse and Dragoones, resident in Towne, were not paid by the Governour, but by the Country; and the Governours whole charge estimated by himselfe, (in a Letter to his Father dated June 17. 1643. and printed with his Relation, pag. 23.) was betweene a 1000. l. 1200. l. and 1300. l. a weeke, reckoning as we conceive his weekly disbursment for fortifying, which was none of his charge.) And for the 15. Regiments of foot and 12. Regi∣ments of horse, wherewith the Relator (pag. 6.) saith, the enemy besieged the Towne; It is confidently affirmed they were not halfe Regiments, and that many of their Colours were no other then such as the enemy had taken from Sir William Waller, and were now set up like scar-Crowes, or penall statutes against Recusants in terrorem only: Let Souldiers judg of their number that saw them. But he relateth (pag. 7.) that there was one place where the workes were not perfect, the ditch not made on the outside, nor the foot-banck on the inside, where was but a weake guard, * This seemeth strange to those that knew how much money was raised to perfect the workes, how long time was spent in per∣fecting, and how suddainly so small a defect would have beene re∣medied, unlesse it had beene purposely left as a posterne for the ene∣my; * A base supposi∣tion, as if he that would have be trayed the Town, would first have killed so many of their men and of∣ficers of quality, in testimony of his correspondency with them. All these particulars shall be fully clea∣red at a Councell of Warre. and that there should be but a weak guard left in the weakest place, and Major Langrish with his Troopes of horse left there to
second the Foot, soundeth not well; i Had the severall complaints formerly made to the Governour against Langrish for his cowar∣dise at Wells, Muncton Forly, Landsdowne, and the Devises, i For the businesse of Welles Langrish was not only clea∣red at a Councell of Warre, but also commended. At Muncton Forly he was not present, being sent to Bri∣stol by S. W. Wal∣ler, and in the o∣ther a places he rā away no other∣wise then Sir W. Waller, and all the rest did. or the present advice of Col. Stephens, Lieutenant Col. Clifton, and many others been heard, he had not beene set there to betray the trust re∣posed in him now: A Lye. Co. Stephē and L. Col. Cliston gave no such ad∣vice. wherefore we must set Langrishes faults up∣on Col. Fiennes score. But it stood not with the Governours con∣veniency to heare any complaints against so k profitable an instru∣ment, he knew much, and could discover much, Delicta fuere ne∣xus amicitiae, (p. 8.) k A base & groūd∣lesse slander. the Relator continues his History of the ene∣mies entering the Line of communication which proved the losse of the Towne. To avoid interruption we will set downe the counter-relation, according to the information received from l di∣vers Gentlemen of quality, commanding in that service. l But namelesse. When the enemies first viewed the Towne, a great Officer of that Army declared his opinion, that he thought it not fit to be attempted, alledging it was no where assaultable, but in the hollow way, be∣tweene Brandon hill Fort, and Windmill hill Fort, (the onely place where the enemy afterwards found entrance upon an as∣sault given) the works being imperfect, and a weak guard kept there, as abovesaid, by the Relators owne confession, (page 7.) It was much the place most obnoxious should be least regarded, yet so it happened, and upon the first entrance m for an houre toge∣ther, there were not above 100. of the enemies, within the Line, m A Lye the foe was so wary in seconding those that entered, that he gave them for lost n And those that entered afterwards as seconds were but such scattered souldiers as had been beaten off elsewhere from the Workes, betweene Wind mill hill Fort and Pegor hill Fort: n How doth this agree with the for∣mer clause that the enemy should fal on with so few men in the maine place intended for the assault. How easily might any man but Langrish have done good service there? as appeares by the good service done by Captain Lieutenant Nevill (whom for honours sake I name, see the Relation, page 8.) who had but 40. horse, and yet if he had been seconded by some Mus∣ketiers, he had cut off all that were then entered, and for about o 2. houres more, there were not above 300. of the Enemies entered, (so unapt they were to beleeve so unexpected a good fortune) o A Lye. p But the Governour presently upon the first entrance of the assaylants, sent his Lieutenant Col: to call his souldiers off from the Line, p A Lye as shall be made to appeare at a Councell of Warre. who af∣firmed that if our souldiers did not speedily retreat, they would be
all cut-off: q Lieutenant Col. Davison with other Officers, earnest∣ly advising that a sally might be made out of the Towne upon them, q A Lye Lieuten. Col: Davison gave no such advise to the Governeur, was not called off his guard till the enemy was posses∣sed of all those places, was not out in the sally, as almost all the rest of the held Offi∣cers were. and that the r Souldiers yet remaining at the line, might keepe it, and fall upon the reare of them, which he could not obtaine untill 3. houres after the assaylants had entred the line, when it was too late, and the Enemy had possessed himself of Essex fort, the Redlodge Sir Fardinando Gorges house, and the Colledge Tower, places of advantage in the Suburbes, r Whence should the Governour have had the soul∣diers to have salli∣ed out with, if he had not called thē off the line, out of the supplies those Gentlemen should have sent him that went about by the lands end Major Lewes (an old Souldier) was of the same mind with Davison, and being at the Line, would not quit it in an houre and half, although he received many commands to that purpose: At last his souldiers taking notice they were com∣manded away, and Lewes receiving a command in writing under the Governours own hand to retire into the Town s under paine of hanging, he obeyed: s He deserved to be hanged if he had not come off as at a Councell of Warre shall be made to appeare. After the sally unseasonably made, and bea∣ten back again, spoken of, (pag. 8.) the assailants possessed the Sub∣urbs as far as Froome gate, t yet was there no danger of the enemies wa∣ding over at the Key, the depth of the mud and disadvantagious landing places, would have made them lyable to great execution, even by stones and clubs, wherin the Townsmen would not have been back∣wards. t How did our own souldiers run over without sticking in the mud. The Defendants both Townsmen and Souldiers were disheart∣ned and displeased at their retreat from the Line, into the Town, and to adde more discouragement to thom, the Governour instead of making his last retreat into the Castle, according to his first re∣solution, neglected to make so much as a shew of further defence, but presently resolved upon a Treaty with the enemy; whether he called his owne creatures, his officers to ioyne with him in this resolution, is uncertaine; But the Committee and Gentlemen of the Country (who had most to lose there) viz. u Sir John Horner, Master Stephens, his sonne the Colonell, and divers other Officers doe deny he ever put the question to them, whether they would treat or no? u A grosse Lye, most, if not all the Gentlemen were there, the question was put to them, and no man dissen∣ted. But after he had sent a Drum to the enemy for a Trea∣ty, and gave Langrish and Captaine Thomas Hippesly for Hostages, he then called the Gentlemen to Counsell, to know what Articles he should propound in their behalfe. This Treaty slackned all mens courages, and made them lay by all thought of saving them∣selves, by fight, but by Treaty only. x Now, and not till now, (what∣soever the Relator saith, pag. 8.) the Souldiers began to drop from
their Coulours and Guards, and many of them ran to the Enemy, x Another grosse Lye, of 1200, 12. foote could not he get to their co∣lours, before any Treaty was thought on or spo∣ken off. and discovered the amazednesse and disorders of the Defendants: Had the Governour retreated to the Castle, and set a good face upon the matter, it would have bettered his conditions, both for the good of his Souldiers and Towns-men, who were so far from a de∣signe to fall upon the Garrison, that they had shewed great love in victualling the souldiers, and great courage in fighting for them. Is that to set a good face upon the matter, to run and hide his head in a Castle whilst hundreds of his Souldiers and friends were but∣chering in the Town. We will not argue how tenable the Town and Castle, or the Ca∣stle, after the Town lost, was, but certainly the Governour and all his Councell (untill that very moment) thought it tenable: otherwise to what purpose served, First, his great cost in fortify∣ing, continued to that day? Secondly, his victualling the Castle? Thirdly, his desire to Sir William Waller to withdraw with his Horse, for feare of cunsuming his provisions, prooved by the testi∣mony of Col: Cooke, whom Col: Fiennes imployed to carry a Message to that purpose, and by a writing under Col: Fiennes hand herewith printed; A Lye. All those particu∣lars shall be an∣swered at a Coū∣cell of War, how all this may be reconciled. And how could Sir Wil: Waller make such hast to Exeter or to Glocester, as to raise forces to rescue Col: Fiennes that was so hasty as to deliver up the Towne and Castle in three or foure dayes to the enemy? Fourthly, his former resolution at a councell of Warre was, if they were beaten from the Line, to fire the Suburbs and retreat into the Town and at last to fire the Town and retreat into the Castle, to which purpose Orders were given out; At what Coun∣cell of War? Who gave out those orders? and yet when we consider how he had pestered the Castle with unnecessary people, and thereby disabled himselfe to draw in his Souldiers to keep it, we cannot but conclude his resolution to loose that and save himselfe was of an antienter date then his deeds and words formerly made shew of, A lye, He gave a Warrant to Cap∣taine Birck and others, to rid the Castle of all such. How to save him∣selfe by keeping at the Line, and most usually in the places of greatest danger, and going to the Koy and marsh to appoint the guards, when the enemy played thick upon him from the Col∣ledge-tower and the houses open S. Austins backe, having a good marke to know him by, by the horse that usual∣ly accompanied him, sure hee might have been safer in the Ca∣stle. but we are sorry to heare this Relator (page 9.) make it so cleer a point that if the place had been Tenable, he could not have hoped for any reliefe in 6 or 8 weeks: what a discouragement will this be to that stout and faithfull Commander Col: Massy, and other Governours of Townes, who have not such a powerfull solicitor with the Parliament as Col: Fiennes Father. We have seen 3 of the Governours reasons why he could not keep the Castle. The first was, he had too many men to keepe the Castle, though too few to make good the Town. The second was, a doubt least the City should fall upon him in his retreat thither. Third was, the weakenes of the Castle not fully fortified: And
now newly discovered by the enemies manner of storming, and the execution his peeces of battery had lately done upon our Para∣petts of earth; Together with the provision he had made of close decked boates, and galleries; which provision is gainsaid by all men: If it was not be∣fore, sure now it is a very cleere point, Col: Fien∣nes was not much out in judging he could not have succour in lesse then six weeks, and it was beyond expecta∣tion that Gloce∣ster had it so soene. Let us now weigh the rest of his arguments (page 9 and 10) upon that subject; first he wanted powder and match, he confes∣seth he found 45 barrells, when he first undertook the charge of the Town, that he received 30 barrells from London, and 126 barrells from France, in all 201 barrells; besides what powder was made in the Town, being about 6 or 7 barrells weekely for 30 weekes together, A lye. by halfe the barrells, and well neere hale the weekes. and what was and might have been gotten out of ships, shops and Merchants sellars, a large quantity surely, had they been well searched; but to find Gunpowder had been to loose a good excuse; Quaere, how many of these were double barrells, and what became of the overplus (graunting that Sir William Waller had 60 barrells out of this said sum) Besides when Chaptain Birck heard that the Castle would be rendred, he came to the chiefe Gunner, desiring the Keyes of him, for that hee would defend the Castle himselfe; the Gunner answered him, it was impossible, for that he had but 10 barrels of powder left, and afterwards in further talk, the said Gunner confessed he had about 60 barrels, but alledged that Colonell Fiennes bid him say, that he had but 10 barrels left; Sure neither was Captain Birck such a foole, nor the Master gun∣ner such a lyer. And for Match Colonell Fiennes might have made enough there. A brave Soulder to maintaine a Castle against a Royall Army, with Match that was to be made every day in the Castle. Secondly, he saith he should have lost all his Horse, being 300, and all the foot which would not be contained in the Castle; wherefore it was concluded by the Councell of Warre to treat and accept of conditions which might preserve 300 horse and 1500 foot to the Parliament: what Councell of War this was appeares not. The Committee and Gentlemen of the Country and most Officers deny, they were called to any such Councell of War, or any such conclusion agreed on to their knowledge (as I heve above said) As you have above lied. And he might have sent his Horse away by night to Glocester, and drawn all his foot into the Castle, had he not so stuffed it with unserviceable people; Sir you were not the first inven∣tour of that ex∣pedient for the Horse, and if you could have fag∣gotted all the foot one upon another in the Castle, what should have be∣come of your friends in the Town between whom and you there was a joint protesta∣tion and oath of mutuall defence. But it should seeme by his actions subsequent to the conclusion of the Treaty, he tooke little care to preserve the said body of men for service of the Parliament: for presently upon the Articles agreed on; First, Hee suffered his men to fall off from their Colours, Guards and Watches, A false lye. Col: Fiennes both by his commands, & by all wayes and meanes endea∣voured to keepe the Souldiers to their coulours and Guards, whereby the Common souldiers of the Enemy entering the Towne, before the time appointed came for the defendants to march out, and
mingling with our Souldiers, gave the Enemy advantage in the mixture, to plunder houses, strip and rifle our Souldiers, dismount our horse, to allure, intice and inforce from the Parl: service many of them; and so to breake and dissolve almost all that body foot and horse: who thereupon scattered and dispersed themselves about the Country into harvest-work for their present reliefe; Nor could the Commanders on the Enemies part remedy this evill which the Governours own folly had drawn upon him; and this is a bet∣ter justification of the two Armies, then that wherewith the Go∣vernour by way of compliance tickleth them, (in his 11 page) All these parti∣culars shall be cleered at a Coū∣cell of War, and for the point of powder, mentio∣ned in the prece∣dent page, that had not Col: Fi∣ennes got some from beyond-seas, and other∣wise by his in∣deavours, the West had been lost long since, and the 10 barrells he helped Glocester with saved it. Nor did the Governour beate his Drum or call his foot Souldiers again to the Colours when he went out of Town, whereby they might march away with him in one intire body; and bee kept together for the service of their Countrey; Secondly, Presently upon the Articles agreed upon, the Governour set all the prisoners in the Town and Castle, at liberty, 2 Grosse lyes. Those that advi∣sed this, thought neither Towne or Castle very safe and tenable. these forthwith grew insolent and fell to plunder both Town and Castle, before the enemy entered to take orderly possession of them; these prisoners were many in num∣ber, and divers of them men of good quality taken by Sir William Waller; the Governour often complaining he was made Sir Wil∣liam Wallers Goale-keeper, A base & groūd∣lesse slander up∣on a Nobleman. He remembers no such answer, but conceives it a justifiable an∣swer if he had said it. and repining at the charge of keeping them, he was often advised to remove them to a place of more safety, where they might be kept as pledges for our friends in cap∣tivity: London and the Lord Sayes Isle of Lundy were propounded. But for the first, the voyage was too chargeable, and for the last (it is since conceived) the Governour was unwilling to send any company to that place, whereby the misteries of that Island, might be discovered; and observation made what was carried in and out there: A malicious lye. He knowes that Col: Fiennes did what he could to suppresse such disorders which were occasioned by the connivāce of other Com∣manders. and when Sir William Waller moved Col: Fiennes to send away the said prisoners by Sea before the enemy came before the Town, he answered he would not, for that he would keep them to make his own conditions the better; For the Priso∣ners, Col: Fiennes wished Captaine Birck, to see if there could be meanes found to send them away by sea, but he could not, and he desired also Sir Arthur Ha∣zelrigg to take some of them with him, but he would have none of them. his own Councells were al∣wayes the best, I meane for his own ends; to make good which, the Councell of War was well furnished with suffragan Captains, purposely made to vote for him. Much more might be said upon this Subject, especially for abuses done in Churches, &c. where∣by the love of the Town and Country was much alienated. But enough hath been said of a bad matter, let us resort to God for mer∣cy, and to man for justice to be done in a fitting way, (that is openly and by man uninteressed,) lest for want of due rewards and due pu∣nishments
(the two Poles upon which the frame of Government turnes) the reforming part of the Common-wealth, become  corrupt as the part to be reformed, which God of his mercy forbid. If lyers and slan∣derers be not pu∣nished and Pillo∣red, no men of honour will be able to live and doe service, as Col: Fiennes doth not doubt to make it appeare at a Councell of Warre, that he made as good a defence of that place, as any hath been made of a∣ny place since this war, though not so long nor so successefull, through other mens faults and the weake con∣dition of the place. THere hath lately come to my view a Letter written by Col: Nath: Fiennes to my L. Generall, with no date to it, wherein (among other matters already confuted in the answer to his relation) he te you he armed 3000 foot, and 300 horse, and paid constantly 2000 foot and a Regiment of horse for 4 of 5 moneths together; This we deny, Col. Pophams Regiment of foot being armed and paid by the Country, and where he will find 2000 foot, those excepted, we know not, unlesse they lay hid in Prince Ruperts imaginary close decked boates: he further saith, he was alwayes ready to furnish Sir William Waller with armes, money, &c. It is denied for both, especially for money, the money Sir Wil∣liam Waller had from Bristoll being taken up upon the private securi∣ty of divers Genelemen, Deputy-Lieutenants, and Committees of Par∣liament and others, Col: Fiennes alwayes repining thereat, and com∣plaining they would draw dry the spring and starve the Garrison in the Town by those courses; this letter seemes to be attested under the hands of divers men, some whereof deny they ever subscribed it. Sure they will not deny their hands when they see them, and Col. Fiennes will bring better proof of all that you deny, even of that which he said concerning close decked boates, then you can prove Major Langrishes cow∣ardize at Munctō Forly when he was 10 miles off. The true Copies of a Certificate under Col. Fiennes own hand, dated Iuly 17▪ 1643. As also of an Order of a Counsell of War held in Bristol the same day, expressing the true causes why Sir W. Waller left the City of Bristol. THE CERTIFICATE. I doe conceive that Sir W. Waller having only horse, they would be of little us unto us for the defence of this City, and may be rather a burthen unto us in the con∣sumption of our provisions, and therefore I doe approve of Sir Williams resolution to march out of the Town with them, and to dispose of them as he shall think most advantagious to the Cause. Bristol, July 17, 1643. Nath: Fiennes. THE ORDER. It was Ordered at a Councel of War held in Bristol, July 17, 1643. That (according to the importunity of the Governour and his Officers) Sir Wil: Wallers departure from Bristol, will be of farre greater consequence for the advancing of this present service, then his remaining there. And after debate, it was concluded most convenient, That Sir Will: Waller speedily march towards His Excellencie the Earle of Essex, or to London. Edvvard Hungersord. Alexander Popham. James Keir. Francis Dovvet. Arthur Haselrig. William Carr. Edward Cook. Jonas Van-drusch. I know not what he meanes by printing that cer∣tificate, and that Order of S Wil: Wallers Councel. of War (whereof I deny the paren∣thesis to be true to my best re∣membrance) and for the Certifi∣cate, I am still of the same judge∣ment under the favour of this great Souldier, especially if Sir Wil: Wallers words were true concerning his horse, that they were such rascalls as he could never rule them. Finis.
