G1214 E1470_3 R208694 99867621 119940
Dies Dominicus Redivivus, OR, The Lords Day Enlivened. OR A TREATISE, As to discover the practical part of the Evangelical Sabbath: So to recover the spiritual part of that Pious Practice to its primitive life: Lamentably lost, in these last Declining times. By PHILIP GOODVVIN M. A. Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastour of the publike Congregation at Watford in Hart∣ford shire. Mark 2 7. The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath. Luk. 4.16. And Jesus camt to Nazareth, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day as his custome was. Imprimatur, Ed. Calamy. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Andrew Kebe and are to be sold at his Shop over against St. Margarets-hill in Southwark, 1654.
TO THE VVorshipful the Justices of the Peace adjacent. Gentlemen, AS the most high God hath set you up to be su∣preame persons in the places of your aboade: so he hath been pleased to put precious oppor∣tunities into your hands for the honour∣ing of him as Christian Magistrates. Now among the many things requisite for Religious Magistrates that they may honour the most high God, menti∣on I shall onely make Of Knowledge, and Courage.
Knowledge to examine and state things right; Courage to determine and act right things. Knowledge as the eye seeing what is just to be done; Courage as the hand doing what is seen to be just. If cou∣rage be without knowledge, the eye of justice is blind: If knowledge be with∣out courage, the sword of justice is blunt. Though your knowledge I do not question: yet your courage I would quicken. And therefore I hum∣bly beseech you to consider, In what cases, And for what causes, courage is comely in every Christian Magistrate. The cases that require courage, are either Civil or Religious. Civil cases that tend to the good of the body Poli∣tick. Religious cases hat tend to the good of the body Ecclesiastick. These ca∣ses last are not the least. Yea, as the Church is more excellent then the Common-Wealth, so a Christian Ma∣gistrate is more to mind the affairs of Gods Church, then the concernments of
any civil State.Magis miror Davidem sallantem quam pug∣ntem. Hence Gregory pro∣fessed, he did more commend David dancing before the Ark, then fight∣ing with the Philistines. All his courage in conquering enemies, was not like his zeal for Religion, and the holy worship of God. Moses having brought Israel out of Egypt,Romae qu∣tie scunque Senatus co∣gbaur, nulla de re prius qu de religone agebat. Varro. lib. 14. cap. 17. before he settled the Common-Wealth, he prescribed the way of Gods worship. Our dear Lord little looked after Civil Judicature, but much laboured the purging of the Temple. Tis Religion as Lactan∣tius oft teacheth that maintains humane Societies, civil Subordinati∣ons,Lact. de vera sepi∣ent lib 4. cap. 4. which otherwise could not sub∣sist, but savage cruelties and sensual impieties would pull all in pieces. Yea, there is no State, City, or Town, but it prospers in temporals, according as Religion and things that relate to God are nourished, and do flourish.Dilexi vi∣rum, qui cum corpor solveretur, magis de statu Eccle∣siarum quam de propriis pe∣riculis an∣gbtur. Ambros. in vit. Theo∣dosii. See Hag. 1. God bids some consider whe∣ther they did not thrive, according as they promoted the building of the Tem∣ple. How well went it with the Com∣mon-Wealth
of Israel when Josiah and Jehoshaphat bestirred them in a Reli∣gious reformation? And how was So∣lomons and Rehoboams Kingdome shaken when they did not regard Reli∣gion, but corrupted the worship of God, leaving the things of God to lie naked and open to enemies and evils. The Gold, blue silk, and purple would ne∣ver have been so safe, or shined so well within the Tabernacle had not the outside been covered with red skins and Goats hair. Such a shelter ought Magistracy to be to Gods Church and all the things of Religion therein, whereby they may the better, and the brighter shine. And as the care and courage of Magistrates ought to be most in the matters of God: So among them their zeal ought to be most earnest in the matter of the Sabbath. The Sabbath observed, is the Compendium and Epitome of the whole practice of Piety. As the transgression of the Sabbath is the violation of the whole Law of God. When the people of Israel went to ga∣ther
Manna on the day of the Sabbath, God makes his complaint to Moses their Magistrate, saying, Exod. 16.18. How long will they refuse to keep my Commandements, and to obey my Lawes? Lawes and Comman∣dements, in the plural: In that they broke the Command of the Sabbath God accounts it as a breach of all his Commandements, and a sin against all his concernments: This Moses is to be affected with. And therefore all that are in office under God, ought to be most burning in zeal against Sabbath-sins & sinners, and for due observing the day of the Sabbath. Such was the zeal of the first and best reformers, as we find in Scripture,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 10. Socrat. lib. 5. Russin. Ecc. bi. lib. 2. Gen. 3.24. The Magi∣strates duty in this point. See Pag. 132, 133, 134. and in the Histories of all ages. In this case therefore of the Lords day in the Lords Name, let me call upon you who about us bear the ci∣vil sword to be towards this Gospel Sab∣bath (as the Cherubims with their flaming sword towards that tree in Paradise) preserving the way thereof, and observing the work therein, &c.
SIRS, so far as possibly you can draw out your care, and lift up your courage so as to be a wall of fire for this dayes defence, that on this day the visible parts of Gods worship be performed, and therefore that the places of Gods wor∣ship be diligently frequented. As I would beseech your zeal against the principal places of Satans service, I mean Rotten Alehouses the Suburbs & Seminaries of Hell, the Nurceries of sin, and Synagogues of sinners: so for the places (within your precincts) of Gods publick worship. The worship of God in publick upon the Lords day by your personal presence, and by your Magisteriall power expresse how much you prize. No marvel David had such a desire to build a house to God, when he cryes out, Psal. 84. How ami∣able are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, &c. How you highly esteeme the publick Ordinances of God declared by your close endeavours to support both the DAY, and the place of their publick use.
The causes that may encourage zeal in these cases, mount your minds and raise your spirits for God and all that is Gods, His Sabbaths and service. I beseech you observe, How hereto you are bound, and How herein you are backed. You are bound that about these things above all you burn in zeal. Hath not God bound you? And have not you bound your selves? God hath bound you not onely as men, but as Magistrates by his holy commands to mind the matters of Religion before all other things in the world, Deut. 16.17, 18. We see what Injunctions are set upon the Supreame Magistrate in this regard, and there∣fore Magistrates subordinate are chiefly to see to such things, above all to look that the dayes and duties of Gods wor∣ship be carefully kept up, by all within the Gates, as of their Domestick, so of their Civil Jurisdiction, Exod. 20.10. Yea, you kave bound your selves by so∣lemn oathes. Though civil things are principally expressed, yet all is in order
to a higher end and greater good. True, some Magistrates, as Jehu, and Jero∣boam, have made the matters of God subordinate to their own interests and the outward peace of their kingdoms, but it hath ever proved the fatal mis∣carriage of such misplacing Governours. State-ends must all be subordinate, the chief and uppermost end of all in power is to preserve the things of God. The main end therefore of all your engage∣ments, is to maintain Gods worship, his holy Sabbaths, and whatever serves for his honour. As an oath hath a Divine Ground, so it is for ends Divine. And though many simple men that be brought before you discern God no more in oaths, then Christ in Sacraments, and therefore can take, yea, and break oaths (as Sampson his Withs) at their wills; Yet what a solemn and sacred thing an oath is you well know. Hereby you are bound, as to do just things be∣twixt man and man, so to do things just for God much more. And as you are bound, so you are backed, and backed
so, as may well work up your warmest courage in the cause of God, for the WAYES and DAYES of God. You are backed with good Lawes against all open offenders, and seen-Sabbath-sin∣ners: Evil doers upon the Lords day. You are backed with the prayers of all Gods precious people, who pour out their hearts to God to preserve, blesse, and prosper all pious Magistrates by whose means Godlinesse may be promoted a∣mongst men, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. You are backed with the promises of God, the presence of God; God is with you, be valiant: Be valiant, for God is with you. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour, sayes the An∣gel to Gideon, Judg. 6.12. Be strong and of a good courage, ayes God to Joshua, I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: One∣ly be thou strong and very couragi∣ous, Chap. 1. vers. 5, 6, 7. And therefore, worthy SIRS, I be∣seech you against all encounters cloath your selves with courage. You are to
encourage others, (inferiour Officers are by your language, carriage, countenance, counsel, commands, to become couragi∣ous) and therefore be you your selves full of fiery courage. The Audacious∣nesse of men to sin, even Sabbath-sins; And the dulnesse of men even to Gods Sabbath-service, calls loud for courage in Christian Magistrates. Our Savi∣our had his scourge or whip, with which he drove men out of the Temple with their sheep and oxen from their buying and selling: Magistrates had need have their whips, penal Lawes in force to drive men into publick places of Gods pure worship with their children and ser∣vants to hearing Gods holy Word and other duties upon the Lords day. Good SIRS, so far as you can put on with en∣kindled courage. Such must not be soft wood, but heart of Oak, that are in the place of civil pillars; not men of easie, facil, flexible, timorous natures; but men of unbended, unbiassed dispositions, resolutions, full of fortitude, valour, magnanimity, and of Masculine spirits,
&c. Theodoret hath a good observa∣tion upon that in Leviticus,Levit. 4.22.27. , &c. where the Ruler for his sin is enjoyned to offer an he-Goat, the private man a she-Goat; for though the female may fit the ruled, yet the male most suites such as rule. Some think that hence Constantine was termed, Revel. 12. the Churches Male or man-child, because of his manly zeal for Gods Church, the Lords day, and all the affairs of the Gospel. Gentlemen, I hope you bear with me, I conceive I am not excentrick, but move within my own sphere while I seek to incite you with courage to set to it for God.Num. 10. Joshua 6.20. When of old the Armies of Israel were to go out in Battel, the Priests were to blow the trumpets. Tis meet for us that are Gospel Ministers to be as Gods Trumpetters, or Drum∣mers, to draw up the spirits, & raise the courage of all that are to engage on Gods side for Sabbaths, and all his sacred con∣cernments against sinful men, among hich Magistrates, and men in office
must have a main stroke. If I may by these expressions, and by this present Dedication more hearten you up for God, and more heighten your zeal for the beating down of sin, and well-being with us of Gods blessed Sabbath: I have my design, Who am ready to serve you in all such affairs, Philip Goodwin. Watford, July 20. 1654.
To the Reader. Dear Christian, A Quickening and a wakening provi∣dence that appeared in the place of my abode about a year ago, put me then on publikely to preach and presse the practical obser∣vation of the Christian-Sabbath. And though upon that sad providential passage, I thought it seasonable to say something upon that subject, yet at first I onely intended two Sermons as one dayes exercise, but I found the Bread so abundantly to multiply even in the breaking, that I could not but acknowlege the bounty of
a Divine hand. Whereupon I pro∣ceeded, and upon the same further in∣sisted. That soul-provision which was therein made, though some hungrily received, yet others hungrily refused, so that I could not but clearly see As God with, So the Divel against. Which made me more to mind the matter. Hereupon having for di∣vers dayes discoursed, I was soon after much moved to transcribe some Notes thereof by me that were very unlegible in their first Draught. These after coming into the hands of several friends, they much encou∣raged me further to communicate the same. I considering they were both Gracious, and Judicious, thought it might be the Lords voice, and that whereunto I ought to listen. Likewise considering of the mat∣ter it self, I could not but confesse it might be of necessary use in the con∣cernments of the Sabbath. For
whereas there are two sorts [Sab∣bath-ward] whose case is sinful and sad: So here are two parts apply∣ing proper remedies for their reco∣very and cure. He is not onely a stranger, but a stone in our English Israel, who doth not sensibly discern, concerning Gods sacred Sabbath. As some putting off the practice of all good thereon: so others not ex∣pressing any spirit of life therein. As some slighters of the Sabbath-day-duties: so others slighty in the duties of the Sabbath day. As some living in a fearful neglect: so others resting in a formal discharge of a few feeble and faint performan∣ces. The former part is pertinent to put men on to the practice of Sab∣bath-service. The latter part is pertinent to pull men up, in the ser∣vice of the Sabbath that they pra∣ctise. And indeed as the leavers of the Lords-day-duties: so the live∣esse in the duties of the Lords day,
who would not condole their condi∣tions, and endeavour to quicken their affections? These latter we as Mini∣sters should much lament, and if po∣ssible amend. The wonted way and day of Gods worship how doth it wax old in our Land? Like David, when he was old and stricken in years they covered him with cloathes, but he gat no heat; wherefore his servants said to him, Let there be sought for my Lord the King a young Virgin, and let her stand before the King, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bo∣some, that my Lord the King may get heat, 1 Kings 1.1, 2, 3. 'Tis not ordinary cloaths or bare outward Ordinances that will bring warmth into this blessed day, that now seems with us to wax old and cold. We must seek for the Spirit of God, the spirit of duty, which as the soul being brought into its bo∣some will put new life, with warmth thereinto. And were but the Lords
day thus recovered to its heat and health, other duties of Religion would not long lie sick: yea, though all religious duties with divers lie dead in our dayes, yet if this live, they would live likewise. Of the lively Lords day, we may say as 'tis said of Eve, Gen. 3.20. She was the Mother of all living. As the Lord of the Sabbath is the Father: so the Sabbath of the Lord is the Mother of all spiritual life. In the womb of a wel-spent Sabbath are the most vi∣gorous and best spiritual conceptions. In the armes and by the breasts of such blessed Sabbaths are born and brought up many new-born babes for God: yea, let the Spirit of the Lord spring life in the Lords-day-duties and Ministerial endeavours, how soon would sunk Christians, decaying and dying professors be fetched back that are going apace to the grave of Apostasie, And other raised that are ven dead and buried in sin? Indeed
some have sunk so low, and (God-ward) been dead so long, that we may say of them, as Martha of her brother, Lord, by this time he stinketh, Joh. 11. yet we might look to see even such Lazarusses arise from their Sepul∣chers of sin upon the spiritual living of Sabbaths and the sacred service of God; such things I also considering, my encouragments have encreased thus publickly to appear in this pre∣sent Treatise. Yet (as great cause requireth) reflecting upon my many infirmities, crosse thoughts have sometimes beset me, not knowing what to do, but looking up to the Lord, at length I resolved to let it go, considering likewise that the Lord oftentimes does great matters by li∣tle and unlikely means. The Pro∣phet was pulled out of a dark deep Dungeon by cast clouts and rotten rags that onely seemed fit for the Dunghil, Jer. 38.11, 12, 13. If th Lord will, my poor weak word
may be some means to draw Sabbaths and sacred Ordinances out of those Dungeons of contempt into which they seem now to be cast. And therefore (good Reader) joyn with me in prayer, that a blessing from above may abide this book, and that the great God of heaven would go with it from heart to heart, and make it some help to this holy Sabbaths and servants. Now the good Lord put life into every leafe▪ line and letter, and the Lord out of his goodnesse more en∣liven my soul and thine, Who am thine in the Lord glad to do thy soul any good, Philip Goodwin. August 9. 1654.
To the Reader. THe matters of Almighty God, and of mans immor∣tal soul, are things of the greatest concernment in all the world. This truth is in the ge∣nerall readily acknowledged by all, and yet there is no one truth more con∣tradicted by the constant courses of the most of men. The businesse of the Sab∣bath is a convincing instance: for al∣though Gods honour, and mens welfare are very much engaged herein; yet many in opinion, and more in their practice, do oppose the right observa∣tion thereof, as holy to the Lord. First, Gods concernment herein may many wayes be made manifest. This is one
of those ten Commandements charged by the Creatour of heaven and earth up∣on man:eut. 4.13.o. 31.18. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. And the engrossing of this charge, God did not leave to any Amanuensis, but he writ it with his own finger.eut. 4.13. sworth. Also to intimate that his intentions were to perpetuate this (with the other precepts of the Decalogue) in the morality thereof, the Lord himself imprinted it, (not in paper) but upon Tables of stone: yea, when the first Tables of stone were broken,xo. 34.1, . en. 2.2. hald. Pa∣phr. a. 58.13. oc ad eum, non d homines ferri de∣t. Calv. ark 2.28. his Ma∣jestie gave expresse order unto Moses, to have other Tables like to the former prepared, and he wrote thereon the same Law, the second time. As the Lord delighted in the first institution of the Sabbath, so he accounts himself honour∣ed, by its sanctification: yea, he taketh this, as a title of glory, to be called, The Lord of the Sabbath: whereas this is his complaint and charge against them who are regardlesse of his Sabbath: I am profaned amongst them, Ezek. 22.26.
Secondly, Mans obligations to keep the Sabbath, would neither be judged few, nor weak,Ezek. 20.12. Ezek. 20.20. Ezek. 20.12. Heb 4.4, 5, 8, 9. if principles of sacred self-love might prevail: For the Sab∣bath is givin, not as a task, but as a pri∣viledge to Gods people to be a pledge of their interest in God, and a confirma∣tion unto their hope of their further sanctification; as also of their ever∣lasting Sabbatisme, or rest after their wearisome wandrings in this World.sa. 58.13. Sabbathum deliciarum: And for the sweetning of the Wilder∣nesse-Way, unto the heavenly Canaan, the Lord hath provided a Sabbath for our spiritual feasting every Week, in which respect, he commandeth us to call it, and to observe it, as a day of delight. The Text, opened and improved in this ensuing Treatise, giveth instance, of an heavenly rapture,Isa. 58.13. Sabb thum delicatum quia deli∣catè, et te nerè est ob∣servandu. Lapid. locum. n with which Saint John in his exile, was refreshed on the Lords Day; and the servants of Christ have, in all ages, had abundant experi∣ence of spiritual Cordials given in, upon their consciencious keeping of this Sab∣bath:
therefore, the rather should we observe it, with holy tendernesse, as Solomon counselleth every one, to keep Gods Law, as the Apple of his eye, Prov. 7.2. Upon the first consideration, we may condemn the profaners of the Sabbath, as guiltie of sacriledge;Exo. 20.10. Rev. 1.10. for, it being the Sabbath of the Lord, and the Lords Day, that time is stollen from God himself, which is spent otherwise then he alloweth. And how sad this sacriledge and theft is, I find unfolded in the following Treatise. Onely ob∣serve, this sin against God in Sabbath-abuse is abominable, and inexcusable, because we are charged only with one day weekly, to be kept as holy unto the Lord. I remember,Deut. 5. that Moses maketh men∣tion of this, as an Act of Gods great indulgence towards man, and that ha∣ving written the ten Commandments, he added no more: And should not we with obediential submission, acknow∣ledge the same concerning the Sabbath?
Upon the second consideration, men may without uncharitablenesse, be censured also as inexcusably regardlesse of their own soules good, both in regard of grace and comfort, here and hereafter, who disrespect the Sabbath day, which is the Market-day of the soul, as worthy Mr. Rich. Rogers was wont to call it. And that smart sentence (which was misapplyed unto Christ, (for he strictly kept the Sabbath of the Lord his God,) may be applyed to that person, who is a wilfull, ordinary profaner of that holy time:Joh 9.16. This man is nor of God, because he keepeth not the Sabbath day. Ac∣cording to a mans regard, or disregard of the Sabbath, is his respect, or disre∣spect unto all the rest of Gods Comman∣dements. Here I might take occasion to bewail bitterly Englands wofull declinings, both in matters of doctrine and pra∣ctice, concerning the Sabbath. In for∣mer times, no Reformed Church was so famous, either for soundnesse in judg∣ment,
or exactnesse in conversation, in relation to the Lords Day. But our Apostasie began to be Notorious, when the Book for the allowing of sports, on that day, was promoted, to gratifie the profane and Popish party, then predo∣minant in England. And hereupon many, both Bishops and others (for alas, how apt are men, even Ministers among others to swim down the tide with them who bear rule?) appeared in the Pulpit, and in the Presse, to decry the moralitie and exact observation of the fourth Commandment. Many worthy ser∣vants of Christ looked upon Germanies Warres as a fruit of this high provo∣cation there, and they have judged our late-yeares troubles an effect of the like profanation. At this day (notwith∣standing our Covenanted Reformation) how wofully is Gods Sabbath neglected every where! and may we not say, that the loosenesse of them, who are Atheistically wicked, is not so dange∣rous to poor England, as the carnal li∣berty
of such, who pretend unto the highest pitch of sanctitie? How ma∣ny even amongst them, under pretence of Gospel immunities, and of observing every day as a spiritual Sabbath, do both take, and plead for that libertie on the Lords Day, which old Puritans (amongst whom the power of godli∣nesse shined gloriously) did decry and abominate. Many years since I heard this speech (uttered with much affecti∣on) from famous Mr. John Rogers, Take away the Sabbath, and Reli∣gion will soon wither. And is not this too much verified amongst our selves in England at this day? We have had, and we have Acts, Ordi∣nances, Orders, for the better keeping of the Lords Day; but who knoweth not, that the life of the Law, lyeth in the execution? Proclamations and Papers will not pluck down profane∣nesse, except they be strengthened by the vigorous actings of persons in power. The Lord threateningly com∣plaineth
of the Priests in former times, because they hid their eyes from the Sabbath.Ezek. 22.26. The meaning of the com∣plaint is judged to be, either (more generally) their regardlesnesse thereof,  (more particularly) their not taking notice when, and how, and by whom profaned, that they might by roproof seek redresse. This I mention, that we Ministers may mind our Duties in this regard more. The Reverend Au∣thour of this Usefull Treatise hath ex∣pressed vigorous affections, with for∣cible arguments to awaken, quicken, and encourage people unto the better keeping of the Christian Sabbath. And what considerations can be more com∣manding and conquering unto an in∣genuous experienced Christian, then those two, hinted and handled from the Text, which this godly man under∣taketh and pursueth to good purpose in this present Treatise, viz. 1. Christ, (whose Day, the Sabbath is in a way of sanctified peculiarity;) 2. Spirituall
joy, with which the Lord is wont to crown the sanctifiers of this his holy Day. The former usefull Works of this my worthy good friend, have found so good acceptance amongst Gods people, that I hope this piece (for its own sake, rather then for my poor Testimony) will also be welcomed and improved. I com∣mend this savoury Treatise to thy serious perusal, and thy self therein, to the blessing of God Almighty. I am Thy friend and servant in, and for Jesus Christ, Simeon Ashe. August 7. 1654.
THE Contents of the first Part. 1. HOw God from the Beginning before the Law, ordained a set Day for Religious Duties, pag. 6 2. How God after under the Law did more unfold and confirm the same. pag. 7 3. Why Christ under the Gospel should have a set Day for his Service, p. 10 4. Wherein the work of Redemption surpass'd the work of Creation. p. 11 5. Wherefore the first Day of the week is called The Lords Day. p. 15 6. What warrant for the change of the Sabbath from tke last to the first Day. p. 34 7. Their Objections answered who op∣pose the Doctrine of the Lords Day. p. 36, &c.
8. Of the Lords-Day-Duties what they are, and where to be perform'd. p. 58, 125 9. Their Objections answered who neg∣lect the Duties of the Lords Day, p. 65, &c. 10. The Multitudes of sinners against the Lords Day discovered. p. 20, &c. 11. The Magnitude of their sin opened in several respects. p. 83, &c. 12. The sad Judgments to which Sab∣bath-breakers are subject. p. 96, &c. 13. Gods Delay of executing Judgment upon many that mis-spend his Day, why. p. 110, &c. 14. What all are to do to help on due Sabbath-observance. p. 120, &c. 15. What especially some are to do that the Sabbath-Day may be duly obser∣ved. p. 132, &c. 16. The Necessary Use of the Sabbath. To whom, and for why. p. 138, &c. 17. The probable losse of the Lords Day, when and wherefore. p. 148, &c. 18. How the Lords Day being remo∣ved,
may be long before its return. p. 160, &c. 19. How the Lords Day may remain amongst some as a sore curse. p. 166. &c. 20. How equal it is to observe one Day in seven holy to God. p. 169, &c. 21. The excellency of the Lords Day, being well observed. p. 179, &c. 22. The commodity of well keeping this our Christian Sabbath. p. 196, &c. 23. The comforts of the Christian Sab∣bath well kept. p. 214 24. Their Objections answered, who cannot find the comfort and profit. p. 225, &c. 25. How the Lords Day in the worst times may be certainly and sweetly continued. p. 244.
THE CONTENTS of the second Part. 1. TO be in the Spirit on the Lords Day, as S. John was, what it is. p. 259 2. Why some of Gods Servants are on the Lords Day in the Spirit. p. 281 3. How any others of the servants of God may be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. p. 293 4. The properties of Gods Spirit to∣wards good men. p. 294 5. The properties of good mens spirits towards the Lord. p. 300 6. Unsanctified men cannot be on the Lords Day in the Spirit, why. p. 309 7. A false spirit moves mightily in them, how that is discovered. p. 325
8. How far some such men may be mo∣ved by the Spirit of God. p. 343 9. Objections by and about some in this regard answered. p. 357 10. Some of Gods Saints on the Lords Day are not in the Spirit, why. p. 354 11. Spiritually to spend the Lords Day what it contains. p. 380 12. Motives that incite spiritually to spend the Lords Day, of two sorts. p. 389 13. Duties requisite to a spiritual spend∣ing the Lords Day, of three sorts. p. 433 14. Preparation for the Lords Day, wherefore, and wherein it is. p. 437 15. How the Lords Day is to be begun, carried on, and ended. p. 452 16. What is required after the Lords Day is over. p. 468.
A short Epistle to the Reader, touching the Errata's. Courteous Reader, THough thou art no fault-finder, yet thou mayest find many faults in a few sheets, both through the Defects of the Authour, and through the Mistakes of the Printer. These latter, are ei∣ther lesser, or greater. Very many words false-spelled,As centre, for center. survile, for servile. and such like. and mis-print∣ed, yet the sense of the place preser∣ved. These and such errours being lesse, I let passe. But many words are printed so much amisse, as destroy the very sense of the place. And among such errours more grosse, Note these.
In the main Text. Page 33. line 12. for sports, read spots. p. 34 l. 24. for use, r. cause. p. 37. l. 25. for breach, r. branch. p. 54. l. 3. for meal, r. wheale. p. 96. li. 15. for renounced, r. removed. p. 107. l 4. for note, r. find p. 108. l. 4 for frogs, r. fogs. p. 121 l 21. for conjunction, r. conviction. p. 135. l. 14. for Yea, r. So. p. 142. l. 27. for, in dayes past, r. in dayes future. p 145. l 6. for but, r. yea, pa. 153. . 3. for cause, r. case. pa. 217. line 10. for Goats, r. Groats. p. 250. l. 2. for pre. r. preserve. p. 22. line 12. for whole man, r. whole of man. p. 353. l. 16. for, fixed, r. fired. p. 372 l. 18. for fixed, r. fired. p 389 l. 16. for spirituality, read spiritual. pag. 412. l. 23. for provoke, r. promote. p. 419. l. 16. for condile, r. condole, &c. Errata in the Mergent. Pag. 41. pro sdendum. lege ludendum. pag. 24. pro ancle. leg. ante. pa. 253. pro sancto, leg. sancta. ibid. pro quiscns, leg. quiescens. ibd. pro Exem. leg. Erem. pag. 322. pro pessima. lege pessimi. pag. 328. pro August, leg. August. These, (Good Reader) and some other such Bruises, the Body of this Book in the Birth hath suffered, which yet thou mayest much heal, by applying thereunto thy charitable
Interpretations, which he humbly entreats, who heartily desires Gods honour herein, and thy Benefit here∣by. Philip Goodwin.
THE LORDS DAY Enlivened. Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit, on the Lords Day. SAint John among the Apo∣stles, is compared to the Eagle among the birds: and truly let him be ob∣served, but onely as the Text present reports, therein he is found to fly exceeding high, soaring upward with heavenly wings, yea, he did as it were pass out of the world into the Spi∣rit, to converse with God in sublime
mysteries upon the day of the Lord. I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. Indeed if we reflect upon the fore∣going verse, we may view him in a very low place and case. I John who also am your Brother, (written to some afflicted Churches of Christ) and companion in tribulation, &c. Other Histories also tell into what troublesome times he was turned, how Souldiers having apprehended him in Asia,Non mul∣tum ante temporis Apocalyp∣sin vidit Joannes. Sed pene nostro seculo ad finem Do∣mitiani Im∣perii. Ire∣naeus li. 5. cont. Va∣lent. and hurried him to Rome, where being brought before Domitian (under whom was the second, if not the sad∣dest of the ten persecutions) this cruell Emperour caused him (for the cause of Christ) to be cast into a Cauldron of boyling oyl, out of which by a strange providence being escaped, he was after carried to prison in the Isle Patmos, which (as Geographers write) was a bar∣ren beggarly place, a little desert Island, lying in the Aegean Sea, where sure this good man met with misery so much as might have sunk his Soul. But though he was (world-ward) in a woe case all the week; yet he was in a high rap∣ture, and Heavenly posture when the Lords day came.
I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. In the words of the Apostle are ob∣servable: Somewhat implyed: And, Somewhat expressed. Or his Concession. And his Assertion. That which he silently grants, and se∣cretly, yet certainly implyes, is, That there was then a Lords Day in use▪ and which he himself in his sufferings ob∣served. That which he positively expresses, and plainly affirms, is, That upon this Day of the Lord, he was in the Spi∣rit, I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. As there were two brazen Pillars whereupon the burden of Solomons Porch was placed, 1. Kin. 7. So the burthen of following discourse shall all be brought and layd (through the Lords help) upon two Principall Points. 1. Point, That even in the times of the Gospel there hath been, and is con∣tinued a day, which is the Lord Christs by a peculiar claim.
THE LORDS DAY. 2. Point, that some of the Servants of the Lord have been, and others may be, in the Spirit on this day of the Lord. The Apostle is plain from his own ex∣perience: I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. Upon these two bottomes I shall en∣deavour to raise the Religious obser∣vance of the Christian Sabbath, and to lift up the Lords Day unto its highest and holiest use. And now enter the first, That the Lord Christ our dear Savi∣our hath a day that is peculiarly (His). THE LORDS DAY. All daies indeed are the Lords. The Lord Christ in all daies hath an un∣doubted interest, yea, and a double pow∣er for their dispose. Natural, and Oeconomicall. An originall power and property pertaines to him as he is God coessen∣tiall and coeternall with his Fa∣her. A derivative property and power as he is Christ the Mediator. For as God
the Father hath put all things, so all times into his Son Christs hands. We find, Genesis 1. the whole space of time divided into Dayes, and Nights. Now there is not a night or day but is the Lords, Psalme 74.16. The day is thine, the night also is thine. Yet there is a day which is THE LORDS, by an excellency, and in a super-eminent and immediate manner. As we see, Psalme 50. the Lord sayes, that all creatures are his; Every beast of the Forrest is mine, the cattell upon a thousand hills, and all the Fowles of the Mountaines are mine, Verse 10, 11. But yet those Bullocks and sheep that were set apart for Sacrifice, were more immediately the Lords. And thus all time is the Lords, there is not a day in a thousand years, nor an houre in ten thousand dayes, but to the least minute, all is the Lords. Yet there is a day so set apart for ho∣ly service, That 'tis THE LORDS DAY. I shall reduce things to a threefold Thesis or Position.
1. Pos. That God hath one day in seven set apart for his solemne service, is sure even from the beginning. 2. Position, That Christ also should have one day in seven solemnely set apart for his service, is sure. 3. Position, That this day, viz. the first day in the week, which Christians have commonly kept, is that day assu∣redly. THE LORDS DAY. First, God from the beginning did ordain such a day for religious du∣ties, a holy Sabbath. This we shall consider, As first, sanctified. And after, ratified. The consecration of it to Adam in Paradise, And The promulgation of it to Moses on the Mount. 1. God did establish a seventh day for a sacred Sabbath, Gen. 2.2, 3. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, &c. As God appointed Adam his work, to wit, on the week-dayes to dresse the ground: so God provided him a Sabbath, a seventh day of holy rest. The ground indeed did not then as now
need tillage, but the first man must be an Exemplar or pattern to Posterity. Neither did Adam need rest by reason of any bodily wearinesse in Innocency presupposed: but God would have him full and whole to set himself one day in seven to serve him, and in a holy com∣munion then more immmediately to meet his Maker, which might be unto him a Paradise in Paradise. This Sab∣bath for his souls solace was as the sweetest flower in all his Garden. This Seventh day God had bssed, and man was bound to keep. As there was a speciall Tree whereof Adam might not eate; So there was a speciall time that Adam might not break. Though he should live without sin: Yet he must not live without a Sab∣bath. Secondly, God did publish his Sab∣bath-pleasure more plain to his People upon Mount Sinai, Exod. 20.8, 9. ver. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, &c. Which words, as they concern a Set-seventh-day-sabbath, so they seem to
look towards it with a two-fold as∣pect, Both backward, And forward. Backward] As reflecting upon the Sabbath for meer entrance. Such a day already instituted, the Seventh day, God in mercy had made it holy, and man must remember to keep it ho∣ly. Some (especially Popish Writers) say, there was no Sabbath set before the Lord had proclaimed his Law upon Mount Sinai: but all the most Orthodox determine otherwise. Besides that in Genesis precited, we see, Exod. 16.23. To morrow (sayes Moses) is the rest of the holy Sabbath to the Lord. It appears 'twas a preap∣pointed day. Forward] As directing to the Sab∣baths further continuance. A day that must be remaining. Some would make the fourth com∣mandement to be a meer transient ce∣remonie, to live and die with the Jewish Church: But if they graunt that the other nine are morall and perpetuall, Then this.
For 'tis comprised among them. Yea, 'tis advanced above them. This is set in the middle of all, as the very heart of the whole, as if the Sab∣bath on the seventh day were the centre in which all the lines of Gods Law meet. Yea, this is set beyond them, as we may see if we observe, with what a word 'tis inforced in the preface, and with what words 'tis inlarged in the progresse. Re∣member, it stands at the door to invite,Calvin, Muscu∣lus, Zan∣chius, &c. 'tis a word of great weight, as our late VVriters observe. And in the precept, as we passe the roomes, there we meet with many words to welcome. The Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work, &c. As saint Paul said of himself, consider∣ed with the other Apostles, 2. Cor. 11. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I. Are they the Ministers of Christ? I am more. In labours more abundant. In prisons more frequent: So may the Sabbath-precept say of it self in respect of the other commandements: Were they written with the finger of God in stone? so was I. Were they put into
the Ark safe to be preserved? So was I. In reasons more urgent. In circumstan∣ces more aboundant; more particulars pressing practise, then in any of the other precepts. The whole Decalogue or holy Law of God was delivered in thunder, and the loudest and longest clap seemed to lie upon the fourth com∣mandement. As if at this the Trumpet gave the largest and shrillest sound, to set it forth and to settle it fast. So we see God had for his service (a Sabbath) the seventh day. From the creation setled: and so to proceed. Secondly, that our dear Saviour should have such a set day of holy rest and religious labour, as relating to him, suits with Scripture, and agrees with grounds of reason. For Christ he hath wrought, as God the Father did; and Christ is to be honoured, as God the Father was. First, the same works have been done by Christ the Son, as were done by God the Father: John 5.19. Jesus answered. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son does nothing of himself, but what he sees the Fa∣ther
do. For whatsoever things he doth, the same doth the Son likewise. Did God the Father blesse and sanctifie a seventh day for his sacred service? and shall not the Son do the same? Is there not a set day which the Son hath sancti∣fied? As God the Father rested from his works, so hath Christ the Son ceas∣ed from his, Heb. 4.10. There∣fore Christ is to have his Sabbath of rest, as well as God the Father, in the first age of the world. Yea, the work of Redemption done by the Son doth it not surpasse the work of the whole Cre∣ation? Being In it self most precious. Upon Christ more pressing, and Unto us more profitable. First, most precious is this work in it self, viz. Christs recovering souls above Gods creating the World. As mans gaining the world cannot recompence the losse of his soul: so Gods making the world does not equalize Christs re∣deeming the soul. To draw men out of an enthralled bondage, is more then to bring matters out of a confused Chaos. In the former God was to deal with no enemy: but in the latter Christ was
put to combate with all the Divells in hell, yea, and to overpower men oppo∣sing their own mercies. 2. Most pressing was this work to Christ, it made his very soul heavy un∣to the death, Mat. 26.38. In this Christ did not onely fight with the Divell, but God herein fought with Christ, bruised him and put him to grief, Isay 53.10. The worlds creation was done without difficulltie: But the redemption of souls was difficult and painfull. To effect the former, God did but speak the word; VVhereas to fulfill the latter, the Lord Christ did shed his dearest blood. 3. Most profitable unto us men, is this mighty work of Christ. Indeed to have earth to tread on, air to breath in, meat to feed of, light to walk by, are benefits: but the subduing the strength of the Divell, the removing the sting of sin, with all the astonishing and sad sequels thereof: The reconciliatian of Gods anger, and The reparation of mans nature: These and the like are benefits more abundantly benenficiall. 'Tis a mor
admirable and andvantagious work for Christ to pull brands out of the fire, then for God to bring a world out of the water. After such works then may not Christ well require a day of religi∣ous rest? A Sabbath to be sanctified for his service one day in seven? Secondly, The same honour is due to the Son that was done to God the Father, John 5.23. All men should ho∣nour the Son of God even as they ho∣nour the Father. In the times of the Old Testament, all men did honour the Father with a day of holy worship, and was a special part of his honour: there∣fore all men must honour Christ the Son, in the times of the New Testa∣ment, with a set day for his solemne service. To Christ, for his Honour is ascri∣bed The service of the day (and there∣fore, The day for the service) is his due. We find Christ honoured by attri∣buting to him the Word, Coloss. 3.16. The Sacraments, of Baptisme, Act. 8.16. of the Supper, 1. Cor. 11.24. So pray∣er,
John 16.23. Yea, the whole Gospel-Ministery; 1. Cor. 4.1. Sure then he ought for his honours-sake to have a Sabbath-day for the exercise of all these. And are there not as great en∣deavours in these last dayes to lay the honour of Christ in the dust, as ever be∣fore was to trample down the glory of God the Father? Yea, and far greater: For Christ and the things of Christ. As they are much above nature cre∣ated. So they are most against nature cor∣rupted. Yea, and the corruption of nature was never so active and opposite against the dignities of Christ, as in these last daies, 1 John 2.18. Little Children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrists shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that t'is the last time, (or the last hour, as in the Greek). And the divell knowing his time is short) as he is the more malici∣ous:Quanto po∣testas Dia∣boli decre∣scit in tem∣pore, tanto crescit in malignitate. so he is the more expeditious, and industrious to dash down all the digni∣ties of Christ; and to hinder him the ho∣nour of his day, which for his honour is his due.
Thirdly, that the first day in the week is the day due to Christ. THE LORDS DAY. And this is fitly called the Lords day for a double cause. Because of what was done by the Lord on this day: and Because of what upon this day was done unto the Lord, First, Such things the Lord did upon this day as might well denominate it, The Lords Day; as, 1. His resurrection from the dead upon this day, Luk. 24.1, 2. John 20.1. Ve∣ry early in the morning did this Sun rise upon the first day in the week. And well might he settle this day most observable for by his this day ri∣sing, he made himself Most honourable, Most profitable, Most comfortable. First, Hereby honourable, manifesting his marvellous Power, when after three daies dead, the Sepulchre sealed, the stone rolled, a strong watch placed, yet he broke through all bars, beat down all opposition, as a Triumphing Conquerour over death and devills. Lazarus, John 11. When he rose came
up with his grave-clothes bound, but Christ cast off his grave-clothes, leaving them in the Sepulchre, Joh. 20. signify∣ing he had victory over death, wereas Lazarus was subject to die again.Plus erat de sepulchro surgere quam de cruce de∣scendere, & plus mortem resurgendo destruere quam vitam descendendo servare. Greg. The Jewes cryed, Let him come down from the Crosse, and we will believe. T'was more (sayes one) for Christ to ascend from his sepulchre, then to descend from the Crosse; more to vanquish death by rising, then to save his life by escaping: O the honour of this! 2. Hereby profitable; The death of Christ was at the sowing of the Corn, Joh. 12.24. The raising of Christ is as the springing up of the Corn. The be∣nefits of Christs death are reaped in his resurrection; the death of Christ was as the casting of Joseph into the pit, sel∣ling him into Egypt, and putting him into Prison; the raising of Christ is like the preferring of Joseph, by which he comes into a capacity to enrich all his Relations. 3. Hereby comfortable; O the joy of a raised Christ! The Christians in the Primitive Church were wont when they saw one another to have this joyful salute; The Lord is risen: and
the others ordinary answer was: True,. Plus gaude∣re propter resurrectio∣nem glorio∣sam quam dolere prop∣ter passio∣nem ignomi∣niosam. Bern. The Lord is risen indeed. We should not so much mourn (saith a good Au∣thor) at Christs ignominious Passion, as we should rejoyce at his glorious re∣surrection. The day therefore of Christs rising, may well set up this Chri∣stian Sabbath. 2. Christs appearing to his Disciples was upon this day; he shewed himself five times upon the very day he rose: first, to Mary Magdalen in the morning, Mark. 16.9. Secondly, to the women, Matth. 28.9, 10. Thirdly, to the two Disciples, Luk. 24.18. Fourthly, to Pe∣ter, Luk. 24.33. Fifthly, to the Ele∣ven, Mark, 16.14. Excepting Thomas, Joh. 20.24. When the Disciples were assembled Christ came in, and he stood in the midst among them (as the tree of life in the midst of Paradise) and unto them we may observe, He spake peace, and He gave power. He said unto them, Peace be unto you; Peace, From outward foes, and From inward fears. And when fears were out, joyes were
in, Joh. 20.20. Then the Disciples re∣joyced when they saw the Lord: ne∣ver did their spirits so spring within them. Never before did such a day of comfort dawn: And upon this day he gave them a threefold power; To Preach the Gospel, To administer the Sacraments, and To exercise Church-Discipline. As is evident, Matth. 28.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16, 17. Joh. 20.21, 22, 23, &c. Hereby He did both sanctifie the day for such Ordinances, And he did signifie such Ordinances were for the day. And again, the very next first day of the week after he arose from the dead he appeared to his Disciples, Thomas be∣ing with them. Then he did for his sake more familiarly and fully unfold him∣self then before. This made (one say) He was more beholding to Thomas doubting, then to Peter believing; for upon the occasion of that Disciples doubts, our dear Lord upon this day drew forth most infallible testimonies of the truth of his resurrection, and so left not onely to his present Disciples,
but to his succeeding servants a more firm foundation for their faith in him∣self, and a more strong Argument to inforce their following observance of the same day, Joh. 20.26, 27, 28, 29.August, de∣tempore. Ser. 25. Bel∣larm. de cultu sancto∣rum. l. 3. cap. 11. Tertul. li. de carne Christi. 3. The Mission, or Christs sending down of the holy Ghost was upon this day. It appears the Apostles met upon the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.1. this was a day instituted in remembrance of the Law delivered to Moses in the Mount fifty dayes after their departure out of Egypt. Answerably whereunto the ho∣ly Ghost (and Gods love thereby, Rom. 5.5.) is sent out, and shed abroad, the fiftieth day after Christ our Passe∣over was Sacrificed for us, which by computation of the learned, both Or∣thodox and Popish, was the first day of the week. Christ being gone up, the holy Spirit he comes down; A blessed bargain (saith an ancient Writer) here∣by was made betwixt heaven and earth, to triumphing Saints was given the presence of Christs body, and to Mili∣tant Saints was sent the comforts of Christs Spirit. The Spirit of Christ the Comforter came down upon this day. That cannot but be a holy day
wherein the holy Ghost came down. There be 3. works of excellency applyed to the three Persons in Trinity: to wit, The work of Creation to God the Father. The work of Redemption to God the Son. And The work of Sanctification to God the holy Ghost. Times and things, Persons and seasons he sanctifies. The holy Spirit passing through this day, hath made it holy: This being the day of the Lord his thus doing, 'tis THE LORDS DAY. 2. To the Lord upon this day hath been done Sabbath-service; In the Primitive times, and In posteriour times. The holy Apostles punctually set apart this first day of the week, for the worship of God. And they were men eminently endowed with the Spirit of Christ. Yea, men intimately acquain∣ted with the secrets of Christ, men im∣mediately instructed by the person of Christ: Christ in his own person be∣fore his death did discover things to them as to no other men, John 15.15.
and after his resurrection, they were the men whom he did commissionate to erect a Gospel-Church, and to order all things therein, and therefore he did continue with them for the space of for∣ty dayes before he ascended, that he might fully furnish them for those great appointments wherein he found them faithfull. And how successeful they were, we see, Act. 2. when on this same day were gained three thousand souls at one Sermon. O blessed day, blessed day! And as for the Apostle Paul, I shall pray you to ponder both, His practice, and His precept, binding the day. His practice in the day is plainly ex∣pressed, Act. 20.7. And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came to∣gether, Paul preached unto them, and con∣tinued his speech till midnight, being to de∣part on the morrow, &c. His precept for the day is plainly implyed, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. the Apostle there speaking of Col∣lections for Saints upon the first day of the week, when they should meet about the works of Gods worship, adds this, [As I have ordained in the Churches
of Galatia,Piscator in Gene. 2.3. fol. 52, &c. even so do ye.] In that, He Ordains such duties for the day, He Ordains the day for such duties. And above fourty years after this (as Chronologie saith) Saint John tells us in the text of such a continued day: The Lords day. And as for other good Authors since the holy Apostles, they report concerning the Christian Sab∣bath upon the first day of the week things of two sorts: Some more remote, as being a Prepa∣rance for it, and Some more immediate, asserting the observance of it. Some things they recite as referring to this first-dayes-Sabbath:August. de tempo. Ser. 25. Austin notes that this very day, was the first day of the Worlds Creation, when Angels, Elements, and lights were made; and that of all the six dayes-works, the work of the first day was greatest; because then the first matter and Model, the principals and Platform of all was laid. Austin also observes that this was the day of Noahs entring into the Ark,August. de civit. Dei. lb. 16. cap. 26. of Infants receiving Cir∣cumcision, of Mannas first falling in the Wildernesse: Origen before him saith▪
that if the Manna were gathered six dayes together as the Scripture de∣clares,Origen. Homil. 7. in Exod. and it ceased upon the seventh day, which was the Sabbath, without doubt it began on the first day which is the Lords day; and so he concludes the Lords day to be more excellent then the Jewish Sabbath. This was the day (say others) of Christs Nativity and Baptisme; of the Stars appearing at Bethlehem to the Wise men, of Christs feeding five thousand persons, and o∣ther particulars which are in this case collected. But I proceed to such as insist upon matters more immediate, affirming this first day of the week to be celebrated for the Sabbath of Christians. In Euse∣bius we read the witnesse of Dionysius the Corinthian, that they diligently kept holy this Lords day in those times. Tertullian naming the Solemnities of Christians, begins first with the Lords day, which they (he saith) most care∣fully kept, declaring their exercises ther∣on. Justin Martyr names the same day, and shewes their works: Ignatius against some that being Christians would retain the Jewish Sabbath, saith
in plain terms,Plinius sub Trajano scripsitsolitos hoc stato die convenire Christianos ancle lucem, carmen{que} Christo qua∣si eo com∣muni voce dicere; postea Sacramento se obstringe∣re non in sce∣lus aliquod, ne furia, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committe∣rent, &c. Magdeb. cent. 2. cap. 6. We celebrate no longer the Sabbath of the Jewes, but every one that loves Christ keepeth now holy the Lords day. An Historian writes of the Christians custome in the Emperour Trajans time, how they met upon this same set day early in the morning, sung a Psalm, received the Sacrament, and bound themselves in Covenant to fly sin, &c. And t'was a common questi∣on put to Christians when they were brought before Pagan Governours: [Dost thou observe the Lords day? and the ordinary answer then was, I am a Christian, and I dare not intermit it.] I shall shut up my discourse about this setling the Christian Sabbath, onely by considering, Something that Christ himself said, concerning that; and Something concerning that Christ said of himself. That which our Saviour saith of the Sabbath, we find, Matth. 24.20. Pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath-day: We may observe, the Sabbath our Saviour means, it was for such as were converted to the faith of Christ; and 'twas for to remain long
after the death of Christ. 1. The Persons that the Sabbath was for, appears to be the praying Saints of God, though Jewes by Nation, Chri∣stians by profession; and therefore the day they ought to observe was suitable. 2. The season of this Sabbath-day was during that Sabbath which should be at the time of the sacking, and sad desolating the City Jerusalem. About fourty years after Christs death that dreadful and terrible time came, when according to the voyce heard in the Temple, Let us depart hence] Gods people departed thence to Pella and o∣ther places; and for the Unconverted Jewes, (as Eusebius reports) whereas they had sold Christ for thirty pence, thirty of them were sold for a peny, and so many hundreds of them who cruci∣fied Christ, were crucified themselves in one day, that there were not places enough for Crosses, not Crosses for bodies. Then, then were Gods faith∣ful ones fain to fly for their lives; yet then were they to be serious, and inces∣sant in Sabbath-day-duties, then all Ce∣remonies were abolished. And that special day which the Jew
had observed being Ceremonial, was be∣fore abrogated; and a seventh day as a holy Sabbath upon an another ac∣count then kept, and so to continue. 2. That which our Saviour saith of himself as concerning the Sabbath, we see, Mark 2.28. The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath-day. Which notes in Christ touching this day two things; His Authority for it, and His Propriety in it. The Sabbath is such a day, that the Lord Christ For it gives a special command, and In it keeps a special Interest. Other time the Lord allots, and allows men for their ordinary affairs, but this day he reserves as his proper and pecu∣liar Portion. Truly may we say of the Sabbath, as 'tis said of Jacob, Psal. 135.4. The Lord hath chosen it unto himself for his peculiar treasure.Vox segulah significat rem quan∣dam auctam & charam, sive the sau∣rus fuerit sive res aliae quae cunqu. (His Segullah.) Time the Lord gives out, but this he keeps as his store, and as that which to him is most dear. THE LORDS DAY. Christ he is clearly the Lord of all, but especially
THE LORD OF THE SABBATH. The Sabbath at first considered with other dayes, As Christ hath separated it from them; So Christ hath elevated it above them. Above all dayes he doth estimate this, 'tis emiminently his: And he the Lord of this day. It being from him, in respect of its Rise, And it being for him, in respect of its Use. Christ was the raiser of it, and Christ is the ruler in it. This is that high day, he hath set up∣on stable grounds. This is that great day, he doth guide unto noble ends. The grounds on which this day is erected, are, The Lords abundant care of: And, His abiding Covenant with his Church and people throughout all ages. Such is the care the Lord hath for the spirituall profit of his People, and to perpetuate the Practice of Reli∣gion, as thereupon he appoints this pre∣sent day. Yea, and that it might abide: he hath bound it by covenant to con∣tinue through all generations,Vid. Wil∣lets Hexapla in locum. Exodus
13.16, 17. The ends to which this day is directed: are, The honour of God, And, The happinesse of man. Hence is that, Isay 58.13. If thou call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honourable, and shalt honour him. And hence is that, Isay 56.2. Happy [or blessed] is the man that doth this, & the son of man that layeth hold on it, that keep∣eth the Sabbath from polluting it To say now no more: this is that sweet day upon which Saint John had such Soul-ravishing-Revelations in the Spirit. I was in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. The Use two-fold. Of Information. Of Exhortation. First, we are here informed of mens fearful evills relating to the Lords Day, viz. Both The sinfull evill they are guilty of, & The Penall evill they are subject to. First, to set out the sinfulnesse of men against the Sabbath, I shall consider, and clearly discover The Multitude of the sinners, And The Magnitude of the sin.
Sinners against the Holy Sabbath are of severall sorts: Some sinning against the doctrine of the day: And, Some sinning against the duties of the day. 1. Some that in point of judgment lye crosse to the Lords Day. Of such There be some grosse in their opini∣on, And others in their opinion more loose. The former deny the day Positively, and in whole. The latter deny the day respectively, and in part. Those that do not at all believe the Lords Day, are of two sorts: Some that more Sordidly declare it, & Some that more subtilly conceale it. 1. There be some that publiquely pro∣claime their denyall of this Holy Day; and of them we may observe two sorts; Some that did never better appear in time past: And, Some that in time past did much bet∣ter appear. Some that have been so Sottishly and
abominably bred up, that a conviction of the Lords Day, they never let in; Sabbath-Principles they never laid up. And some whose education and profes∣sion hath formerly declared their be∣lief of the Lords Day: but now run in ranting and riotous waies, publishing their opinions against all Sabbath-ob∣servance: yea, are come to scorn, and mock at the Sabbaths of the Lord, like those, Lam. 1.7. Of such what shall I say? But declare them utterly unclean: because the Leprosie is in their heads I allude to that, Levit. 13.44. verse. Secondly, there be others that carrie Some Sabbath-day-shew, they abstain from their ordinary works, and meet where some matters of Religion are managed: but not from any tye upon conscience, or obedience to any divine Authority. The Papists upon an Eccle∣siasticall, and others upon a Politicall account, and because of the civill pow∣er; otherwise in their own opinions, they are set Sabbath-free. They do not embrace the Sabbath, that's crosse to their inward principles: yet they doe not disclaim the Sabbath, that may prove their outward Prejudice. This
is plain hypocrisie in the Lords Day, and woe to such hypocrites in the Day of the Lord. I proceed next to consider them that assent somewhat to a Sabbath-day: but their assent thereunto is not right and through. Of such there be two sorts. Some which deny that this is the Day: And, Some who deny that of the Day which is. Some grant the Lord hath a Day for his service, but they plead against the first, and for the last day in the week (the particular day which the Jewes kept) to be still the standing Sabbath-day. In this is a subtile design of Satan, when he sees, as Sabbath-men will have, he seeks to set it where it may be sure to fall; and though about this scruples may be in some consciencious: yet the principall Patrons for the Jewish Sabbbath do it out of a secret design to lay waste the Lords Day.Conatus eo∣rum tan∣quam Pesti∣lentissimus est retunden∣dus. Musc. Loc: Com. Part. 1. fol. 148. This made Musculus to conclude their cunning endeavours were perillous and pestilent, and by all meanes possible to be suppressed. Such men lift up Moses to throw down
Christ: advance God the Father to abase Christ the Son, and to deface his glory due. Zanchius de oper. re∣dempt. li. 1. ca. 19: fol: 612.And though they seem to be for God and his Law: yet 'tis an unlawful and ungodly thing (sayes Zanchius) as to have no certain day for Gods publick service: so to undermine and to over∣turn that day which is certainly set∣led for the Lords Day. Secondly, some grant this to be the very Lords Day: but they do not be∣lieve 'tis a day so precisely to be cele∣brated. As there are few so far Atheists as absolutely to deny there is a God: (A God many grant there is, that yet deny the true God, and many acknowledge the true God: that yet cannot be con∣vinced he is such a God, so just, holy, pure, and perfect.) Thus there are few so far opposite to Sabbath as wholly to deny there is any day. A day they yield there is; but then they do not confesse the right day, or they do not confesse the day aright, a day to be kept, so ho∣ly and strict, this they withstand, whence they are very loose and take large liber∣ties upon the Lords Day. And of these there are two sorts.
Some so minded for want of better Instructions. And some so minded from the force of base Corrupti∣ons. 1. Some have strange latitudes in their judgements of the Lords Day: and indeed the very Doctrine of some Churches, and Canons of Synods set the door wide, allowing liberty for worldly labour, recreations and sports upon the Sabbath-day. But these are black sports that blemish their beauty in the sight of God. 2. Some who live where they might learn better, the light of the Lords Day in the Doctrine of it, breaking out more bright, and shining forth clear and pure: yet they cannot see the ho∣linesse of the Day, through the filthi∣nesse of their flesh, and their dear in∣dulgings of their delightful lusts. Nei∣ther are they willing to see the Sabbaths Sanctity, lest it should disturb their sinful security. If for the Lords Day they should be strict in their opinions, they could not with conscience-quiet be loose in their practice: these persons, in this point of corrupt principles, and
erroneous judgements, object divers things, as, 1. Objection, The Sabbath is mutable and moveable from one day to another, and therefore may be removed quite and made utterly to cease. Answer, The Sabbath 'twas mutable, being altered from the last to the first day of the week: but 'tis not possible there should be such another change, in that there can never possibly be such another cause. To that change we may consider a double cause concur∣ring The material cause for it, and The actuall cause of it. The cause upon which the day was altered. viz. Christs Resurrection. The cause through which the day was altered, viz. Christs Institution. So that the cause on which, and the cause by which this was done, all was Christ. In this change of the Sabbath we may observe a double use: Originall, and Organicall.
The primary,Id sine du∣bio tenen∣dum, quod Ecclesia ab Apostolis Apostoli à Christo, Christus à Deo susce∣pit, &c. Tertul. Nostrae po∣testatis non est sanctifi∣care. Deus est qui sanctificat, &c. Muscul. Loc. Com. Praecept. 4. principall efficient cause of that change, was Christ: The holy Apostles were the Secundary and In∣strumentall cause; for to such purpo∣ses all their power, was from Christ, who did extraordinarily call, qualifie, and commissionate them upon such ac∣counts as never can come the like. The Lord himself set up his own Sabbath: and indeed, 'tis onely for him to give a being to a Sabbath that can give a bles∣sing to a Sabbath: this is the work of the Lord alone, to blesse and sanctifie a day. Therefore not any person may assume power, nor by any power may persons presume to alter and settle any other Sabbath. Men must not alter the ordi∣nance for the day, as they may not al∣ter the ordinances in the day, to bring in other Sacraments, another Gospell. Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from heaven should preach another Gospel to you then that you have received, let him be accur∣sed; and so he that shall cry up amongst you any other Sabbath then what ye have observed, let him be accur∣sed.
2. Object. 'Tis contrary to Christian liberty to be limited to a day wherein to worship God. Answer, Christian liberty learned out, is taken Either more strictly, Or more largely. Strictly,] Christian liberty is a release from Mosaical Ceremonies and Judai∣cal circumstances; but this doth not free from a fixed day for the Lords ser∣vice, which is not a ceremonie, a circumstance, but the very Soul and sub∣stance of Christian religion. Largely,] Christian liberty or Gospel-freedome it does comprise these two things; Freedom from the service of sin, and Freedom in the service of God. First, to be free from sins servitude, this implies freedom from death and di∣vel, the curse of the Law, and the wrath of God, the sequels of sins slavery; Sins service is the sorest bondage. Au∣stins Position is proper:August. de civit. Dei li. 3. cap. 4. A good man though he serves, yet he is free; a wick∣ed man though he reigns, he is a ser∣vant. Rome, saith he, is the great Mi∣stresse of the World, yet the drudge of
sin:Chrysos. Hom. 19. in priorem Epi. ad Co∣rinth. and hence Chrysostome concludes Joseph was the freeman, and his Mi∣stesse who obeyed her lusts, was the servant. 2 Pet. 2.19. While they promise themselves liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought into bondage. Secondly, to be free in the service of the Lord is sweet liberty: this is the case of Christians; whatever they do to∣wards God as their duty, 'tis under a freetenure, viz. the Covenant of Grace. Tis through a freee mover, viz. the Spirit of Christ, yea, and their own spirits set free by Christ: The precepts of the Lord are a good mans large walks, Psal. 119.45. I shall walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. BED∣DACHAH, at large: that is the onely free life, that's spent in seeking, serving, obeying, and blessing God. So then into Christian liberty let's look never so farre, we shall not find that a discharge from the Lords day is any breach there∣of. And therefore a strict observance of this Lords day is no breach thereof. 3. Objection, Under the Gospel there
is no difference of dayes to be obser∣ved. Answer, For satisfaction herein, we shall consider first, That there is a dif∣ference between dayes, which it is sinful for to observe. And Secondly, That yet there is a differ∣ence of the Sabbath from other dayes, which not to observe is sinful. Sinful it is to observe such a difference of days as is Heathenish, Jewish, Popish; the Apostle plainly prohibits this, Rom. 14.6. Gal. 4.10. Colos. 2.16. Yet by these places the Apostle doth not forbid a distinct observance of the Christian Sabbath, for then should he contradict himself, as Zanchius well observes; and others before him clear those Scrip∣tures, from any relation to the Lords day. Let him blesse the Lord, sayes Lu∣ther, that knowes how to distinguish be∣tween the Law and the Gospel. Like∣wise let him thank God who hath learned to distinguish between several Sabbaths under the Law, and this Lords day under the Gospel; they being abolished weare not bound to observe them, or to make any differ∣ence between those dayes, and others
of equal concernment. But for the Christian Sabbath, it abides; and a dif∣ference of that day from others we ought to observe. This is that day set apart, By the holiest Person; and, For the holiest purpose. Psal. 4.3. Know ye that the Lord hath set apart the man that is godly for himself. So know ye that the Lord hath set apart the day that is holy for himself. Here not to distinguish, is to abolish. As God will have his Servants to be separated from other men: So he will have his Sabbath to be differenced from other dayes. As men must not divide what God hath joyned: so men must not mingle what God hath separated, or debase what God hath elevated. 4. Object. Every day ought to be a Sabbath. Answ. True, the whole term of our life should be a continued Sabbath, in two respects, Viz. Cessation from the service of sin, and Disposition to the service of God. 1. To serve sin we should be ever averse; and O how glad would God's Saints be to keep such a perpetual Sab∣bath,
as alwayes to rest from sin! and O how sad have some of Gods Saints been, because such a Sabbath comes so seldome! How does the Apostle com∣plain, Rom. 7. That though with his mind he served the Law of God, yet with his flesh he served the Law of sin? Thus Austin condoles his own condition, Alas, sin fol∣lows I fly, and yet I fall; I fight, and yet I am captive: I run from it, and yet I am drawn to it; I would rest, but I can∣not be quiet one day, one hour, &c. To have such an uninterrupted rest, as to be every day at a distance from sin, is a very desirable Sabbath. 2. To serve God we should be ever prepared. Though we are not alwayes in Sabbath-day-time, yet our hearts should be alwayes in a Sabbath-day-frame, in such a blessed bent as is fit for all holy businesse. Some expound that precept of the Apostle Paul, Pray con∣tinually,] Have a continual frame of heart sit for holy prayer. And that of St. James, Be swift to heare,] Have alway an open ear, ready to hearken to the holy Word of God. We find, Ezek. 1. Angels described under the form of Beasts;] Having four faces and four
wings, vers. 6. Faces] Ready to mind, Wings] Ready to move into any part of the World, about any portion of work God pleases to appoint them: Thus Gods people should be in a pre∣pared posture at all seasons for Sab∣bath-service. Yet if we respect the performance of the solemn works of Gods worship, or the forbearance of the lawful works of mens callings; we are not required to keep an every day Sabbath, Exod. 20.9. Six dayes shalt thou labour, and do all thy work, vers. 10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of tht Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work. God could in the Creation (as Austin observes) have made an immediate dispatch of all with a word, but he took six dayes about the works of the World, that he might allot men six dayes time for worldly works. Yea, before the Law this was laid upon man: In the sweat of thy brows thou shalt eat thy Bread.Cumlegatur Adam in Paradiso po∣situs, ut operaretur, quis sanum sapiens fi∣lios ejus in hoc mundo positos ad sudendum arbitraretur Bern. Serm. And after the Law, under the Gospel. We command, saith the Apostle, men to work with quietnesse, and to eat their own bread. So that if men should not be in their worldy businesse upon the week-dayes,
they would sin in a defect, falling short of what is commanded. And if they should be every day in the set service of a Sabbath, they would sin in an ex∣cesse, going beyond what is required, which would be but will-worship, un∣warranted by the Word, and unplea∣sing to God. But with men this is but a meer pretence, to evade and avoyd all Sabbath-observance. As Polytheisme is the way to Atheisme, an omni-Reli∣gion to no-Religion; so a pretended every-day-Sabbath, and then really no Sabbath at all. Next we come to consider such as sin against the Lords day in point of pra∣ctice. Such are of two sorts. Some doing upon this day what they should not; and Some upon this day not doing what they should. The works that men should not do on the Sabbath day are double. Servile, and Sinnefull or Worldly, and Wicked works. And accordingly those that do upon the Lords day, what they be bound to forbear, are of two sorts;
Those that then be about,Est triplex servitus, un∣de opus dici∣tur servile, &c. Thom. Aqui. 22. qu. 122. art 4. either The evil works of sin, or The servile works of the world. In evil actings there are those that sin out the Sabbath day, passing away this precious time; Some in sinful pleasures, and Some in the pleasures of sin. Pleasures that are in themselves law∣ful, yet are sinfull upon the Lords Day. 'Twere better (Sayes Austin) for a man to dig and plow,August. in tit. Psal. 91. then to dance and play upon the Sabbath day: that to the Common-wealth may be a benefit: but of this there is no advantage: yet this is one of Satans stratagems, to make men mindlesse of Sabbath duties, he pleases them with sinful delights.Justin. lib. 1. As Cyrus dealt with the Lydians when he had conquered them in battel, he allow∣ed them liberty for all sports and pastimes, and so more fully subdued them, that they became his servants for ever: Thus Satan in policy puts men upon sinful pleasures even upon Sab∣bath daies, that for ever he may make them his assured and setled Servants. How contrary is this to what God in the Prophet expresses, Isay. 8.13. Thou
shalt not find thine own pleasure upon my holy day. But there are some who do exceed these, passing Sabbath-daies in the down right pleasures of sin: in lasciviousness, wantonness, surfeiting & drunkennesse, and such like sinfull actions, that 'tis rather the Divells day, then the Lords Day. Plutarch thought that the Sabbath of the Jews was from [Sabbos] a name of Bacchus,, Jovialiter vivere. that signifies to live riotously, jocundly, merrily, and the like. And indeed the Sabbath of Christians, as some keep it, may seeme to have such a derivation, for they make it the day of their mad merriments, when they are most Jovial, vain and voluptuous. And were it not for Gods wonderful Pati∣ence, while they are thus polluting the holy seasons of God, it should be to them as to Belshazzar, when he was abu∣sing the holy vessels of God: In the same hour came forth fingers of a mans hand, and wrote upon the plaister of the wall; MENE, MENE, TE∣KEL, &c. Then the Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joynts of his loyns were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Danniel 5.3, 4, 5, 6. To be sinful upon the Sabbath-day,Hieron. in Isaiam. cap. 5. Au∣gust. Tract. 4. in Joan. 'Tis an aggravation of sin; And, 'Tis an assimilation of Satan. Thus a man greatens his sin, by sin∣ning upon the Sabbath; a man not on∣ly offends against the fourth Comman∣dement, but other Commandements by such sins are also violated, which makes the offence more deep and double. As to be good in evill dayes, is that which heightens a mans praise, and declares the eminency of his grace; so to be evill on good dayes, sinfull upon the sacred Sabbaths of the Lord, is that which makes a mans case more cul∣pable, and his sin the more abomina∣ble. Thus a man likens himself to Satan, who is ever bad, but worst upon the best dayes. The wickedest act that ever the Divell did, was when he met man in the holy place of Paradise: and O what sinfull designs hath Satan upon the sons of men, when he meets them upon the holy time of Sabbaths! Of all sins such Satan is most prone to pro∣mote, that will most provoke God, and
such are the sins of the Sabbath. 1. Cor. 6.15. Shall I (sayes the Apostle) take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid; so should a man say, Shall I take the dayes of Christ, and make them the dayes of sin and vanity, of gluttony and drunken∣nesse? God forbid. Unto God sin is ever offensive, but to sin upon the Sab∣bath does most incense God. Ezra 9.13. Seeing, O Lord, thou hast given us such a deliverance as this, should we break thy commandements, and joyn affinity with the people of these abominations, wouldest not thou be angry till thou hadst consumed us, and so as there should be no escape? Thus ought men to argue, O Lord, see∣ing thou hast given us such A DAY as this, should we transgresse thy com∣mands, and practise abominations there∣upon, would'st not thou be very angry, &c.? Chrysost: de Lazar. con. c. 1.Chrysostome well observes: that the Sabbath is the Day God appoints to purge and cleanse men from sin; and therefore on that day for men to mix themselves in sin, is exceeding sin∣ful. Secondly, in earthly actings there are
those that spend out the Sabbath-Day, ravelling and running out this rich and precious time of the Lords Day. Some upon their worldly businesse, & Others about their businesse in the world. In Sabbath-time are some set upon their ordinary affaires. As Sea-water it will not abide in its own banks, but beats and eates upon the Land, and drownes the dry ground; so many mens worldly callings will not keep within their weeks compasse, but eate upon the Lords Day, and drown up Sabbath-time. God in the creation went on through all the works of the World, till he had made man, and then he took his Seventh Dayes rest, and sanctified it; how sad is it to see man stay in worldly works, and never care to come at God in a Sanctified-Seventh-Days-rest. True, there are some who though they will not be in the open Sabbath upon their ordinary week-day-work, yet they will be about such things as have ten∣dency thereunto. We find in the 14. of Luke, of some that when they were sent to at Super-time, they made their excuse: One said, I have bought a piece of
ground, and I must needs go and see: and another said, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them. The one sort did not at that very time purchase their Farme, but went then to see it; nor the other did not then buy their Oxen, but went then to prove them. Thus some in Sabbath-time though they are not upon the common work of their Trades, yet then they go to see, and are busie about the disposing of their week-day-works. As God in the Creation wrought out the works of the World in six several dayes, but the very first day he fitted and ordered the matter for the whole frame. Thus men upon the first day of the week, OUR LORDS DAY, are busie about the ordering of matters for their earthly affairs in the following dayes. All this proceeds from Satan that evil one, and from co∣vetousnesse the root of all evil. 1. The Divel upon the Lords day, when he cannot draw to that which is wicked, he will to what is worldly; Thereby To augment the sin of man, and To prevent the service of God. 1. Hereby Satan encreases the sin of
man, he well knowes those works which are upon the week dayes lawful, are up∣on the Sabbath sinful, and so sets men thereupon. 2. Hereby Satan opposes and suppres∣ses the Service of God: God upon this account requires (as Austin excellently notes) men upon the Sabbath to for∣bear their worldly businesse,August. de civit. Dei lib. 6. cap. 11. Idem de tempore Serm. 25. that they may then be the more free and full, prompt and ready for religious service; and fot this cause th Divel puts people then upon their earthly businesse, that he may beat them off from Gods bles∣sed service upon his holy Sabbath day. The Divel does not like diligence in a lawfull calling, but upon sinful designs he unseasonably sets men thereupon. I could report of a poor woman, oft under strong temptations, whom I have heard sometimes sadly say, she was not able all the week to go about the neces∣sary works of her calling, but when the Lords day was, she knew not how to keep from her worldly work, being vio∣lently provoked thereunto. True, the more common case is for Satan upon the Sabbath to hold men on in their earthly affairs, who are eagerly bent
thereabout all the week besides. As the subtile Serpent said to Eve, Gen. 3. Yea, hath God said, ye must not eat of every tree? so Satan subtilly sayes to men; Hath God said, Ye shall not work upon every day? ye may work, 'twill be for your benefit. Yea, should Satan be silent, to survile work on the Sabbath. 2. A principle of covetousnesse puts men hereupon: What made Eve to eat of the tree th was forbidden of God? And what caused Achan to take the wedge of gold that was otherwise disposed and set apart of God, but co∣vetousnesse? And whence is it, that men upon the Sabbath day which God hath separated for himself, are so car∣ried about their own common business, but from covetousnesse? Covetousness, Colos. 1.5. is called Idolatry; This Idol the world, it takes up that time of ser∣vice which does belong to God. The Sun must bear the swey of the Day, though the Moon rules the Night; and though the World▪ hath the pre∣dominancy all the week, yet 'tis meet Christ should have the command of his own day,
THE LORDS DAY. I proceed to a second sort that sinne against this Lords day, by not doing on the day what they ought. Concerning Sabbath-day-duties, we shall consider, The kind they are to be of, and The place they are to be in. For the kind,] the duties on the Lords day to be done, are Of Piety towards God, and Of Charity towards men. For the place,] the duties to be done on the Lords day, Are in our publike meetings, Or in our private dwellings. Now persons who do not their Sab∣bath duties, and so sin against this day, are of two sorts. Some that Idle out the day, and do nothing of the duty, and others that trifle in the day, and of the duty do but something. 1. Too many are manifest, that spend this holy day in Idlenesse. By the Law the Priests upon the Sabbath day, were to offer double sacrifice; whence Chrysostome collects,Chrysost. concion. de Lazaro. that the Sabbath ought not to be a day of ease and Idle∣nesse, but of double diligence in holy
exercises. In the Gospel even the Lord of this day is revealed, not as in an idle, but an active posture; During the dayes of his flesh he went about doing good, Act. 10.38. And the Sabbath was the day of his best and most abundant works, as is well observed; and there∣fore this Lords day calls for diligence in the best duties, and does not indulge Idlenesse. The Jewes use to call the seventh year the Idle year, because then the ground lay follow, no Plowing, or sowing, or bringing forth of Corn. Many Christians may call the seventh day, the Idle day, for then is no praying, hearing, &c. or bringing forth any fruit that is good, the whole day to the man, and the whole man in the day lyes like the desert, dry and barren, where no seed is sowen; through Idlenesse on the Lords day men they become, Most culpable in their sin, and Most lyable unto Satan. 1, To be Sabbath-idle increases a mans sin: Idlenesse is ever evil, but never so bad, as upon this good day: No time is allowed for Idlenesse. As of every idle word:Matth. 12.36. so of every idle hour, a man must give account at the day of judge∣ment;
and as one upon the place fur∣ther infers:S pro etioso verbo redde∣mus ratio∣nem, videa∣mus ne red∣damus pro otioso silen∣to. Am∣bros. de os∣sic. lib. 1. cap. 3. ut nullo die intermit∣tantur certa tempora o∣randi. Aug. Haeres. 57. We shall not onely give account for our idle saying, but we must give account for our idle silence, for our not speaking, when men do not take unto themselves words in prayer, and the like: but he like the Prophets Idols, having mouthes, and speak not; ears, and hear not, &c. Some religious exer∣cises are every day duties: Austin up∣on that place of the Apostle, Pray con∣tinually.] Expounds it, See that in no day there be any intermission of certain times for prayer. But then from prayer and other holy duties to be idle, vacant, and voyd on the Lords day, deepens the sin, because on such dayes, Men have best work, And most work to do. 1. The Sabbath is a day of the best work. Most of the week-work is world-work, poor in comparison of this. That's like digging in a dark pit, this as reap∣ing in a pleasant field. As 'tis best being with God: so 'tis best working for God. Weekly labour is but bodily labour, burdensome labour; Sabbath-work is chiefly soul-work, and all sweet work. Men work on the week, that they and
theirs may live well in this world a while: But the Lords Day-work is our meal for ever. Therefore for any to be idle on this day aggravates their sin of Idlenesse. Secondly, the Sabbath is a day of the most work: men on that day should do more in the service of God then all the week besides. The Jews did much on their Sabbath; Christians are to do more on their Lords Day. If we com∣pare Numb. 28.9. with Ezek. 46.4. we shall find that the offerings in the time of the Gospel prophesied of, were more then those in the time of the Law. In Num. we find but two Lambs: but in Ezekiel we find six Lambs and a Ram for the Sabbath. This signifies that in the settled times of the Gospell, Gods Worship upon the Christian Sabbath should be solemnized more fully then in former times under the Law. Now for men to be idle when they have most work to do, causes idlenesse to become the more culpable, and the greater sin. Secondly, to be Sabbath-idle, exposes souls to Satans service: hence so many do the divells drudgery, and draw the
divells cart upon the Lords day. When Satan, especially in Sabbath time, sees men idle and not about any thing that is good, then he soone sets them about that which is naught: so that upon this day men are most eager to go on the divels arrand, though to their own ruin. Yea, men upon the Lords Day, that lye idle, they tempt the Tempter, and do invite the Divell to their dwellings, and as it were ask if he hath no work, or what service he will command them. They are ready, each saying, Here am I, send me. As in supper-time Satan en∣tred into Judas: so in Sabbath-time Satan takes possession of such idle ones. Some keep the Sabbath like their cattel, they go not to plow in deed, but no∣thing good they go about. They are in their houses as their horses in ther stables: yea, perhaps in their beds as their hogs in their styes. Or on the Lords Day, if they be not as beasts, they are as birds that flye from place to place: so do they wander from town to-town, idly passing away of Sabbath-time. Yea, 'tis with many in this, as with the Divells, they believe a Sabbath, but they observe no Sabbath: as they
can keep no Sabbath in point of rest: so they will keep no Sabbath in point of work. Men are on earth as the damned in hell, who never are in any religious duties: they may be crying for water to coole theie tongues: but never pray∣ing for grace to change their hearts, or for mercy to remit their sins. For thousands of idle Sabbaths hath God with some to reckon: and let them be fure, that as God will not hold them guiltlesse that take his Name in vain; so God will never hold them guiltlesse that spend his time in vain. Secondly, I come to consider such as indeed do somewthat of duty in the day of the Sabbath: but of these there are that take up their Sabbath-work, Either in some one part of the day: Or in some one place for the day. The part of the Lords day wherein the exercises of religion ought to lye, be∣ing both The former, and The latter. Some men they take the one, but then leave the other, and will not let the Lord have his time entire. They say of
the Lords day, as she in the Kings of the living child; Divide it, Divide it. Yea, they make the time of the Sabbath like the Vaile of the Temple at Christs death, to be rent in twain, viz. between the Lord and the World, or which is worse, between the Lord and their lusts; whereas not a bone of Christs body was to be broke, so not an hour in his day: As not a member of that, so not a minute of this. As our Saviour said concerning the loaves, and the fishes; Gather up the fragments, let nothing be lost: so he seems to say concerning his holy Sabbath, Gather up the parcells thereof, let not minutes be lost, which are precious like the least parings of gold. It hath been perillous to clip a Kings Coyn, tis more dangerous to clip the Lords day. O the dreadful death and doome of Ananias, who kept back part of the price, and brought onely a cer∣tain part, and laid at the Apostles feet, whereas before 'twas all in his own pow∣er, Act. 5.3, 4. But this holy time was never ours, nor ever was any part there∣of in our power, therefore to keep back any hour of this holy day is wor∣thy of death. If no part be the Lords,
why do you give him any? if the whole be the Lords, why do you put him off with part? 2. The places wherein religious exer∣cises are to lye upon the Lords day, be∣ing Both publike, And private. Some rest in the publike and neglect the private: And others are all for the private, and contemn the publike. First, There are some, all whose reli∣gion upon the Lords day lyes at Church, no praying, reading of Scriptures, re∣peating of Sermons, instructing their charge, or any such duty done in their houses all the day long. 'Tis said, Exod. 12. that there was a great cry at mid∣night in all the dwellings of Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead: but not so much as upon the Lords day from the dwellings of divers does any holy cry go up to heaven. ('Tis doubtfull in divers houses there are not any alive by grace, to bewaile them that lye there dead in sin,) while yet 'tis easie to hear, and evident to see what rudenesse they suffer in their children and servants on the Sabbath day. Hast
thou kept the commandement of the Lord (said Samuel to Saul) in de∣stroying all Amelek? What then means the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen which I hear to day? So may we say to many a man: hast thou kept the commandement of the Lord, in ob∣serving his Sabbath? What mean then the laughing and sporting and foolish talking of children and servants, which is then heard in their houses? Such parents, and ungoverning gover∣nours sure the Lord will one day charge with the breach of his blessed Sabbath. See what God sayes to Eli, 1 Sam. 2.29. Wherefore kickest thou at my sacrifice, and honourest thy sons above me, &c? did Eli kick at the sacrifice of God? no, but his sons did, and he re∣streined them not; and therefore Gad accounts it upon him. Will not God thus say to some Fa∣thers and Masters, Wherefore prophane ye my Sabbath? and why have ye pol∣luted my holy day? for they so do in their children and servants, whom herein they do not restrain. They are careful to provide for family necessities, but carelesse to perform family-duties,
though it be the Lords day, when they should look to all within their gates, Exod. 20.10. 2. There are others, what they do in Gods service on the Sabdath, 'tis pri∣vate. for in the publike Assemblies they are seldome or never seen. For the Israelites to sit still in their houses when a thick darknesse was abroad in all parts of the land, was excusable. [I pray God there be not a near approach of such a time upon England, when through worse then an Egyptian dark∣nesse, people be constreined to stay at home in their houses.] But to lye at home on the Lords day, while through the open light of the Gospel the land is like Goshen, is an inexcusable evil. And sure,Chrysost. in Act. 3. Hom. 9. & Hom. 2. in 1 Cor. 1. 'tis no good presage, when people despise publike Ordinances, even on the Lords day: does not to such the Lord say, 1 Sam. 2.29. Wherefore do ye kick at my sacrifice, and at mine offering which I have commanded in my habitation? Read but those Gospel-Prophesies and Promises, Isay 2.2, 3. Isay 56.7. Mich. 4.1. which import the gatherings of Gods people for his publike worship. There are those who withdraw
themselves from such duties, and while they think to prejudice others, they do themselves the greatest wrong. 'Tis clear they do not onely fall from holy ordinances, but they fall into ugly er∣rours, and filthy evills many of them come to act.Chrysosto. Serm. cont. Anomeos. Chrysostome concludes that there is nothing more causes sta∣blenesse in the truth, and keeps up ho∣linesse of life, and corrects opposite vanities and vices, then a constant fre∣quenting of the publick assemblies, and a careful and chearfull there hearing the holy Word of God. And hence Augustin so earnestly exhorts and per∣swades in some of his Sermons,Aug. de tempore. Ser. 251. not to separate, but to congregate upon the Lords Day, and to the Gospel publickly preached to apply themselves.Just. Mart; Apol. 2. Justin Martyr reports of the Christians in the primitive times, how they would call one another out of their houses, to meet together in the most solemne manner they might upon the Lords Day And if we come out of the Oce∣an of the Ancients, and go into the streames of our lateCalv. in Deut. 5. &c. Pet. Mart. in 1. Sam. 1.3. Bucer, in Math. 12.11. Zanch. in 4. Precep: Bullinger. Gualterus in Act. Writers, as they all urge the observance of the Lords Day: so they presse the practice of publike
duties in open assemblies, as most ne∣cessary unto the right, and religious ob∣servation thereof. Give me leave (I hope I dote not on any holinesse of places, but prize the publike gatherings of Gods people, especially upon the Lords Day) to tell you that such ser∣vants the Lord hath had in preceding times, that would pitch upon places of publike worship, not onely therein to serve the Lord; but to suffer for the Lord therein: thither they would run to die, where they use to pray: and rather then they would be driven from them, they would be destroyed in them, thinking it good going together from thence to heaven. Eusebius reports that under the cruell persecution of Dioclesian many thousand Christians were burned in the Temple of Nicomedia, being assembled to celebrate the Day of Christ. And another mentions how at Ments in Ger∣many,Hieron. Epistol. ad Geront. the Citie being taken, in the Church were many thousands murther∣ed. But O how exceeding sad is this when people may come to the publike in peace, pray in peace, hear in peace, de∣part in peace from Sabbath after Sab∣bath, yet loiter at home on the Lords
Day! I wish empty seats make not way for empty pulpits: and that quite forgetting Sabbaths, be not the event of slighting Sermons. (To say nothing of such as desert our assemblies, upon the groundlesse grounds of Separation,) what Athe∣isme begins to grow in the Land? whole Parishes live as without God in the world, scarce knowing when a Sabbath comes: Help Lord. Now amongst such as sin against the Lords Day in respect of works thereup∣on to be done, Divers things are objected: Some against the condition of the work in the day: And Some against the continuance of the day in the work. The condition of this dayes work considered, some object, Because any thing of the day is required in publick. Others, Because so many things in the day are required. Some say, They can read good books, and serve God at home, when the Sab∣bath comes. Answer, 1. They can, but 'tis a que∣stion whether they will or no. Such as
in their houses all the whole week do little or nothing in the worship of God, are like to do no great matter at home when the Sabbath comes in the service of God. As one well observes, that commonly, they who forget God in the time of their life, do forget both God and themselves in the day of their death: So they who neglect God in the week-time, do ordinarily little re∣gard God or the good of their souls upon the Sabbath-day. Secondly, The publike preaching of the Word is of more Soul-concernment on the Sabbath then any private read∣ing at home, if we consider, Either the precept of God; Or the Profit of man. Both expresse in that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new-born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Sincere milk of the Word, , Sermon-milk, warm milk from the Mothers brest is best to battle the babe. Sodden milk hath not so much spirits therein, nor the child that refreshing thereby. Revera fratres nu∣bes sunt praedicatores &c. August. in Psal. 35.Sermon-milk is the best food for spiritual growth. Agustin compares the
preaching of the Word to the raining of the clouds, which more refreshes the corn then if pond-water should be poured out in pailes and buckets: My doctrine shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall distill as the dew, Deut. 32.1, 2. Slight not such Sabbath-showres, nor misse upon the Lords Day the for∣mer or the latter rain. Object. On the Sabbath in publike I shall only hear another, at home I my self can speak to God in prayer. Answ. In publike thou mayest not on∣ly hear, but also pray even then when not one word thou speakest. A man at home may speak many words, yet make never a prayer: and a Christian in the congregation may pray earnestly, though he speaks never a word. 'Tis not the speaking of the tongue, but the working of the heart that makes prayer.Non vocis magnitudi∣ne, sed cor∣dis magna∣nimitate clamandum est, &c. Cla∣mabat popu∣lus et non audiebatur, tacebat Mo∣ses et audi∣ebatur ille. Ambros. in Psal. 119. One observes how the Israelites, when the Egyptian army was behind them, and the Red-sea before them, they lift up their voyces and cryed out to the Lord: yet God did not regard, this as a prayer. Exod. 14.10. Moses he was silent, not one word of prayer ap∣pears: yet the Lord sayes to Moses.
Wherefore cryest thou unto me? ver. 15. Though his tongue was still, his heart was hot in holy prayer. Secondly, he that will not upon the Lords Day hear Gods Word, his pri∣vate prayer is but unpleasing to God. 'Tis a saying of one of the Ancients, God oft rejects his prayer in trouble, who in the daies of his peace does de∣spise Gods precepts:Deus saepe ejus precem in perturba∣tione deserit, qui precepta illius in tranquilli∣tate contem∣nit. Greg. Mor. li. 5. ca. 36. and so God does but abominate his prayer in private, who will not hear upon the Sabbath-day Gods holy precepts in publike. He that turnes away his ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be an abomi∣nation, Prov. 28.9. He must first hear God that will be heard of God. Objection, On the Sabbath in publike I may be put upon expence, in contri∣buting to some or other in want, which by being at home I escape. Answ. 1. Charity to such as are in necessity is alwaies an excellent duty. It makes a man to resemble God, who hath never need to receive, but is ever most free to give, Jam. 1.5. 2. For the duty of charity the most seasonable day is the SabbathChryso. in 1. Cor. 11. Homil. 43. Chryso∣stenme observes that the Sabbath is
the day when God in his best bounty does most appear unto us, and there∣fore for us to expresse our bounty to others the Sabbath is the fittest day. 3. Though charitable duties are fit for every Sabbath, yet such occasions are not constant. Christians indeed upon those Lords Dayes when they are not communicating to, they should be commiserating of such as suffer in the World; when they are not in their con∣tributions liberall, they should be in their compassions lively. In their thoughts they should go forth and look upon the burdens of their brethren, re∣membring those that are in bonds as if bound with them, Hebr. 13.3. Object. Some Sabbath-work I am willing to do, but so many works on the Sabbat be burdensome. Answer, 1. The more work, the more wages. The more good Sabbath-seed men sowe, the more plentifull crops of comfort they shall rap both in earth and heaven. God hath more Sabbath-mercies to vouchsafe then we duties to perform. 2. As on this day men have much
work: So they have much help; Scrip∣tures, Ministers, Ordinances, yea, An∣gells: yea, God himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Our Lord is not like Pharaoh who required brick, but with∣held straw. 3. The work indeed on the Lords Day is large, but it is all excellent busi∣nesse, that well becomes Kings: yea, and pions Princes have accounted it not onely their duty, but their dignity not onely to see that others, but them∣selves also in all holy duties do observe the Lords Day.Zozom. Eccl. hist. si. 1. ca. 8. History in the praise of Constantine reports much of this. And the Scripture prophesies that Prin∣ces in Gospell-times should not abate, but abound in Sabbath-day-duties. And the burnt-offering that the Prince shall offer to the Lord in the Sabbath-day,Exek. 46.4. shall be six Lambs without blemish, and a Ram without blemish. This by type did signifie that in succeeding times the Service of God should be plentifully performed, even by the highest of the people upon the Lords holy Day. 4. Upon the Lords Day, though of du∣ties there be a great variety, yet there is no contrariety. In the soule of a
Saint there be contrary principles, flesh and spirit one opposing another: but there are not in the Sabbath contrary practices each to other repugnant, one duty does not thwart another▪ but Sabbath-services are to each other helpfull. Prayer fits for hearing, and hearing prepares for prayer. 5. The diversity and change of Sab∣bath-work, shewes the Lords wisdome, yea, and the love of the Lord; to make exercises the more easie, that holy labour may not be heavy labour, nor men tyred all Sabbath-time with one continued work, the Lord lets them passe from one imployment to another for refreshment. 6. On the Sabbath we have several works, yet in all we serve but one Master: Indeed had we divers Masters, it might discourage; but to us there is but one Lord. Upon the Sabbath in re∣ligious services we change our place, and we change our businesse, but we do not change our Master: All is to Christ; to Christ men should say upon a Sabbath-morning, Though other Lords in the week-time have had too much dominion over us, yet now
we will make mention of thy Name one∣ly. 7. If multitude of services be tedious, what will multitude of sufferings be? Jam. 1.2. sayes the Apostle, My bre∣thren, count it all joy when ye fall into di∣vers temptations. How will they re∣joyce in divers daily distresses, that shrink back because exercises are divers upon the Lords day? Object. The Sabbath ceases when pub∣like exercises end: no longer holy day, then while holy duty. Answ. If so, sure then with some Sabbaths are very short. But shall we think that men can begin and end a Sabbath when they list? The Churches of Christ in ages past have determined of an entire day due to the Lord. The Sabbaths,Iren. cont. Valent. lib. 4. cap. 31. August. de temp. Serm 251. sayes Irenaeus, do require a compleat day, and the perseverance of that whole day in the Lords service. Austin declares his judgement touch∣ing the time of the Sabbath from that text, Levit. 23.32. From even to even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. 'Tis evi∣dent from that place of the Apostle, Jam. 2.10. that whosoever carelessely casts by any part of Gods precept,
transgresses the whole law of God; and thus, whosoever wilfully neglects any part of Gods Sabbath, is guilty of breaking this whole holy day: men must not suite the day to their duties, but their duties to the day; while the day endures their duty remains. Object. But so to keep the whole day is terribly tyring: a hard service, who can do it? Answ. God because of our infirmi∣ties does afford what may refresh, the better to bear up our bodies the Lord allowes moderate sleep in the night, and temperate food in the day. True, it was in Tertullians time a dispute,Tertul. de coron. milit, cap. 3. Tom. 1. pag 747. whether it be not a duty on the Lords day to fast? but our Saviours Apologie for his Disciples, in plucking and eating the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, may easily quiet that question, Mark. 2.25. And blessed be the Lord for the allowances of his love. 2. Men do not complain of whole dayes for the world, They rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulnesse, Psal. 127.2. They do not say all the week, when the morning is, Would God it were evening, but rather
in the evening they wish, would it were morning again, to go after the world afresh; yet we find some even in sin∣ful wayes so unwearied, that when one day is past, they pitch upon the very next day with inlarged resolutions: Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink and to morrow shall be as this dy, and much more abundant, Isai. 56.12. 3. We may see what some of Gods servants have desired; instance David, that dear servant of God, Psal. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, (sayes he) and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life. As if he should wish it were alway Sabbath day with him. Psal. 84.4, 10. O blessed are they that dwell in thy house, &c. For a day in thy Courts is bet∣ter then a thousand: I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednesse. Were men of Davids mind, a day in seven for the service of the Lord would not be too long. 4. There have been them that have spent divers dayes and nights also in the service of God: see a considerable in∣stance,
Luk. 2.37. A widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. For her sexe] A woman: For her case] A widow, not having the company or comfort of a husband. For her age] About fourscore and four years, yet night and day with fasting and prayer serving God in the Temple. 5. For such as are tyred out with the time of a Sabbath, would they go to heaven? There 'tis ever Sabbath, alway singing, serving, and setting up of God. Bernard urges the observation of the Sabbath, and holding out in ho∣ly exercises thereon upon this account, that by present rest men may learn to live in rest eternal,Bern. super Saluz Regina Serm. 4. Col. 1744. and by persevering service men may be prompt to perpe∣tuate the Lords everlasting praise. But how would men do to endure heaven, and a never ending Sabbath there, who know not here how to bear out the durance of a Sabbath day? Object. I cannot so tend duties on the day, for I have other works of ne∣cessity to do. Ans. 1. There are works of necessity
which we grant may be done upon the Lords day,Vid. Lyra. in Exod. 20. & in Jo∣nna. 5.8. Beda in Marc. 2.23. Zanch in 4. praece. as by food to refresh our bodies, to resist the invasion of ene∣mies, to stop the irruption of waters, to quench the rage of fire, to preserve the life of our Cattel, and the like. 2. Those that say on the Sabbath such things they must necessarily do, ought yet carefully to see, it be not A fained necessity, or A made necessity. To pretend a things necessity, when yet indeed no necessity of such a thing to be done, is to commit a double sin: To do what is not good, and To say what is not true. Men must also beware they bring not a necessity upon themselves, upon the Sabbath to do such things as they might prevent through a prudent foresight, this is to make a sin with a necessity. Isay 58.13. Thou shalt call the Sabbath a delight, not doing thine own wayes, nor find∣ing thine own necessities; so some Para∣phrasing expound the Hebrew word: men have many necessities which yet are of their own causing, and not of Gods appointing. 3. There are things necessary in their
season, that yet are not necessary upon the Sabbath. 'Tis necessary for a man to follow his lawfull calling, and to be diligent in his worldly businesse. When we read (sayes Bernard) that Adam in the pleasant place of Paradise was appointed to work, shall we think that the sons of Adam in the troublesome Wildernesse of this world are placed for play? No, 'tis necessary for the sons of men to be industrious in their lawful affairs: Moses putting his hand in his bosome, 'twas leprous; but putting it out, 'twas made whole. God hath given men hands, for a threefold work, sayes one: To lift them up in prayer to God, To stretch them out in charity to the poor; and To put them down by labour in a lawful calling. So that for a man in his lawful calling to labour it is necessa∣ry, viz. in its season. But herein to la∣bour upon the Lords day is dangerous: The gain of this day may be as the gold of Tholosse, as the cole brought to the nest setting the young and all on fire. Luk. 10. Reproof is given to Martha by our Saviour, for her being about
ordinary affairs, assuring her that [One thing was needfull.] Needfull it was for Martha to be about her houshold businesse. Yea, but not then when Christ was present, and an opportunity served for soul-advantage, which her sister Mary minded. Thus though 'tis needfull for Christians to look after their lawfull occasions in the world, yet not upon the Lords day, the season for soul-advantages. 4. Are such wordly walks and works necessary? and are the works of Gods worship arbitrary? yea, upon the Sabbath is not the service of God much more necessary? As the Apostle said, Act. 4. Whether it be more needfull to obey God or men, judge ye: So say I, Whether it be on the Sabbath more needfull to serve God or your selves, judge ye; whether more needfull to take care for your temporal or your eternal being, judge ye. A∣mong necessaries that which is most necessary, is to be first minded. Object. We see none so exact, our neighbours are not so nice, but take their liberties on the Sabbath; and why not we the same?
Answ. 1. We must live by precept, not by example; 'tis the Law of God, and not the lives of men that must be our rule. As he that will be for God must crosse the most of men; so he that would go to heaven must leave the greatest part of the world behind him. He shall never write a good hand, that makes the world his Copy; nor shall he ever well observe a Sabbath, who frames himself unto the common platforme. 2. If patterns are to bo followed, Be ye then followers of God as dear children, Ephes. 5.1. In six dayes God made hea∣ven and earth, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath-day, and hollowed it. Likewise let us look un∣to the Lord Christ, Luk. 4.16. He went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, as his custome was, &c. Learn we ought of Christ, though not (as Austin observes) to walk on the waters, yet to work in Gods worship upon the Sabbath-day. 3. If we will take our Model herein after the manner of men, 'tis best to look back to preceding Saints. Gods Church and people considered as past and present may be compared to
that cloud, Exodus 14. which was partly bright, and partly dark. The bright part was before, to give light to the Israelites, and the dark part be∣hind, to blind the Egyptians. The Saints and people of God aforetime were as the bright side of the cloud, shining clear in Chistianity, strict in all the waies of God, and most exact in Sab∣bath-service; such as now professe them∣selves the Saints of God, are as the following dark side of the cloud, more dim and dull in holy duties, more loose upon the Lords Day, having lesse of the life and lustre of religion. O let us but think what was the care of Chri∣stians not many years ago, to improve Sabbaths, and all the service of God, such follow, with holy Apostles and Martyrs, and the spirits of just men made perfect. 4. If herein we will take such as are present for our pattern, Blessed be the Lord, some are left, that hold up religi∣on to the life; and with great care look to the Lords Day, and the duties there∣of. Indeed there are divers of whom we may complain,Chrysost. in Matth. Hòm. 3. as Chrysostome of some in his time: Whereby (sayes he) shall I
know you to be Christians? Do you not delight in any place more then in the Courts of the Lords house? and take pleasure in any time, more then in the hours of the Lords day? Yet some few are found faithfull to the Lord, and his Day, and such we should duly ob∣serve. 5. When an age is in religion loose, 'twill be the more any mans credit and comfort to be exact and strict. To be a precise Sabbath-keeper in a Sabbath-breaking-age, that's a mans honour: For a man to remain sound in his principles, and punctuall in the practicall observation of the Sabbath, when opposite evills are high and huge,August. de Tempo. Serm. 23 2 in times and places that strange birds build their nests, when multitudes in Townes and Parishes (as Austin resem∣bles them) are like Toades and Frogs in fens and puddles, Croaking against the Lords Day. When many as Mus∣culus upon the fourth commandement complaines,Beza in Cant. So∣lo: Hom. 30. Bucer in Psal. 92. (the like Beza Bucer and others laments) pittifully prophane the Lords holy Day; this is praise, then to be painful, pure and permanent in the practice of all the Lords-Day-du∣ties.
Object. We for our selves observe the Sabbath, but there are some with us, that will have their liberties, and who can help it? Answ. Superiours must help as much as is possible, that others under them as well as themselves observe the Lords Day. Therefore as many of us as have others within our gates, and under our government, we ought as much as in us lyes, upon the Lords Day to endea∣vour the drawing them to holy duties, which may appear plain through a dou∣ble proof: The precept of God about them, & The property of God in them. 1. God gives his precept for them herein, as we find in the fourth Com∣mandement: The Seventh day is the Sabbath: in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, &c. If it be our duty to keep them from ordinary work for the case of their bodies, then to bring them to holy or∣dinances for the good of their Souls: and the bodily rest we are to allow them lyes upon this account, they are
to rest from the common works of their vocation in order to the exercises of religion in private and publike upon the Lords Day. Luke 13.15. Doth not each one of you on the Sabbath loose his oxe or his asse from the stall, and lead him away to watering? and ought not each one of us on the Lords Day to loose his children and Servants from our businesses and houses, and lead them away with us to be instructed? should not every one of us publikely present our selves on the Sabbath before the Lord, as it were, saying, Behold, here am I, and the chil∣dren and servaants that thou hast given me? And if we go before God alone lea∣ving our families to their liberties, what will the Lord say? As Eliah said to Da∣vid when he came to the Camp of the Israelites, 1. Sam. 17.28. How comest thou down hither? where is the flock? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wildernesse? And may not God thus question some, when they come, and on the Sabbath day appear in pub∣like, How comest thou hither? where is thy family? with whom hast thou left thy Children, and servants?Euseb. de vita Const. li 4. Ca. 18. et 19▪ Eusebius reports of Constantine what good laws
he made for the bringing forth of fami∣lies, all sorts of servants, yea souldiets and men of war, to Gods publike wor∣ship upon the Sabbath day. And other pious Princes in times past, have thought it no lesse a part of their duty. 2. God keeps his propriety in them; he is the great housholder, and all our families are his; as Laban said to Ja∣cob, Gen. 31.43. These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my chil∣dren, and these cattel are my cattel, and all that thou seest is mine: Thus sayes God to a Governour, Thy sons are my sons, and thy servants are my servants, and all that thou hast is mine. Now as by virtue of our interest in them, and authority over them, they work for us on the week: So by virtue of Gods interest in them, and sovereignty above them, they are bound to serve God upon his holy Sabbath; they have a Father in heaven, and a Master in hea∣ven, whose commands especially on this day they ought to obey, which we must further, not hinder. As the Lord said by Moses to Pharaoh, Let my people go, that they may serve me: so he sayes to us, Let my children go, and my servants go,
that they may worship me upon my ho∣ly Sabbath. Pharaoh against this was froward, but think what befell him, and let us fear. We should be in this case towards all under our charge, as the Master of the Colt, as soon as he had heard the Lord had sent for him, he streight way unloosed him, and let him go, Luk. 19. Let them be loath herein, if we do not put them on, the utmost we can, our selves fall under sin. Thus having seen the several sorts of men sinning against the Lords day, and examined the arguments which on each side they urge, answer∣ing among objections the principal they presse, that they may passe with∣out blame;Multitudo peccantium auget pecca∣tum, I proceed from the multi∣tude of the sinners to discover The Magnitude of the sin. Sin that lies against the Lords day is Great Both in judgement, And in practice. To erre in opinion upon this point, as the error Is very senslesse, So very sinfull. 'Tis a senslesse error; For such as own the Lord of the day,
yet to deny the day of the Lord: for men to acknowledge themselves under the command of Christ, and yet to be above the Sabbath of Christians, &c. 'Tis a sinful error. 'Tis an error full of sin, in judgement to be against the Christian Sabbath: for it is A Mother-error, A Master-error. And therefore a monsterous error; men may easily imagine, many other errors are under the beck, and bred in the belly of this. Hence people cry down Sanctification, Mortification, Re∣pentance, practical holinesse, publick Ordinances, Prayer, Preaching, Scrip∣tures, and all the means of grace, &c. Yea, hence ready to plead for Popery, to imbrace Images, and advance all Idol-worship. At this one door this tri∣ple crown will easily come in, with all Antichristian, yea Heathenish vanities: 'Tis a fundamental error, O what Ba∣bels may be built upon this: yea, by this such batteries may be made, as may shake and shatterdown the whole Fa∣brick of Christian Religion. This makes many so miserably misuse Scrip∣ture:
some texts they muzzle their mouthes, and will not suffer them to speak; other texts they set upon the rack, making them speak what God never meant, and all to make the Sab∣bath nothing: Satan having not a greater design then to down this day. And indeed the Divel well knowes, there is not a readier way to rout & out all the truthes of God all the world over, and to introduce all errors into all parts of the Christian world, then to corrupt the judgements of people, with an Antisabbatarian principle. Ther∣fore to erre herein, is a very great sin. 2. To erre in point of practice, and to transgresse against the Lords day in respect of the duties thereof, is a sin exceeding sinful: Both for its gradation, And for its dilation. If we ob∣serve, How high it riseth, and How far it reacheth, The sin is great. Great is the sinne of Sabbath neg∣lects:
If we con∣sider How it ascends in height, & How it extends in breadth. 1. For height;] This sin goes up to God, and is a sin of such degrees a∣gainst him, as that therein are not onely many sins enwrapped, but each sin ri∣sing higher then the other, so that the latter is much worse then the former. As Austin once aggravated Adams sin in eating the fruit God had forbidden:August. Enchi. ad Laur. cap. 45. so may I aggravate this sin, in not keep∣ing the day God hath commanded; For therein is Ingratitude, Forgetfulness, Perfidiousness, Theft, Robbery, & Sacriledge. Ingratitude.] God at the beginning gave man a Sabbath; but man by sin soon lost his Sabbath-right, yet God after gives men a new Charter for Sab∣bath-priviledges, Christ confirmes it; the day is sure,Consule Ambros. Orat. de obi∣tu Satyri. the mercy is sweet. Lord, what is man? even a monster in nature (sayes one) herein to be un∣grateful. For him that is unworthy of a minute, to be unthankful for a day, and such a DAY as this; a mon∣strous sin indeed. Forgetfulnesse.] As for God to for∣sake
man is among the sorest judge∣ments: So for man to forget God is among the greatest sins. When the Scripture would set out the worst of wicked persons and Nations, it sayes they are such as forget God. Now sure, he that does not remember the Sabbath of God, he does forget the God of the Sabbath. Yea, it argues God for∣gotten all the week, when men do not remember the Sabbath day and duty. Perfidiousnesse.] This blessed day is one of those precious things God hath commited to mans trust to keep; now to be untrusty and treacherous herein, is a most abominable sin. Constantine was wont to say, Such men I am sure wil never be faithfull to me, that are un∣faithful to their God. No marvel men betray so many trusts in the world, when they deal falsely with God, in his holy times and things. To be ungrateful to God is bad, to be forgetful of God is worse, but to be perfidious with God worst of all. Theft.] Though God hath given man the Sabbath for his use, yet he still continues therein his own interest, and
lets it go upon no other account, then to have it religiously kept; therefore they that take it from God upon other terms, and turn it to other ends, shall be thrust among theeves in the great day of the Lord. Perhaps a man may say with Samuel, Whom have I ever defraud∣ed? whose Oxe or Asse have I taken, &c? Some though they have not theeved from their neighbour, yet they have stollen from God the time of his holy day. Who is not afraid to be found such a Felon? August. lib. 4. in Exod. & habetur 14. q. 15. c.Robbery.] Austin well observes, that Robbers are worse then theeves: Theeves they take nothers goods se∣cretly, by fraud, when the owners are not aware: But Robbers they take openly, by force, the owners looking on. Thus men take away the Sabbath day, under Gods all-seeing eye; that which God holds, they profanely pluck away: among high-way-Robbers shall such be ranked not repenting, Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? even in the dayes and times of the Sabbath. Yea, and this greatens the sin of such men: they that
theeve and rob, they possibly may plead necessity, having nothing of their own whereon to live. But the Lord hath allowed men time of their own, for any needfull and lawfull work, and yet to rob him of his Sabbath? Sacriledge.August. su∣per Joann. & habetur 13. q. 4.] This is worse then all the rest. Austin does admirably aggra∣vate this sin, and he makes it so much the greater, because it is a sin which cannot be committed but against God alone.Augu. cont: Cres. lib. 4. cap. 10. And what way can it be worse committed against God, then by pol∣luting the holy time of his Sabbath? To abuse sanctified time, is such Sacri∣ledge as the Lord most abominates: Thou then that abhorrest Idols, dost thou commit Sacriledge? Rom. 2.22. Why, is it not worse Sacriledge to take this blessed day from Gods holy worship, then to take the silver Cup from the communion Table, or the great Bible from the reading Desk? Be not de∣ceived, here be heaps upon heaps, many sins piled upon this sin, yea, more might be mentioned, as disobedience, rebellion, unbeliefe, pride, self-conceit, a base and low esteem of the wayes of God, Word of God, worship of God,
all concurre to make this sin hateful and horrible in the height thereof. 2. For the breadth;] This sin is of a large spread, Both against God the Father of Christ, And against Christ the Son of God. 1. This sin against the Sabbath day, considered in the duties thereof, does reach so far against God, as it is found to be a sin Against all the Attributes of God, & Against all the Ordinances of God. 1. The Attributes of God are herein all sinned against: He that takes not care to keep the Sabbath of God, slights the wisdom of God, disobeys the will of God, despises the mercy of God, provokes the Justice of God, con∣temns the power of God, abuses the patience of God, defiles the holinesse of God, defaces the beauty of God; yea, as it were undermines the whole being of God blessed for ever: No marvel if they that observe no Sabbath, should believe there is no God. 2. The Ordinances of God are here∣in all sinned against; to sin against Ordinances, is to pollute those holy
vessels wherein are laid up for us the treasures of heaven, and to cut those precious pipes that convey to us the water of life. To sin against Ordinan∣ces, is to break those Chariots wherein the Lord rides towards us, and to sink those Boats which are to carry us over to God. To sin against Ordinances is to cast by those clear Lanthornes wherein the light of the Lord shines, and to fling dirt in those bright glasses wherein the face of our God is seen. Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, all are as it were pulled in peeces and put out of doors when the Lords day is laid by, and Sabbaths set aside. 2 This sin against the Sabbath day in its duties reaches also so far against Christ, as its found to be a sin Against the estates of Christ, and Against the offices of Christ. Christ considered in his estates, is by this sin injured Both as humbled in his death, And as honoured in his resurrection. 1. To sin against the Lords day, is to sin against the Lords death. This holy day was one of those precious things Christ purchased, and with his blood
bought. As with his blood he bought a people to serve him, so with his blood he bought this time for them to serve him in. To sin then against the day of Christ, is to sin against the blood of Christ: What sin so abominably black, as to sin against Christs blessed blood? I was nothing (sayes Austin) and God made me with his word;Aug. Serm. 151. de tempore. I was worse then nothing and Christ re∣deemed me with his blood; what shall I say? shall I ever sin? we may well add, 2. To sin against this institution of Christ, is to sin against the resurrection of Christ.August ad Janua. 119. cap. 13. & ad Casul. 86. Idem, de civit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30. Idem, de verb is Apost. Serm. 15. Chemni. ex∣am. cap. de diebus festis. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. Austin does oft in his wri∣tings praise the practice of the Apostles, in that they did observe this first day of the week to be the Lords day, upon the account of Christs resurrection. So Chem∣nitius commends it much, saying that the celebration of the day of Christs resurrection, was the best way for the abrogation of Judaisme, and the exal∣tation of Christianisme in the world. Sozomene sets this down for the honour of Constantine, that in the Law he made for the keeping of this day, he laid the strength of his reason upon Christs re∣surrection.
On the contrary, how crosse is this to Christ who rose from the dead this day? And what a sinful shame is this to them that professe Christianity, to cast by that day whereon Christ rose from the dead? Oh the sin of such as put this day to death, when Christ died that it might live! and how abomi∣nable is it to bury this blessed day, which God raised together with Christ! This is a wickednesse worthy to be cryed down. 2. Christ considered in his offices is herein injured, Both as a King, And as a Prophet. 1. Christ as a King is herein cast off: 'Tis one of the Regalities of a King, to appoint his own time when his servants shall attend.Berna. Serm. 2. in Epipha. Christ (as one well notes) though his kingdom be not of this world, yet he hath his kingdom in this world; and in this world is to exercise Kingly power, in respect of his dispose of per∣sons and seasons, times and things: 'Tis the message that every Sabbath-breaker sends to heaven, Christ shall not be our King, we will not have him to reign over us.
2. Christ as a Prophet is herein put off:Tertul. li. contra judae∣ot. An ancient writer affirmes, that Christ by his coming into the world, accomplished the prophecies of prece∣dent Prophets, and as it were sealed up them: but left a Prophetical office of his own to be fulfilling even unto the end of the world, and the Sabbath day to be the especial day for his exercise▪ in this office.Ramus de relig. lib. 2. cap. 6. Another calls it the School-day, wherein Christ the great Doctor of his Church, whose chair is in heaven,August. Serm. 4. in fest. Jo. B. keeps School on earth, and those persons proudly contemn Christs teaching, who neglect Sabbath-time. Is not this then a great sin? a sin against God and Christ: a sin against Law and Gospel: a sin which Pagans and Divels are not guilty of. Object. This is the sin of such as pro∣phane and pollute the Lords day, but I do not so, though I do not the duties thereof. Polluitur Sabbathum, cum cujus gratiâ in∣stituitur, à plerisque plane non curatur. Muscul.Answ. They pollute the Lords day who do not keep it holy; as they are said to defile Gods Name, who do not sanctifie the Name of God, Jer. 34.16. To fanctifie the Sabbath is to spend
it in holy exercisesLyra. in Exod. 26. Bulling, in Rom. 14.5. and not to sanctifie it, is to pollute it. There are things men may be said to destroy them, when they do not take care to preserve them: So such are said to defile the Sabbath, who do not use the means to sanctifie it. But for this, that saying of the Prophet may suffice, Isay 56.2. Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that laith hold on it, which keepeth the Sabbath holy, and pol∣luteth it not. By which place it plainly appears, that as he doth not pollute the Sabbath who keeps it holy;Zanchi. de tribus Eloh. part. 2. lib. 3. cap 9. & de oper. creat par. 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. Idem in 4. praecep. so he who keeps not the Sabbath holy, doth pol∣lute it. Now all accord, that to keep the Sabbath holy, is to passe the whole day in pious duties. Indeed divers they think they very well keep the Sabbath day, if they forbear wicked and world∣ly works, though that day little be done in the service of God: But as God speaks in the Prophet, Isay 58.5. Is it such a fast as I have chosen? so is it such a Sabbath as I have appointed? a day for men to do what they will? to take up and lay down duties as they please? Is it such a Sabbath as I have commanded? a day for men to take
their carnal ease, to be idle, slothful, and vain? Is not this the day that I have ordained? to be loose from earth∣ly delights, worldly cares, to be free from all entanglements for God? Is it not for men to give themselves wholly to holy service? Is it not to pray fervent∣ly, to heare diligently, &c? The neglect of these upon the Lords day, is a loud sin. 2. The judgements that such sinners are subject to, come next to be noted. These are, Both Privative And positive Penalties. Through this are Good things renounced, and Evil things inflicted. Gods judgements of the Privative sort; are either In temporal matters, or In Spiritual means. 1. God in judgment removes, or re∣streines matters necessary for men in this world for the sinful neglect of his Sabbaths and service; As things needfull For their personal sustentation, For their political preservation. 1. Things neeedful and good for the
supporting of their bodies as they are men God removes as a punishment for this sinful neglect of the Lords day. Hence God does not hear the heavens, the heavens do not hear the earth, the earth does not hear the Corn.Cypria. con∣tra Demet. Cyprian hath an elegant saying: thou complai∣est that now adaies the fountains are not so flowing, nor the air so whole∣some, nor the rain so plentiful, nor the earth so fruitful, &c. Dost thou serve God by whose means all serves thee? dost thou waite on him by whose beck all waits on thee, &c? God withdraws his bounty when men omit their duty. When the Lords day and religious du∣ties, his house and holy things are laid waste; what follows? let the Lord him∣self speak, Levit. 26.2, 16.19. Hagg. 1, 9. with several such texts. 2. Things needfull and good, as peo∣ple are embodyed, for the preserving of their civil State, God in punishment pulls them away for sinfulnesse against his Sabbaths: as order, government, good lawes, just administrations a∣mongst men. Let justice be removed (sayes an ancient Writer) and what are Kingdoms and Common-Wealths, but
great robbing places, where might overcomes right? Let government be gone, and multitudes of miseries break in, Nations of men are made as the fishes of the Sea, and as the creeping things that have no Ruler over them, ruines rush in upon them. Yet such are the sad sequels of Gods slighted ser∣vice, and neglected Sabbaths, as may be easily evidenced from that of the Prophet, Jer, 17.24, 25. Jer. 22.8, 9. 2. Judgements privatively considered, which sinners against the Sabbath are like to suffer, in removing of Spiritual good things; Both Instrumental, And Principal. 1. Things Instrumental for much good, God removes from men not minding his Sabbaths and service; I mean, the means of grace, the Ministery of the Gospel. A miserable punishment. True; such as have an immediade hand in removing the Word of God preached from a people, are guilty of a very great sin. And wo, wo, wo, sayes Luther to them that leave the Church without a Preaching Ministery, through which
great Towns of people come to be like dark dens of wilde beasts. And a dread∣ful doom it is on such as suffer under a famine of the Word of God. Yet such a famine God inflicts for sinning against his blessed Sabbath; See Amos 8. 5. some saying, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set forth wheat, &c. vers. 11. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, I will send a famine in the land, not of bread, but of hearing the word of the Lord. 'Twas ill with Israel when there was no Smith found in all the Land, but the Israelites were forced to go to the Philistines every man to sharpen his Share and his Coulter, his Axe and his Mattock, 1 Sam. 13.19, 20. And will it not be ill with England, if no faithful dispensers of the Gospel should be found in the Land, but poor people should be put to go to Papists, and other persons of corrupt opinions; thinking thereby to quicken and com∣fort their dead and sad hearts, &c. The God of heaven hold off the sight of such a dismal day. We read Gen. 21.15, 16. of Hagar, when the bread and wa∣ter in the bottle was spent, and her son ready to famish, she went and sate her
down at a distance, saying, O let me not see the death of my child! And she looked toward him, and left up her voyce and wept. When Spiritual food shall faile, will not a faithful Minister sit down sorrowfully, saying, O let me not see the death of my people? Yea, when holy Ordinances are gone, how will other Christian Churches look over to England, and lament saying, VVe have a sister, and she hath no breasts? Can. 8.8. These are the deserved effects of our lamentable neg∣lects of the Lords day: when men cease from Sabbaths, then God makes Sab∣baths to cease, Hosea 2, 11. Men sin∣fully forget Gods Sabbaths, and then God as a punishment causes Sabbaths to be forgotten, Lam. 2.6. The Lord hath violently taken away his Tabernacle, destroyed the places of assembly, and caused the Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion. 2. The principal of all precious things is hereby brought to depart, even God himself. When Gods Sabbaths, service, and servants leave a Land, the Lord goes along with them. I read of Nazianzene, who being about to go from a place where he had Preached for some time, a good man comes cry∣ing
unto him. O Nazianzene, wilt thou go away, and carry the holy Trinity with thee? Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all forsake such as are Sabbath-forsaken: the Gospel of God, and the God of the Gospel goes together. In the departure of the Lords day, the Lord of the day departs. 2 The positive punishments for Sab∣bath-sins are considerable, Both in their Diversity, And in their Severity. 1 God does execute divers judge∣ments upon the neglect of the Lords day; when God himself with his Sab∣baths and service forsake a Land, he lets in lamentable calamities, and makes men suffer several wayes. 2 Chron 15.5, 6, 7. For along season Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law: And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabi∣tants of the Countries. Nation was destroy∣ed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vexe them with all adversity.Gaulter. in Act. 13. Homil. 88. A learned Expositor thus speaks▪ In our dayes even among Christians, the Sab∣bath
is sinfully broken, that blessed day abused which should be wholly conse∣crated to God, and do we yet marvel what is the cause of our calamities? I have heard that in Germany, under their woful Wars, there was at a time a very great convention sitting to consult what should be the cause of their cala∣mities, and the Major part pressed the not trimming of their Churches and adorning them with Images; not con∣sidering how carelesse they were of the Lords day, and the due worship of God. The error with us is slighting of all publike places, painful Preachings, pure Administrations, Gods holy Institutions of times and things; yet we are not aware that these things work our wo. Let's look into Levit. 26.2. Ye shall keep my, Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary: What if not? I will make your Sabbaths to cease, and bring your sanctuaries into desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours: vers. 31. And is that all? I will set my face against you, they that hate you shall reign over you, I will send wilde beasts among you, and I will bring a sword upon you: and several other sad miseries we meet in the Chap∣ter.
The like Lamentations. 2. The Lord hath violently taken away his Ta∣bernacle, caused his Sabbaths to be for∣gotten in Zion, and hath despised (or suffered to be despised) in the indig∣nation of his anger the KING and the PRIEST: contempt to be cast upon all that are appointed to rule and govern both in Church and State, A great sin, a grievous punishment. and what fur∣ther? The wall of the Daughter of Zion is fallen, her gates are sunk her bars are broaken, the LAW is no more, vers. 7, 8, 9. Alas! O the breaches God makes, and bloodsheds God brings for breaking his Sabbaths! The Christian world is filled with wars when the Lords day growes dimme; When the Sun is dark∣ned, the Moon is turned into blood, Joel 2.13. 2. God does execute severe judge∣ments for the Non-sanctifying of his Sabbaths, In general upon people, And also on particular persons: Jer. 17.27. If you will not hearken to me, to hallow the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, and it shall devour the Palaces thereof, and it
shall not be quenched. Fire it holds forth the fierceness of anger, evidenced in its most fearful effects: The Lord by the mouth of the Prophet threatens fire, fire, Fire in the Palaces, and Fire in the Gates. Palaces;] Places of honour, the beauty and ornaments of a City: upon these shall be fire. Gates;] Places of power, where the strength of a City is laid, and where justice is done, here also fire. Fire in the Palaces,] No keeping in: and also Fire in the Gates,] No running out. A devouring fire round about, that all must feel, and none can quench; and all this comes for not keeping the Sabbath holy. See how Nehemiah contends with transgressors against this holy time of the Sabbath, What evil is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon them, and upon this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. This sin heightens the wrath of God, and causes great fires, Nehem. 13.17, 18. Not onely Nations, but Particular persons have also been severely punish∣ed
upon the same account, as ther have been sad instances in several ages; men made as monuments of Gods dreadful anger in divers places.Tacit. Hi∣stor. lib 5. Josephus Antiq. lib. 12 cap. 13. & lib. 16. cap. 11. Pompey that great Souldier, is reported sorely to suffer for defiling of Gods Sabbath and Sanctuary. 'Tis written of Herod the King, who appointing some to pull up the Sepulchres of Gods Saints, and to search for supposed treasures there∣in, God made fire to rise out of the earth, whereby such as searched were devoured.Ecclesiast. Histor. 12. centur. Magdeb. cap. 6. Histories are found full of examples of Gods fearful judgements upon such, who upon supposals of earth∣ly pleasure, and profit, have presumed to pull down the Sahbath of his Son, in the solemn service thereof.Joh. Fincel, lib. 3. de mirac. Many make mention of that miserable Wo∣man, who upon the Lords day dressing her flax, fire flamed out thereof, and the third Sabbath it so burned in the house that her children and self was consumed therewith.Discipul de de tempore Serm. 117. Another carrying in his Corn upon the Lords day, fire kindled in his Barn, and burnt it to the ground: I have read of many such sad examples. Some within doors their brains beat out, o∣thers
abroad their bodies burnt with Lightning, and beat down dead with claps of Thunder, as some recite. Object. We see no such punishments in our present times, upon persons pro∣faning the Sabbath. Answ. The Lord now leaves men un∣to that which is worse then punishment; to wit sin, Both in the time of the Sabbath, And out of Sabbath-time. O the sad sins of several, even upon the Sabbath day! Such sins set Mus∣culus upon the fourth Commandement to make a sad moane; and Bucer upon the 92. Psalme, does bitterly bewaile such sins. O that we had some so seriously mourning! for we have now many miserably so sinning: yea, and also at other times: Men are in sin▪ when they are out of the Sabbath: God leaves men to week dayes trans∣gressions as a punishment of Sabbath day omissions. The Lord lets men on the week dayes do the evil they should not, because on the Sabbath day they did not the good they should. Yea, let's sadly consider our abomina∣ble sins,
Both in judgment, And in practice. The sinking of Sabbaths, is the rising of all errors. Hence we note Armi∣nian, Socinian, Pelagian opinions pub∣lished almost in every place. With our sins against the day of Christ we have sinful errors against the death of Christ, against the whole Doctrine of Christ, Dignity of Christ, Deity of Christ. I have found some affirming, that 'twas a piece of the Divels policy, to hinder the Sabbath from being called (the Lords day,) that he might the more keep men from knowing, and imbracing the Lord of truth, and the truth of the Lord. I dare say, 'tis Satans design, that he might make men vent and ad∣vance Venomous opinions against the pure and precious truths of Christ, he causes them to become carelesse in keep∣ing the Lords day. 'Twas observed among the Jewes, that when they grew remisse concerning the Sabbath, they became corrupt in their Tenents touching the works of God in the Crea∣tion: And it may be observed among Christians, that since men have fallen to soul neglects of the Lords day, they
have about the works of Christ redemp∣tion, wax'd wilde in their imaginations; yea, errors of all sorts hath God suffer∣ed, as filthy froggs to infect our Eng∣lish air. 2. Sinful and prodigious practices are also plentiful in every place. As the observation of the Sabbath is that which brings on all the duties of godli∣nesse, cease that, and all sinks: so the violation of the Sabbath is the inlet of al loosenesse, a door to all the works of darknesse; what wickednesse will not rise up where the Lords day is down? As in the Decalogue the command for the Sabbath is set in the middle, being the band of the whole, and that which hath an influence into all: thus in the Catalogue of Jerusalems sins, Ezek. 22. the sin against the Sabbath is set in the midst amongst them, as being the main, and that through which all the rest move. Read vers. 7, 8, 9, 10. In thee have they set light by father and mother, in thee have they dealt by oppression, in thee have they vexed the father lesse and the widow. Thou hast despised my holy things, and hast profaned my Sabbath; In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, in thee
they commit lewdnesse, thou hast greedily gained by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God. Now for the Lord in a Land to suffer such sins, is worse then if he should in an ordinary way punish, punishment not being so great an evil as sin: Sin is the common cause of punishment. In evil things the cause is more corrupt then the effect; punishment is the work of God, sin is the proper work of the Divel, punishment is opposite to the peace and quiet of the creature, sin 'tis repugnant to the very being of man, yea, of God himself: 'Tis sin alone which formally and causally separates a soul from God the chiefest good, and therefore is the greatest evil: 'Tis sins that are Bars in Heaven-gates, that there is no entering in; and Bonds in Hell flames, that there's no getting out. If I (sayes Anselme) were in hell without sin, I should not be kept in, and were I in heaven with sin, I should soon be turn∣ed out. This (sayes Chrysostome) do I think, and this I will ever Preach, that 'tis worse by sin to offend Christ, then to be tormented in hell-fire for ever, May not we then well think, that sin is
a sorer evil then any punishment possi∣ble? And therefore, though God does not punish persons for polluting his Sabbath: yet in that he leaves them upon this unto other sins, their case is a thousand fold worse. Yet of such too many are manifest, men who on the Sabbath do not regard Gods assisting grace to help them in good: God on the week dayes withdraws his restrein∣ing grace that might keep them from evil, even sin the worst of evils. 2. Though God does not in visible wayes punish such men, yet he does in various wayes whereof they are not aware, viz. Negative, and Positive. 1. 'Tis a punishment that God does not punish them, Hosea 4.14. I will not punish your Daughters when they commit whoredome,Infignis est poena, & vindicta impietatis connivere Deum & indulgere peccantibus Philo. lib. de confus. linguarum. &c. When God does not punish persons for polluting and neg∣lecting his Sabbath, this is a sore punish∣ment: Yea, 'tis a notable punish∣ment (sayes a learned Writer) and a dreadful revenge, when God seems to indulge, and as it were oversee sinful men. As God shewes love in correct∣ing,
so he shewes wrath when he does not correct. 'Twas mercy to me, may some man say, that I was chastised. 'Twas good for me (sayes David) that I was afflicted. So every wicked one shall one day say, 'twas ill for me I was not afflicted, 'twas a judgement to me God did not correct me. The lesse smart on earth, the more pain in hell: 'tis a ter∣rible punishment upon some Sabbath-breakers, to break the Sabbath, and yet to passe unpunished. 2. God sends in sad Judgements for this sin which men do not see; as a Judge he smites them with blindnesse of mind, and hardnesse of heart; for this God threatens, Levit. 26. to make the earth as brasse, and heavens as Iron: Iron-hearts are worse then Iron-heavens. If sometimes on the Lords day to the Congregatiō men of hard hearts come, yet that word which is a mercy to some, is a judgement to them:Quum sanctae ex∣hortationis verba alia∣mens susci∣pit, alia reci∣pere recu∣sat, super unam civi∣tatem pluit Dominus, & non super aliam. Grego. in Ezek. Hom. 10. 'tis Gods ex∣pression in the Prophet, That he caused it to rain upon one City, and not upon a∣nother, (that is, sayes an ancient Writer) the same words of exhortation which God as a loving Father causes some to receive, as an angry Judge he makes
others to reject. Yea, God for sinnes against his Sabbath, gives men up to follow their own fancies, and eagerly to pursue their own seducements, Ezek. 20.24, 25. Because they despised my sta∣tutes, and polluted my Sabbaths, I gave them statutes that were not good, and I pol∣luted them in their own gifts, &c. Under such punishments poor people perish, and perceive it not. We see mens Sab∣bath-sins against God, and Gods judg∣ments are upon men for those sins, though we see them not. 3. Though God does not appear presently to punish such men, yet he will ere long. God is fitted himself to be sure, and God has fixed his day which is neer. 1. God himself is fitted to inflict pu∣nishment upon such as defile his holy day: for as he is the Lord of the Sab∣bath, so he is the Lord of hosts. The same that in the Hebrew term is the Lord of the hosts, in the Greek Septu∣gint, is the Lord of the Sabbath; and so does the New Testament expresse it. Except the Lord of hosts (sayes the Pro∣phet) had left us a remnant, we had been like Sodom. Isay 1.9. Except the
Lord of the Sabbath, sayes the Apostle, Rom. 9.27. repeating the words of the Prophet. It appears he that is the Lord of this day, hath many hosts at his command, wherewith he is ready to give Battel to all the breakers of his blessed Sabbath.Josephus lib. 5. Ant. Judacar: cap. 6. Josephus speaking of the Battel, Judg. 5. wherein God fought against Sisera, with an host of Men, an host of Stars, an host of Stormes, an host of Rain, Haile, and Winds; for, sayes he, there fell such a sudden and terrible tempest beating full in the faces of the Canaanites, as took away their sight, and benummed their hands, that they could not hold their shields, not fling their darts; but beat so on the backs of the Israelites, as em∣boldened them the more. God indeed does not immediately make war with men that misuse his Sabbath, but he hath his forces ready to fight them, his Armies are mustered and ready to march: all his weapons of war are pre∣pared, Psal. 7.12, 13. 2. God hath such dayes drawing neer when he will certainly proceed against Sabbath-sinners, and pursue them to death;
As a day of National Judgment, And a day of general Judgement. Indeed a dismal day of calamity may our Land look for, wherein the pollu∣ters of the Lords day shall be drawn out to suffer Gods severe vengence. There be some offenders and Malefactors, which the Magistrate does not immedi∣ately punish, but they are bound over to the next Assizes. Though Sabbath-breakers by Gods immediate blowes be not beaten down, yet they be bound over to such an Assizes as we never yet saw in England. God may not afore∣hand inflict exemplary punishments up∣on particular transgressing persons, be∣cause he means to come with common calamities upon the whole body of a Nation, when transgressors shall be destroyed together. Psal. 37.38. if a National repentance prevents not. Such a day of National distresse drawes neer, wherein Sabbath-breakers with other sorts of sinners shall assuredly suffer: The Lord will either lay the Land in blood, or in water. If waters of sorrows do not flow from men, fires of fury will flame from God, and then wo to such as sinned down the day of the Sabbath.
2. The great day of Gods general Judgement is now apace approaching, when such as sin against Gods sacred Sabbath, The Lord will disown them, and The Lord will condemn them. Disown them,] so that they who regarded not the Lords day, shall not be regarded in the day of the Lord, nor of the Lord in his day. Condemn them,] down to endure pains perpetual, and torments eternal; O how sweet would one Sabbath of rest be from Hell-torments in ten thousand years! But they who would not keep the Lords day of rest, shall never have a day of rest to keep. The day when Sabbath-slighters shall be certainly ad∣judged so to suffer, now draws on. God in some former ages might more exempla∣rily punish Sabbath-abusers, because then this Judgment-day was at a further distance, this day now drawing nearer, the Lord may more let men alone, and they may escape present penalties. But they that neglect the Lords day shall not escape the dreadful day of the Lord. We may observe a double day that men for the most part mind not:
The present day of the Lords Sab∣bath, and The approaching day of the last Judg∣ment. Men live as if there were no Sabbath day to be religiously imployed in: and as if there were no Judgement-day to be diligently prepared for. I eat, I drink, I play,Bernard de interna Do∣mo. cap. 33. (sayes Bernard) as if I were gone beyond the day of Judgement. Thus may many a man say, I eat, I sport, I sleep, I leap, and laugh, as if I had passed over, and got above Gods bles∣sed day. Men are as if they were now exempted from attendance on the Lords day; and as if they should hereafter be excused from appearance at the day of the Lord. But the day drawes neer, when all men must appear before the Judgement-seat of Jesus Christ, and answer for non-attending upon his holy day.Hieron. Epist. de scient. legis. Tom. 4. Oh what shall we do, sayes Jerom, in that day, when the Lord shall come with Trumphet sounding, fire flaming, sinners fainting, stars falling, mountains melting, poor creatures cry∣ing to graves to hold them, and hills to hide them? Let none that abuse the Lords day, suppose this day of the Lord
to be far off; for, Beold, sayes the Apostle, The Lord comes with ten thou∣sands of his holy ones, to execute judgment, &c. Jude 14, 15. The comming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. 5 8. Te Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. Heare this all ye who with the Lords good day, put off the evil day of the Lord. Lastly, though the Lord does not evi∣dently punish all such men, yet he hath openly of late laid hold upon some. Yea, herein the Lord hath spoken so loud from heaven against Sabbath-sinners, that I cannot be silent. We hereabout have had in a short time ter∣rible tokens of Gods severe vengeance upon men not minding the service of his day. Among our selves a sad example, a Townsman going into the Parish, and gathering Cherries on the Lords day, fell from the tree, and in the fall was so battered and bruised, that he never spake more, but lay groaning in his blood untill the next day, and then he dyed. Another man not far off, this Cherry-time fell from a Cherry-tree, and lay in dreadful dolour all the week, and the very next Lords day dyed. A grown youth upon the Lords day, not
long ago, in a Neighbour-Town scram∣bling with others for Pears, thrown out of some pockets in the Church-yard, broke his main thigh-bone, and the bone of his leg on the same side, in such a miserable manner, as a precious man who set those bones, assured me though he had seen very many; yet he never saw the like. Thus much may evidence, that though now the Lord lets alone the most Sabbath-slighting-men, yet he does evident execution on some: To inform men of himself, and To reform men in themselves. 1. By this God brings out unto men more of the knowledge of himself, Psal. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judge∣ment he executeth, &c. God executing judgement upon such as pollute his holy day, is known to be a holy God. Some such the Lord lets alone, that his patience may be seen, and some he pro∣ceeds against, that his justice may be known.August. de civit Dei. cap. 8. Austin is excellent in this: God now punishes some sinners, that the Attribute of his present justice may be observed: but God he reserves o∣thers, that the Doctrine of his future Judgement may be believed. If God
should punish none, he would not be known to be just: If God should for present punish all, the need of a Judge∣ment day to come might be questio∣ned. 2. By this God brings on more men to amendment of life: at least 'tis the Lords end in executing judgement upon some Law-breakers, to stop others in the breaking of his Law: when God bodily beats any sinner down, his aime is, to strike thereby upon the hearts Of all sorts of sinners, but Especially upon sinners of that sort. God in doing visible and terrible execution upon some Sabbath-breakers hereabouts, expects that all who break his blessed Sabbath,Interim ple∣ctuntur qui∣dam, quo cae¦teri corri∣gantur, &c. Cypr. de lapsis, Serm. should heare and fear, repent and amend. Cyprian doth sweetly presse the recovery of some re∣lapsed Christians, from the dreadful examples of Gods judgements upon some Apostates. And this use our Savi∣our makes of those eighteen, whose brains were beaten out by the fall of the Tower of Siloam, to provoke others unto speedy repentance, Luk. 13.4, 5. Except, &c.Alsted: Chronol. We read of one Waldus in France, who seeing a man suddenly
to fall down dead, it so struck upon his heart, that he went home, reformed his family, admonished his friends to re∣pent, and became famous, being the founder of the Waldenses. O that the hand of the great God would now reach all your hearts, who have seen and heard of what God hath in justice done in the fearful falls of some, who defiled his Sabbath! For except ye re∣pent,Pereunt im∣pii, non ut pereant, sed ut pereundo alios profici∣ant. Seneca. ye shall all likewise perish. O repent, repent! That the Lord may have the praise of his justice, And that you may have the profit of his judgements. The exhortation followes. And in prosecuting this present use, attend Both the Matters men are to be ex∣horted to, And the Motives men are to be ex∣horted by. The most material things to which I would incite concerning the Christian Sabbath be, To Assent in judgement, and To Assist in practice. Let all assent that this Sabbath ought
to be observed, and let each assist in the observation of the Sabbath; and let's seriously see that our Sabbath-assent be Full without doubting in it, and Firme without swerving from it. With some little varying, let me presse in the words of the Apostle, 2 Thess. 2.1, 2, 3. Now we beseech you, brethren, by the comming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter; as if the Lords day should not be at hand, and ever in your hearts: Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day is, and must be, and will be owned, except there come a sad and fearful fal∣ling away, through the subtilties of that man of sin. O let us take and keep such a conjunction upon our conscien∣ces concerning this day and duty, as may be strong and stable. Indeed to be well settled in the point of the Sab∣bath, we have exceeding good cause, considering we have Not onely the help of Nature, But also the help of Scripture. There be some lessons the light of nature leads to, viz.
That there is a God, That this God must be worshipped, That there must be a time set to wor∣ship him in, Than 'tis meet for God to appoint his own way and time of wor∣ship. 'Tis true, to determine the seventh part of time for the worship of God, is above the dictate of Nature; hence the Heathen in derision were wont to call a Jew [the seventh man] because he observed a seventh day wherein to wor∣ship God. We have not onely princi∣ples of nature, but expressions of Scrip∣ture: nor onely consequentiall deducti∣ons, but also positive assertions to settle our beliefe concerning a holy Sabbath; yea, we have Not onely the help of the Law, But also the help of the Gospel. The Gospel guides into most glori∣ous truths, viz. That there is a Christ, That this Christ is God: That therefore he must have Divine worship: That for his worship he must have a set seventh day, as God had. That every first day in the week is the day set, for the solemn worship of Christ: yea help,
Not onely of the Gospel of Christ, But also of all the Churches of Christ, In ages past, And present. They all with an harmonious consent subcribe this truth, and hand over to us this testimony, That the Lords day, Is the Lords due. Yea, Not onely the Churches of Christ without us, But also the Spirit of Christ within us helps. The Spirit of Christ, though he sa∣vingly converts but few; yet he does forcibly convince the most: most men amongst us are hereby convinced of this fundamental in Religion, viz. That the Lords day ought to be observed. Let us not then dimme the light, nor drown the voyce within us, that cryes, Sabbath, Sabbath. Let us not suffer our minds to be cor∣rupted with any poysonous opinions in this point. But Brethren, stand fast, and hold the institutions of God, accor∣ding as you have been taught. Silence all doubts about, and disputes against the Lords day; and stick close to that
truth herein, which you have professed and imbraced. O let not any of you let in the least thought ever to live Sab∣bath-free; indeed 'tis a day all men must alway be free for, and free in; but not any ever freed from.Bulling: in Rom 4 et 5. 'Twas a good observation of a learned Wri∣ter: The Sabbath as it came in with the first man, so it most not go out but with the last man. As it was from the beginning of the World, so it must continue till the worlds end. And therefore for the Lords sake, and your own souls sake, suffer none to seduce you, as to conceive a Sabbath-cease: but keep your Intellectuals sound in Sabbath-Tenents: and while you live, la∣bour to keep pure your Sabbathp-rin∣ciples. And as for practices, 2. Let all and every one assist unto the service of the Sabbath day: Suitable to the parts of the service, & Suitable to their places for the service. Concerning the service of the Lords day it self observe The spring of it, and The spread of it. What it must proceed from, and What it must extend unto.
1. Sabbath-service must proceed from a spring of love: The service of our Christian Sabbath-love,Amor meus pondus me∣um; eo feror, quocunque feror. Aug. 'Twill facilitate it, and 'Twill perpetuate it. Love it will lead out and carry through the wole businesse of this bles∣sed day with ease to the end. Love is the best Load-stone through all the Lords day-duties. This is one of the dayes of the Lords appearing, which every Christian is bound to love, 2 Tim. 4.8. And who ever loves the day, will not leave the duty, 2. The service of the Sabbath is of such extent, that there are divers duties duly to be performed, Both secretly in our Habitations, And openly in the Congregation. In our private dwellings;] Religi∣ous duties upon the Lords day are re∣quired of every one, as Prayer, Medi∣tation, and holy Conference: Prayer, whereby we speak to God. Meditation, whereby we speak to our selves. And good Conference, whereby we speak one unto another. Prayer;] The Sabbath is indeed a
day God hath sanctified, yet 'tis not sanctified as to us, nor we to it without prayer. Our Sabbath in heaven shall all be imployed in praysings of God, but prayer to God must have a prime part of every Sabbath we observe on earth. Are there Sbbbath duties to be performed? we must pray, [that God would make us able.] Are there Sab∣bath mercies to be received? we must pray, [that God would count us wor∣thy.] Meditation;] The Sabbath is the day for the bodies rest from earthly affairs, and therefore the mind is then most meet to be about the best businesse.Theophil. in Marc. 1. et 21. One well notes that the Lord commands rest upon the Sabbath, that men might read the Word, and meditate upon the Word they read. The Word and the Works of God are indeed every day to be meditated on, but most upon the Lords day. Augustine gives this reason why God was six several dayes in the works of the World, to wit, that upon the seventh day man might the more orderly think upon those Works of God. Conference;] The Sabbath is the
day when all in a family have more li∣berty to be together, then on any other day. On the week dayes persons in a house are as Bees in a Hive, that go forth several wayes to work; but on the Lords day their common work a∣broad ceases: so that they may the better set themselyes to assist each other in soul concernments. Exhorting one another while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13. In our publick meetings;] The reli∣gious duties which upon the Lords day are required, be Either more ordinary, Or lesse ordinary. Ordinary and constant] duties for the exercise of all, As Prayer to God, Hearing the Word, and Singing of Psalmes. Prayer;] Upon the Lords day, though one be made the Mouth, yet 'tis meete there should be as many praying hearts, as present bodies. Prayer was a princi∣pal thing; the practice of which, the Primitive Christians continued, in their congregated assemblies, Act. 2.42. Austine sadly complains of some in his
time,August. de tempore Serm. 251. who when they should be entring in the Church doors, they are tarrying in the Church-yard: playing without, when they should be praying within: idly talking of the world, when they should be seriously seeking the Lord, &c. O that this abuse had dyed in his dayes! but the Lord knows, it lives for us to lament. Hearing;] Upon the Lords day a great duty is diligent attention to Gods word read and preached. They (sayes a reverend Writer) who rightly use the Sabbath day,Gualt. in Marc. 3. Hom. 23. they go to the publick assemblies to hear the holy word of God. And herein what was the practice of Gods people in the time of the Apostles, is plain, Act. 13.14, 15, 16, 42, 44. Act. 15.21. Act. 20.7. &c. And Justine Martyr who dyed for the cause of Christ, in the year of our Lord 170. in his second Apologie for Chri∣stians, reports the people of God to ga∣ther into one place perpetually on the Lords day, to hear the Scriptures read, and to attend exhortations there∣upon. Singing;] Upon the Lords day it being the day of Saints sweetest de∣light,
holy Psalmes are seasonable to be sung. And in ancient times there were some Psalmes penned and purpose∣ly appointed for the Sabbath day▪ as is expressed in the Preface of Psal. 92. Pliny in his letter to Trajan tells how in those times the Christians upon their set dayes of solemn worship used early in the morning sweetly to sing together unto the praise of God.August. lib. 9. confessio. cap. 6. Austin in this publike exercise, sayes he had often wept for joy, joy, &c. Some seek to cut off and cast this comfortable service quite out of doors: contrary to the example of Christ, Matth. 26.30. the practice of the Apostles, Act. 16.25. and other expresse texts in the New Testament,August. in lib. Psal. Prolog. Basil. de virt. & laud. Psal. Tom. 1. as Colos. 3.16. Ephes. 5.19. Jam. 5.13. Among other ancient Wri∣ters Basil speaks large in the praise of praysing God in this way, and abun∣dantly blesses God for the Book of the Psalmes as a fit foundation for this duty. Lesse ordinary, yet frequent] duties upon the Lords day to be done, they do relate to Sacraments administring, Censures inflicting, and
Necessities supplying. Sacraments;] The transacting of these suites best unto the Sabbath sea∣son. One well observes that upon the day of the ancient Sabbath, the sacrifi∣ces were doubled:Danaeus, Ethic. Chr. lib. 2. cap. 10. And our Sacraments succeeding these, should not onely come in their room, but be at their time as services most seasonable for the day of our Sabbath. Chrysostome reports how in the primitive times the Lords day had a double name, 'twas called Chrysost. de Resurr. Serm. 15.The day of light, and The day of bread. Of light,] Because on that day the Sacrament of Baptisme was wont to be openly administred. Of bread,] Because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper used to be celebra∣ted on that day in the Assemblies of Christians. And this was the manner of the Disciples in the time of the Apo∣stles, Act. 20.7. Censures,] The exercise of Disci∣pline is fit for the Lords day, when the servants of Christ are assembled, then to remove from among them scanda∣lous persons both in opinion, and pra∣ctice; that's a plain place, 1 Cor. 5.4.
In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, [viz. on our Lords day] and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan, &c. And the first power for this purpose that our Saviour gave to his Disciples, was upon the day of our Christian Sabbath, the first day of the week: see Joh. 20.19, 23. Therein di∣recting them as on this day to exercise that power: and that power (it does appear) was upon this present day prin∣cipally put in execution afterward; thus Origen, Cyprian, and others relate.Orig. can. Cels. lib. 3. Cypr. ad Pomp. Epi. 62. Greg▪ Nys. orat. And O how pure and clean would our wa∣ters boyl, could we on this day so cast off our scum! Help Lord, &c. Necessities,] The duty of charita∣ble relief is proper for the Lords day, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Tertullian tells in his Apo∣logie for Christians, how carefull the Christian Churches were to works of mercy on the Lords day, whereby their Brethren in bonds were bountifully supplied, and the bellies of the afflicted refreshed.Irenaeus contra Va∣lenti. lib. 4, cap. 19 Another of the Ancients does excellently note from the example of our Saviour, Luk 13.15. that the right sanctifying the Sabbath day does
consist in acts of pitty, works of mercy; and how charitable deeds become this comfortable day, Luk. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. is full. These Sabbath-duties some way concern the whole body of a people more promiscuously. 2. There be some duties on the Sab∣bath that do concern some persons principally, as Magistrates and Ministers, Parents and Masters. All ought to concur in their care for the keeping of this day. Indeed the Lords day is the Fort-royal of Religion, let all stand to it in their places, we be not beaten out of that, especially now, when so many lay siege thereunto: Some set their wits awork, and op∣pose the doctrinal part of it. Others set their wills awork, and impugne the practical part of it; and as they will not rest on the Lords day, so they will not let the Lords day to be at rest, but mount their Cannons, and make what batteries they can, &c. O let all, and especially such as may do more then others, now bestirre themselves to raise the Sabbath siege, and to main∣tain our Sabbath Fort; if we dye, let
us dye in a couragious keeping of this, indeed if this be taken, all is lost; hold this, and yet there is hope. Let us that are in publike places play the men. As the two milch-kine, 1 Sam. 6. being coupled together they bore up and car∣ried on the Arke of God; Thus let Magistrate and Minister be united to hold up the holy day of God, and the holy worship of God upon his day. Let Sabbath-breakers for multitude be like a numerous Army: if Magistrate and Minister would but joyn, we should route them all: O how commendable were it if these two in this regard would agree like Joab and Abishai his brother, 2 Sam. 10.11, 12. If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee; onely be of a good courage, let us quit our selves like men, for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seemeth him good. So let us do what we are able to the utmost for the Sabbaths and the service of our God, and then the Lord do with us what seems him good. O that those who bear the sword were fired with some of
that Sabbabth-zeal that once Nehemiah had, Chap. 13.17, 18, 19. 'Twas a high praise that Ambrose gave of Theodosius, that he was more solicitous to preserve the things of God as a Magistrate, then to preserve himself as a man. And it was a good caution that Austin gives upon Psal. 2. Magistrates are to be ad∣monished,Vid. Pet. Martyr. in judg. cap, 1. (saith he) as not to grant men immunity to any false worship, so not to allow men liberty to leave the true worship of God. The Magistrate upon the Lords day, is not onely to see men forbear the outward works of their callings, but to see that they be about the visible works of Gods worship.August: Bonif. co∣miti. Epi▪ 50. & prae∣cip. Tom. 7. Cont. epist. Parmeniani lib. 1. cap. 7. Tom. 7. lib. 2. con∣tra Epist Gaudentii, cap. 16.17. Au∣stin more then once commends Imperi∣al Lawes against the Donatists for sepa∣rating from the publike worship of God, and gathering into private houses upon the Lords day, there to promote their Anti-magisterial opinions. Which Lawes were to punish the ordinary peo∣ple with fines of Money, their leaders with banishment, the places of their meeting to be forfeited to the Empe∣rour: and that none of them should have power to bestow their goods by will, or to enjoy any Legacy to them
by will bequeathed. And he gives In∣stances of the execution of these Laws, and the good successe thereof, encoura∣ging the Magistrate therein. And when people are brought to the publike Pool,Joh. 5.2, 3. the Minister is as the Angel that upon this Sabbath-season must move and work in the waters, to wit, be active in all the Ordinances of God, that such as by divine assistance step close in, may meet God for the cure of their souls. And as the Minister is more immediate∣ly to manage the worship of God upon this holy day; yea, his place is to presse that men do not on this day of the Sabbath satisfie themselves in a bare bodily way to worship God, but to see they on the Sabbath serve God in Spi∣rit and truth. Thus these two as the two Cherubims that looked one to∣wards another, and both upon the Mercy-seat, they should with respect look one upon another, and both upon the service of the Sabbath, that so the Lord may have his day and his due. Lastly, Let governours of families, Parents and Masters contribute their best assistance to see the Sabbath well
observed; for which end towards their children and servants there is required upon the Lords day a double duty, A taking of them to the publike means, And a taking with them private pains. 1. You are to bring them with you unto the publike Ordinances. In the time of the Old Testament people that went to worship God, they carried their flocks and their herds with them, Hose. 5.6. that in sacrifice they might offer them up to God. In these times of the New Testament, men are to carry their children and servants with them to the worship of God upon his holy day, offering them up, with themselves as a sacrifice to God. When 'twas re∣quired that the whole body of the Israe∣litish people should go out from their dwellings in Egypt to serve the Lord to∣gether in the Wildernesse, Pharaoh called Moses and said, Go ye serve the Lord, but let your flocks and your herds be stayed: but what sayes Moses? We will go with our flocks and our herds, with our sons and our daughters, with our young and with our old will we go; there shall not a
hoofe be left behind: for we must hold a feast unto the Lord, and serve the Lord our God, Exod. 10.9, 24, 26. Such Religious resolutions become Christians in the present case. 2. Such of you as are heads of families, must upon the Lords day be diligent in houshold-duties: We find in the 4th. of Mark, yea, and likewise Luke 14. how our Saviour on the Sabbath day, when he had publikely preached to the people as a Minister of the Gospel, he after privately examined his Disciples, and further instructed them as a Master of a family. From which example of Christ an excellent Expositor observes,Chemnit. examen cap. de dieb, fest. how unto the sanctification of the Sab∣bath, besides publike duties there is work to be done in Families, as instru∣cting servants, repetition of Sermons, reading Scriptures, counselling and quickning such as are under our care, that all may keep holy the Lords day. So we see the matters men are exhor∣ted unto, I come now to consider the motives by which hereunto men are to be exhorted. These are of two sorts:
Some more driving, and Others more drawing. Motives that more drive unto dili∣gence in these Duties, may arise by ob∣serving concerning the Christian Sab∣bath these four things: The necessity of it's continued be∣ing, The Jeopardy of its future losing, The uncertainty of its sudden re∣gaining, and The possibility of its present cursing. 1. The being of the Lords day is ne∣cessary, note, Negatively, and Affirmatively. Not that God needs any Sabbath-service, or such holy duties as additio∣nals to his Dignity. Indeed as to us the honour of God seems to sink when Sabbaths cease. And the supporting of Sabbaths seems the advancing of Gods glory; but the intrinsecal glory of God can receive no increase. God would be infinitely happy, though men keep no day holy: we need his service, not he our obedience. When our Sa∣viour sent, Luk. 19. to unloose the Colt, the Disciples were to give the owner
this reason thereof: The Lord hath need of him. We call indeed to a careful keeping of the Sabbath, but we do not say the Lord hath need of it. The gods of the Heathen need the supports of such as serve them; but so does not the God of heaven. Hence sayes the holy Apostle, Act. 17.24, 25 God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands, nei∣ther is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life and breath and all things. One well observes of the Angels,Chrysost▪ in Matth. Hom. 9, they are not poor, though they have no flocks of sheepe; they are not in want, though silver & gold they have none; they do not need these things, because they have better things abide them. Thus God does not want our service in Sabbaths, neither needs he any of our duties on holy dayes, because of those most perfect felicities, and glorious ex∣cellencies that are in himself abiding. As the Lord is omniscient, and needs not any man to assist his knowledge: So the Lord is all-sufficient, and needs not any thing to help his happinesse. And
therefore the necessity of Sabbath-ob∣servance does not referre to God: But to observe Sabbaths, the necessity is in reference to us for a double cause, viz. Necessitas duplex, Prae∣cepti, & Medii.Gods Injunction towards us, and Our condition towards God. 1. 'Tis necessary for us to observe the Sabbath day in all its duties, because of Gods injunction. And here 'tis meet of two things to take good notice, to wit, Every command of God causes a necessity of our obodience: and here is a necessity of our obedience, because of Gods expresse command. 1. Whereever God gives a word of command, there is a work of our obe∣dience necessary. I had rather (sayes Luther) obey the Lords commands, then to work Miracles. If Miracles need be wrought, God will do his own work; but 'tis needfull we obey commands, for God will not do mans work. As God by his promises binds himself to vouch∣safe mercy: So God by his precepts binds us to perform duty. As God promising mercy, requires our faith; so God commanding duty, requires our
obedience. Obedience 'tis a debt which as we certainly owe, so we must necessarily pay. Some they owe to God the debt of passive obedience, as they are his prisoners: all, they owe to God the debt of active obedience, as they are his creatures. 2. Here God gives a word of mani∣fest command, and therefore visibly to obey is necessary: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Exod. 20.8. Touch∣ing this commandement, That the Sabbath day be kept holy, we may observe, Who was the Giver of it,Mediatorem hic appellat Christum, de∣clarans quòd ipse ante legem fuerit, & legem tulerit. Chrysost. In principio mundi Chri∣stus Media∣tor erat ho∣minum, etfi nondum erat homo, &c. Orig. Am∣bros. lib. 4. in Luc. and To whom it was given. 1. He who gave this Sabbath Com∣mand, was Christ the Mediatour; He who came down upon Mount Sinai, and gave the whole Law, is called Je∣hovah, Exod. 20.2. Deut. 4 11. This the Septuagint translate (Lord;) And the same the holy Apostle applies to the Mediatour, our Lord Christ, Gal. 3.19. And Origen, Chrysostome, Ambrose, with almost all the Ancients, in expounding that place of the Apostle, do affirme, that 'twas Christ the Mediatour both of the Old and New Testament, by whom
the Law was given: So Calvin, Juni∣us, Marlorat, and other able Writers since assert upon the same text. We are therefore to look upon this sanctifying the Sabbath, as that for which Christ hath given a positive Command. 'Twas not a Mosaical Cere∣mony pointing to Christ: but 'tis a Moral duty appointed by Christ, and so to remain under the Gospel and go∣vernment of Christ, untill Christ shall deliver up the Kingdome to God the Father, and set an end to all times and things in this world. 2. He to whom this Sabbath-Com∣mand was given, is every one Indi∣vidually, [Thou] Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Thou;] Not as a Jew, but as a man, every man, both Jew and Christian. Herein whosoever exempts himself, deceives himself. Yea, and of all the commands, not any have such a Memorandum upon it, as that which concerns the sanctifying of the Sabbath. Remember,] As it related to a duty to be performed in dayes past, so it related to a people that in dayes past should still perform that duty. A Chri∣stian Church to come. Remember,] If
men forget all the rest, yet let them re∣member this; and if they well remember this, not any of the rest will be forgoten. That which Luther affirms of the first, may wel be referred to the 4. Command∣ment, that in the observance of that, obedience to all the rest is comprized. 2. The Sabbath day in all its duties is necessary for men to sanctifie, because of their condition, whether they be considered As unregenerate, Or as regenerate. 1. For men in an unregenerate estate, they need to have a holy Sabbath ob∣served. And of such there are two sorts; Some in a sinful estate, and know it not: and others that know their estate to be sinful. And towards both, there's a necessity of Sabbaths. 1. For such men as are sinfull, and do not know it, but are utterly in the darke. Gen. 1. we find, that at the be∣ginning there was darknesse as a black vaile drawn over the face of the deepe, but God upon the first day in the week created light, which was exceeding
good. God upon the first day of the week our Christian Sabbath, creates that good light which scatters darknesse, that before covered the face of the soul, and causeth such discoveries of things never before seen, 1 Cor. 14.23 24, 25. If the whole Church be come together, [viz. on the Lords day] there comes in one ignorant, and he hearing the Word, is convinced, is judged, the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so falling down he worships God, &c. And in∣deed this is one great end of Sabbaths and Sermons, Act. 26.18. 2 Cor. 4.4, 5, 6. 2. For such men as know themselves sinful, Sabbath-service is necessary, that they may consider how sad it is to per∣sist in known sins, Luk. 12.47. Joh. 15.22, 24. Jam. 4.17. For some, our Saviour sayes, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do: but of several we may say, Father, affright them, they know what they do. They transgresse Gods Lawes, abuse his mercies, they oppose his Servants, and they know what they do. The former need Sab∣baths to convince them of the evil they know not: And these latter need Sab∣baths
to convert them from the evil they know. Yea, to all sorts of sinners there's such a necessity of these dayes and duties, as that there is little likely∣hood of any saving good to the souls of such as lay aside the Lords day: but they who come not within Sabbath-compasse, their case becomes incurable. Though a man be never so diseased and sick, yet as long as he lyes at Physick, keeps his purging dayes, and uses good means for health, there is hope he may do well; but when he neglects his hea∣ling time, lets his disease run, will not come under the Physicians hands, then his case growes desperate, and dye he must. Even so though a man be ne∣ver so sinful, yet as long as he keeps within Sabbath-compasse, and comes under the means of soul-cure, there is hope he may amend; but if he neglects the Lords day, leaves off holy duties, damne he must. 2. For men in a regenerate estate, the Lords day is of necessary use; Of what∣soever sort we consider them. Of such Some are in sins relapsed, and Others are in sorrowes distressed. All need these Sabbath-helps.
1. Relapsed Christians need Sabbath-relief. Whether their spiritual decay be, In opinion, In affection, Or practice. The service of the Lords day is of necessary concernment, to clear truth clouded, to quicken love deaded, and to introduce the duties of a holy life neglected. 2. Distressed Christians need Sab∣bath-succours. Sabbath-Cordials are required for the recovery of faint∣ing spirits, and the reviving of droop∣ing dying hearts. Again, Gods Saints are to be consi∣dered, either As more weak, Or more strong. And unto them all the Lords day, is a day of deep concernment. 1. For weak ones, they need Sab∣bath-supplies, Dayes wherein they may draw near and derive virtue from Christ, into all their feeble parts. Dayes wherein as babes from the breasts of the Lord, they may suck in soul-nourishing milk of grace and mercy to breed them up.
2. For strong ones, they need Sab∣bath-supports, that they may stand fast in their good estate and plight. The highest and holiest of Gods Saints ought to be under Sabbath-observance, 'tis a reserve for heavens priviledge to be above Ordinances, and present Administrations. 'Tis the City of the Heavenly Jerusalem, that needs not the light of the Sun, neither of the Moon, Revel. 21.22. While we live, as we need the Moon, viz. the world with its crea∣tures and comforts for the bearing up of our bodies: So we need the Sun, viz. Christ with his holy times, and things for the well-being of our souls. Some say of the time that is spent upon the service of Christ, as they said of the oyntment poured out upon the bo∣dy of Christ. What need this waste? Matth. 26.8. But as St. Paul said, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. So may every one say, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I sanctifie not the Sabbath. The sancti∣fying of the Sabbath is as the [One thing needfull] to Christians in re∣ligion, and unto the religion of Chri∣stians.
'Tis said of Jacob that his life was bound up in the life of his son Ben∣jamin: So the life of a Christian, and the life of his religion is bound up in the life of Sabbaths. As Rachel said, Give me children, or else I dye: so a Christian sayes, Give me Sabbaths, or else I dye. Religion sayes, Give me Sabbaths, or else I die. The Sabbath is as the soul of Christian-Religion, if that departs, all becomes as a Carcase, upon which the Vermin of corrupt opi∣nions prey: 'tis necessary then this continue. 2. Of losing the Lords day there is danger: And here we shall discover The grounds of the losse, and The greatnesse of the losse. The grounds on which we may see the Sabbath in hazard to be lost, and the Lords day in our dayes likely to cease, are The sinfulnesse of men, and The righteousnesse of God. 1. Men being monstrously sinful, put upon us this present peril of being de∣prived of the Lords day, to wit, Wicked men against us more remote, and
Wicked men amongst us more imme∣diate. 1. Men of the Romish Religion in remote Nations, are they not bigg with a design to make our Sabbaths cease? As some of the Powder-Traitors 1605. Confessed the cause why they sought to blow up the Parliament-house was, be∣cause that was a place wherein against the Romish Religion so many Lawes were made. And do not Popish par∣ties in all places, plot against the Sab∣bath day, because that is the time wherein against their Idolatrous wor∣ships so many truths are taught? And are not now their hopes high, by our present Wars, to deprive us of our pre∣cious times and things; to raise Rome in the ruines of poor Protestant Nati∣ons? Does not Antichrist crow ovet these Christian Kingdomes, as once Tyrus over Jerusalem, Aha, aha, she is broken, that was the gates of the people, she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste? 2. Among our selves how many seek to set us beside our Sabbath-mercies? As Both Papists, And Atheists.
Papists,] Who secretly consult in our chief Cities to lay us Sabhath-waste. Jesuits who can cunningly comr like Countrey-men, and be seen like Soul∣diers, Citizens, Lawyers, Preachers, in any posture to promote their projects. Atheists,] These like Pharaoh's-frogs are found covering the land, and croak∣ing against the Lords day in every Pond, in every Parish. Men that would have no God for a Sabbath, would have no Sabbath for God Yea, what numbers of two sorts may we see, all setting against our Sabbath-enjoyments. Men of rotten principles, and Men of wretched practices. As Herod and Pilate both agreed for the Lords death, so these both joyn against the Lords Day. As the blessed body of Christ was crucified between the Theeves, so the blessed day of Christ is now crucifying between loose Sectaries, and prophane sinners. And Lord help, who labours to rescue it? Who sees not our Sab∣bath-slightnesse, wearinesse, and wil∣lingnesse to be set Sabbath-free? The
barrennesse of the best, and the ingra∣titude of the greatest part, what does it foretell, but an approaching time of turning out, and overturning Sab∣baths? 2. God being infinitely righteous, makes the danger of this more exceed∣ingly dangerous. God in his just way of Judgements makes mournfull re∣moves of such sweet mercies, either When men to follow their sins, for∣sake his Sabbaths; Or when men observe his Sabbaths, but in their sins. Isay 1.13. Your Sabbaths, and your solemn Assemblies I cannot away with, your hands are full of blood. Bloody hands cannot hold Gods blessed day. Those things will away, that God cannot a∣way with. 'Tis not all the powers, nor policies of men and Divels can pull a∣way Sabbaths from a Land if there the Lord will hold them, neither is it all the Prayers and Powers of Saints and Angels can keep Sabbaths in a Land if thence the Lord will take them. Let not us in England think we have such a settled Fee-simple of the Sabbath, as that there is no disinheritting, or such
an entaile, as cannot be cut off. The Apostle, Rom. 11. speaking of Gods cut∣ting off the Chuch of the Jewes, a learn∣ed Expositor puts the question, How did God cut them off?Olevian. And then gives the answer, By taking from them his Word, Sacraments, and Sabbaths, Lam. 2.6. The Lord hath caused the solemn feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion. What in Zion? The Lord loves the gates of Zion, Psal. 87.2. The Lord hath chosen Zion, Psal. 132.13. The Lord dwelleth in Zion, Psal. 76.2. yet God causes Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion? Yes, Zion and Sabbaths are parted, with the losse of Sabbaths even Zion is punished. And O England, doest not thou fear such a day drawing near? Art thou better then Zion? 2. How great, the losse of the Lords day will be, we may mournfully fore∣see in four things, viz. The Matter it will be of, This was Preached at a time when no lesse lay in danger.The Subject it will be to, The Season it will be in, and The Sequels that will be thereupon. 1. The matter the losse will be of. In the ceasing of Sabbaths, a pawse is
put unto the precious things of God, as the Gospel with its glorions admini∣strations. Was it not a sad cause with the City Jerusalem, when the sucklings swooned in the streets, and the children cryed to their Mothers, Where is Corn and Wine? And will it not be for poor people pittifull to cry to their Ministers, Where is the Word and Sa∣craments? Where be those blessed re∣freshments we were wont to find? That was a dolefull day, Jer. 14.3. when little ones were sent to the waters, but they returned with vessels empty, be∣cause the pits were dry. And will it not be a wofull day for men, women and children to go for the water of the Word whither they were wont, but to return with vessels empty, for the pits are dry, or full of mud and dirt? [What the present sinking of the springs and drying of the streams may mean, I much fear to think.] Will not that losse be great, wherein the Word of life is lost? What (sayes Luther) is the World with∣out the Word but a dark hell? And what is a Land without the Gospel, but a black Lanthorne without a candle? The keeping of the Sabbath hath been the
honour of our Nation, and the Gospel the glory of our Land; when the one is down, the other will be gone, and then may we write Ichabod upon all our doors. I read of a Germane Minister, when he saw hopes of the Gospels-passage, he cryed out with joy, Let it come, let it come. O but to let it go, what bitter cryes will it cost? 2. The Subject, this losse will be to, It will be the souls of men will suffer sorely herein. Sabbath-losse is a soul-losse. A soul in our Saviours account is of more worth then all the World, Matth. 16.26. Even the worst soul (sayes Austin) is better then the best body. As the Apostle sayes of man, he was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man. And so (sayes Chryso∣stome) the soul was not made for the body, but the body for the soul which is the better part. If we lose health, Wealth, and all the things of the world that relate to the body, 'tis but a little losse. But if we lose the Word, Sacraments, and Sabbaths, it being a losse that relates to the soul, it is exceeding great. 3. The Season this losse is likely to be in, makes it more lamentable. We find
it foretold, Math. 24, that towards the latter end of the World there should be times of great tribulation. Nation should rise against Nation, &c. Ill in such a time to be without Sabbat as: It was wofull for those Virgins, Matth. 25. when there was a cry at midnight, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, and then their Lamps were out, and their oil to seek. And doleful will it be for those Nations, when they shall be in their Nights of Trouble, and hear nothing but cries, Behold, more misery comes, and then to have their Lamps out, their burning and shining lights gone. Have not our hopes been high to see Sab∣baths more firmly settled, the Gospell more clearly preached, Ordinances more purely administred, and if after all, all should be dashed down in the dirt, and we left in the dark, how dreadful would this be? To lose Sabbaths at any time were sad but at such a time as this. 4. The sequels of the losse make it most lamentable. Fearfull effects will follow the losse of the Lords Day, viz. the desolating the places of publike as∣semblies, Levit. 26.31. Lam. 2.6. Psal.
74.4, 5, 6. The Prophet thus sadly sighs it out to God: Thine enemies roar in the midst of the congregation, they set up their ensigns for signs. A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees, viz. to build places for Gods publike Worship. But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and hammers. They cast fire into thy Sanctuary: yea, they say in their hearts, Let us take the houses of God in possession, let us destroy them together, and burn up all the Synagogues of God in the Land.Decet Sacer∣dotes cum Templis in∣terire. Titus with his Roman ar∣my when he ruined Jerusalem, burnt the Temple, he commanded the Priests of the Lord to be slain. Time will come, says our Saviour to his Disciples, that they which kill you, will think they doe God good service, John 16.2. Rom. 11.3. Or if such places be not plucked down, they abuse them to abominable worships. When ye shall see the obomination of desolation stand in the holy place, Math. 24.15. Instead of a preaching Ministery, a wooden Idol. 'Tis said of the Egyptian Temples, they are beautifull without but within ugly formes. To have the places of our publike meetings filled with deformed faces, and
blaspheming voices. Owles to dwell there, and Satyres dance there, Isay 13.22, 23. Yea, upon this losse followes not onely the desolating the places of pub∣like worship that be in the Land, but the desolating the Land it self wherein the places of publike worship be, Le∣vit. 26.31, 33. I will bring your Sanctu∣aries into desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours, Yea, I will make this whole Land desolate, that your enemies shall be astonished thereat. Then shall the Land enjoy her Sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate. The Land shall have Sabbaths of rest from plowing, when Sabbaths of praying cease. Now let us hence learn how lamentable the loss of the Lords Day would be. I fear some are so profane, that they think while Sabbaths are kept, the losse is great.August. de civit. Dei, li. 6. ca. 11. Au∣stin reports of that heathen Philosopher Seneca, That he severely blamed the Jews for resting on the Seventh Day, because thereby they lost the seventh part of their time. Some I doubt that are called Christians, that yet are of such a Paga∣nish opinion, that they think that time lost which is spent in the Service of God. But this, this is indeed that losse
which the Lord help us to lay close to heart, not to have the Service of God to spend Sabbath-time in, and not to have Sabbath-time to spend in the Ser∣vice of God. To lose the Sabbath is not alone the losse of bare time, but of blessed time, time sanctified and set apart by a Divine Ordinance, &c. 3. The Lords Day lost in a land may be long before it be regained. The way of Sabbaths once ceased, may not soone (if ever) return, as may evi∣dently appeare in a double respect. viz. Of God inflicting this losse, and Of Men on whom this losse is inflict∣ed. 1. Because God does not make Sab∣baths to cease in a sinfull Land, but when there is great wrath in him stirred up, and great wrath of him to be poured out. 1. When God takes away his holy Sabbath from a people, he is with great wrath provoked. The Lord does not deprive a people of such precious pri∣viledges, as his holy times and things, till he is very angry, and exceedingly in∣censed,
so as that himself forsakes them. Now great wrath in God as it is not suddenly raised; so it is not pre∣sently appeased, but it may remain long, Zech. 1.12. 2. When God takes away his holy Sabbath from a people, he hath great wrath to execute: The Lord hath caused the Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, Lam. 2.6. This was when God had great anger against Zion, and Zion was sadly covered with the anger of God. How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger Lam. 2.1. He hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter, of Zion, v. 2. He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horne of Zion, v. 3. He hath poured out upon Zion his fury like fire, v. 4. &c. Now when God hath much fury to bring forth, and in the way of his judg∣ments much work to do, he takes time. God in the wayes of his mercie goes swift, because therein he moves with delight, Micah 7.18. But as God is slow to execute wrath, so he is slow in the wrath he executes,Dolet Deus quoties cogi∣tur esse fe∣rox. for herein he moves with a kind of grief, Judg. 10.16. Lam. 3.33,
2. Such men as suffer this sad punish∣ment, the cessation of Sabbaths. 'Tis long As before they come to a true sense of it, So before they may make a good use of it. Men are many times long before they are sensible Either of their sin, which is the cause of punishment, Or of the punishment, that is the ef∣fect of their sin. Commonly men that come under this Spiritual Judgement, the deprival of the Lords holy day, Either they are pleased with it, Or they are stupid under it. Some they please themselves in being Sabbath-free, as we may see at present in some parts of the Nation. Can it be believed, that in England or Wales, there should be Parishes wherein the people know not when the Sabbath comes, neither do they enquire, but are contented, and account liberty from Gods Ordinance, a great deliverance. People are pleased when well-spent Sabbath dayes are down,
Because then they are gone, who di∣sturbed them, and Because then they find others in place, that flatter them. Such as caused them some soul-dis∣quiet are gone, Revel. 11. See how merry the world makes it when Gods witnesses are slain: They that dwell upon earth shall make merry, rejoyce and send gifts one to another, because the two Prophets that tormented them are dead, vers. 10. Yea, and then such as keep them in a carnal, quiet, and sinfull se∣cure peace are present. See the people of the Jewes, when Moses was gone from amongst them and they got Aaron to be of their own minds, and made them a golden Calf; O what dancings and merry doings there was! Exod. 32. It liked them well, but it wrought them woe. 'Twas that which had a sad in∣fluence into all their after troubles. Hence it grew a Proverb:Non est poe∣na supra Israelem in qua non est uncia vitult. That there was no punishment upon Israel in which there was not an ounce of the goldden Calf. Thus people when they can get such Ministers among them,Sabbatum aurei vituli. August. as will help make them, a Sabbath of the golden Calf, as Austin calls it, that they may
huddle and slubber over a little service to God, and passe the principal of the day in dancing, feasting, and Jovial meetings, this is to their minds, but 'twill be misery in the end. 'Twill put a sting into every trouble on earth, and torment in hell. Others under this judgement of Sab∣bath-ceasing are sottish, and brutish. Abundance such there be now abroad in England, where for want of a pub∣like Ministery the Lords day it laid by, and since that liberty hath been granted to some upon the Sabbath, wholly to separate into private houses: others have taken the advantage to live like Atheists and Epicures, as if there were no Sabbath for God, nor any God for a Sabbath. Yea, people are in such a posture, that if the Lord should punish the Land with the losse of Sabbaths, 'tis not like soon to be laid to heart. With many, the Lords day is already lost in the Land. As they that being asked, whether they had re∣ceived the holy Ghost? Answered, We know not whether there be any holy Ghost. So aske many now adayes, whe∣ther they have observed the Lords holy
day? they are ready to answer, they know not whether there be any such holy day to be observed. Time was, a Book was set out to give liberties up∣on the Lords day, men now take their liberties from the Lords day without any Book. And they that do not, are so listlesse and livelesse in the Lords-day-duties, that I doubt if God should judicially deprive us of Sabbath-Sea∣sons, we should not thereof soon be sensible. And so the time of Sabbath-returnes may likely be long. Again, if the Lord should lay such a Judgement upon the whole Land, as the losse of Sabbaths, 'tis not probable people will presently make such a pro∣fitable use thereof, As to prize them highly, And to pray for them earnestly. Highly God will have them prized. God will raise Sabbath-esteems before he makes Sabbath-returns; before God brings back his blessed Day, as men shall feele the want, so know the worth thereof, and be of Davids mind: One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand, Psalme 84.10. vers. Heartily God will have them prayed for. [Sabbath-Li∣berties,]
Men shall be humble Petitio∣ners for them before they be happy pos∣sessors of them. 'Twas one of the three things Latimur did so ordinarily and earnestly pray for in Queen Marys dayes; That the Gospell might be resto∣red to England, once again, once again, &c. That Sabbaths might be openly observed, and Gods worship publikely performed, [Once again, once again.] Which words he used to repeat with great vehemencie of spirit. Others concurred in the same request, and had from God a most gracious grant. What are David desires and prayers? Psalm 63.2. That I may see (Lord) thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. And, Psalm 42.4. When I remember these things, I pour out my soul within me: for I had gone with the multi∣tude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the multitude that kept holyday. Should holy Sabbath-dayes cease, some I doubt not but upon knees bended would beg their bringing back, though the Major part would likely make little of it. O that men would yet make much of Sabbath-Seasons, lest such a time come when
they would they cannot! Time will be, sayes our Saviour to his Disciples, Luke 17.22. when ye shall desire to see one of the daies of the Son of man, and shall not see it. O if you might but have one Sab∣bath as in former times! Luke. 19.42, 43. When he came near, he beheld the City & wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy Day? the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. The things with the day, and the day with the things there∣of are now past and gone. Amos 8.11. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, I will send a famine in the Land, not of bread, but of hearing the Word. And men shall wan∣der from Sea to Sea, and from the North to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it. O now, now, while it is called to day, THE LORDS DAY, be∣fore Sabbaths, and Sermons cease: though there should not come such a time over all the Land, yet it may be upon particular places rain may fall on one City, and not upon another, Amos 4.7. Brighr beames of the Sun may shine on one field, and the very next field under a dark shadow, and
over it a black cloud. There shine; Here rain. O the clear light that hath shi∣ned upon the Lords Day, and the sweet Sabbaths that have been kept in some Townes of England not long since: but now Ichabod, The glory is gone: God knowes whose turn it may be next. O let me beseech you of this place to look to the Lords Day, be diligent, hold fast. God never takes away his Sabbaths till people are weary of them, and wil∣ling to part with them, 4. To a people the Lords Day may not be lost, but last; yet all lie under a curse. They may be curs'd to the Sabbath, & The Sabbath may be curs'd to them. The soules of men may be curs'd towards Sabbaths. Never let fruit grow on this tree: Never let Sabbath or Ser∣mon do this people good. No sooner had our Saviour curs'd the fig-tree, but it withered at the roots. May there not be found amongst us men and women that are most miserably withered, Both branch, And root? Not onely the branch of their out∣ward
profession, but also the root of their inward affection withered. What shall we say of such Galatians, who would now pluck out Paul's eyes, that were once ready to pluck out their eyes for Paul? Are not they withered? Are not they under Gods dreadful curse? For men to be curs'd in the trades they fol∣low, & fields they possess, is sad: but to be curs'd in the Sabbaths they spend, and curs'd in the Sermons they hear, is worse. For God to say to a Minister every time a Sabbath comes, Go indeed to the Pulpit, and preach to that people, Hearing they shall hear, but shall not un∣derstand: seeing they shall see, but not per∣ceive. For the heart of this People is wax∣ed grosse, their ears are dull of hearing, their eyes have they closed. Now make their hearts hard their eares deafe, their eies blind, that they may never be convert∣ed, never healed, but live and die under a Gospell-curse, and their Soules sinking under a Sabbath-curse: yea, and so Sabbaths themselves may be cursed to the soules of men. As men by their sins may pollute that day, which otherwise is holy: So God by his judgement may curse
that day, which otherwise is blessed, and so Sabbath-mercy may be turned into a judgement, as Moses Rod was turned into a Serpent. It would have been ill for Israel if the brazen Serpent should have become a fiery Serpent; that mortally to sting them, that was made to heal them. And will it not be ill for any if the Lords day which is a day of life, shall become a day of death? This saving day, changed into a damning day? 1 Sam. 12.17. We see 'twas terrible when God turned a day of Harvest, into a day of tempest; and that time wherein they should have gathered their Wheat with the labour of their hands on earth; God scattered it with thunder and hail from heaven. And who would not fear such an effect, for God to turn a day of Rest, into a day of Wrath, and therein not to blesse, but thereby to blast mens hearts and hopes? 'Tis sweet for Saints, when to them the very curses of men are blessed; but 'tis sad for sin∣ners when to them the very blessings of God are cursed, Mal. 2.2. I, saith the Lord, will send a curse upon you, I will curse your blessings, yea, I nave cursed
them already, yet ye lay it not to heart. Beware then I beseech you, how you spend the Lords day, lest the Lord make this blessed day, to become a curse. But I proceed from these Motives that are more driving,Generosus animus fa∣cilior duci∣tur quam trahitur. to insist upon such Motives as are more drawing; for upon Generous and Ingenuous minds such Arguments work most. And here I beseech you consider: The carefull keeping of the Lords day, and the Lords day carefully kept, It is Equitable, It is Honourble, It is Profitable, It is Delectable. And O that God from heaven would set to the help of his own hand, that un∣to diligence in the Lords-day-duties you might be drawn by this fourfold Cord. 1. For the equity,] That 'tis just and fit we all do the utmost of our endea∣vours in the duties of this day, divers reasons may be drawn. Some from God, Some from other men, and From our selves some.
1. If we consider God in his graci∣ous dealings, there is much may draw to a diligent observance of his holy Sabbath, As his general dealing towards us with others, And above many others, his special dealing with us. Let us mark how well God hath here∣in dealt with man-kind in common; as for instance, His mercy in appointing this day, out of other time, and His bounty in affording so much time, beside this day. First, if we consider, Both our souls, And Bodies, There's much mercy. The common rest of the day, is mer∣cy to our bodies, And the holy work of the day, is Gods mercy to our souls. For the saving of our souls, God in∣joynes the work, And for the casing of our Bodies, God Ordains the rest: That neither our souls fall, into hell∣torments, Nor our bodies faint, under earthy toylings.
God is pleased in pitty to set apart a Sabbath. Hence 'tis said, Mark 2.27. That the Sabbath was made for man] That is, for mans use, in order to mans advantage.Gualter in Marc. 2. Homil. 22. A learned Expositour upon the place does excellently open this; Even as had it not been for man, a Savi∣our had never been born: So had it not been for man, a Sabbath had never been made. For their sakes (sayes Christ) do I sanctifie my self. And for their sakes (sayes God) do I sanctifie my day. Now it cannot but be manifest to as many as mark this mercy, how meet it is for each man to make much of the day of God. 2. Let us see how liberal the Lord hath been in allowing man so much o∣ther time, viz. six dayes, with a re∣serve to himself, [This ONE.] As Joseph, Gen. 39. said to Potiphars Wife, My Master hath not kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his Wife: So may each man say to the Sabbath, God the great Master hath kept back no time from me but thee, because thou art his DAY. We read how under a Parable Nathan the Prophet aggra∣vated Davids sin, 2 Sam. 12. A rich
man that had many flocks of sheep, yet when a traveller came to his house he spared to take of his own, but took and killed the one ewe-Lamb, that this poor neighbour had nourished up for him∣self. This aggravates the sin of many a man, when a temptation comes to his heart, and businesse he is to go about, he spares to take of his own time, though he hath several dayes, but takes of this ONE DAY which God hath set out for himself. Luk. 13. There are six dayes wherein men ought to work in them, therefore come and be bealed, but not on the Sabbath day. So say I, There are six dayes for lawfull labour; in them men may go and trade and travel, but not on the Sabbath day. What sayes the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.21. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God? So I say: What have ye not nights to sleep in, and have ye not dayes to buy and sell in? and have ye not time to recreate and take any lawfull delights in? but pollute ye the day of God? Seeing 'tis but one day in seven, how unwearied in holy workings ought we to be? As Christ said to his Disciples when
he found them asleep, Could ye not not watch with me one hour? So will the Lord say to some at the last and great account, Could ye not work for me one day? Seeing the Lord hath been so bountiful as to give us six daies for our necessary concernments in the World, he may well claim our close attendance upon this one day. God might (as one well observes) have required all dayes to be spent in the works of his worship,See Pet. Martyr. Gen. 2.3. Read. Cal. upon Deut. 5. Ser. 35. and set us by night to get our necessa∣ry living. Had all time been ours, then if God had taken out one whole day for himself and his service, and left us six, we might have made some exception: But when all time was Gods, so that for men to have a minute is a mercy: yet to have such a plentifull portion as six-days-time of God every week, with so small a reserve to himself, is well worthy of wonder. But O how much more to be admired is God in his goodnesse towards us of this Nation, and especially in these parts thereof, in settling amongst us for so many years such Sabbath-Helpers, and Helps for Sabbaths! Should we go into many parts of the Christian world,
yea, into divers parts of this Land we might see poore people sitting of Sab∣baths destitute. Matth. 20.6, 7. 'tis said to some, Is it not the eleventh hour? Why stand ye here all the day idle? they said, Because no man hath hired us. Thus might it be said to severall, Is it not the Sabbath? why walk you about, or sit you at home all the day idle? They may answer, Because we have no Mini∣ster to preach to us. For want of the Ministery of the Word, in many Church∣es of this Land, the Lords Day lies dead and buried, the generality of people running into Atheisme, ready for Pope¦ry, and all Soul-poysoning opinions; yet God is good to us, and gives us Sabbath-supplies, Sermons in season, and out of season: Week-day-lectures, as preparatives to Sabbath-day-labour, and preservatives of Sabbath-Day-life, to keep up quickenings in Christians, that what they gain on the Lords Day, they may not lose in the week. Behold, what manner of love is this? And is it not meet, that this Day should be du∣ly observed? 2. Let us consider some men, and we shall see the observance of this day more meet; viz.
Adam before Moses, The Jewes before Christ. 1. For Adam, Peter Martyr upon Ge∣nesis the second observes, that man im∣mediately after his creation, was to en∣ter upon this Holy-day-duties. God having made him a woman for his wife: soone made them a Sabbath for their work. And Chrysostome notes,Chrysost. Gene. 2. Homil. 18. how God in setling the very first week of the world sanctified a Sabbath; thereby (says he) insinuating that in the compasse of every week one whole day was to be spent in spirituall working for God, and a Sabbath to be for holy rest as long as a week of the world last Had Adam in innocencie remained, he was bound to God in Sabbath-obedience, and is it not more meet that we should be Sab∣bath-bound in obedience to God? Must he keep a Sabbath to God his Creator, and we keep no Sabbath to Christ our Redeemer? Must not he misse a Sab∣bath in his compleat condition? and may we omit Sabbaths who have mani∣fold imperfections? Might not the first Man and the common Father of us all be free? and shall any of his posterity plead liberty?
2. The Jewes generally were held un∣der the tye of a holy Sabbath. Hereof we have greater cause for a consciona∣ble course. If we consider, Our Sabbaths are fewer, and Our mercies are larger. 1. The Jewes besides their great Sab∣bath, every seventh day, they had sever∣al other Sabbaths which they were re∣quired to observe: [Sabbaths of moneths, and Sabbaths of years;] Sabbaths of di∣vers sorts, Isay 1.13. Hosea 2.11. We for our Christian Sabbath, have onely one day in seven, and shall we cease the service of that, or in the service thereof be slight? 2. The Jewes had not so many mer∣cies as we, for engagements unto Sab∣bath-observance. They lost many mercies that we might find them; We find many mercies that they ne∣ver lost. 1. Mercies were taken from them, for us to possesse. They that were the natural branches were broken off, that we of the wilde Olive might be graffed in. Behold therefore the goodnesse and the severity of God: on them se∣verity,
but towards us goodnesse. See Romans the eleventh at large. They received their Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah, that it might be Ruhamah and Ammi to us, Hosea 1.6, 8. Hosea 2.1. 2. Mercies are given to us that they did never possesse. The best of them could but look through a lattice, and see Christ to come; look upon the sa∣crifices slain, and see a Christ to die: We may see Christ come, crucified, rai∣sed and set at the right hand of the Majestie on high. They had the Gospel vailed in the Law, We have the Law revealed in the Gospel. They had the promises of things pre∣cious, We have the precious things promi∣sed. Shall God to us be more in mercy? And shall we in duty be lesse to God? We should be stricter then they in Sabbath-obedience, because God hath been larger to us in all sorts of kind∣nesse. 3. If we yet further consider our selves, the best care in keeping the Sab∣bath-day is due.
Other dayes we observe, whilest we live, We may live to observe but few Sabbath dayes. As long as we live there are dayes we duly observe; some their Birth-day, others their Marriage-day; The day of some notable victory; The day of a great deliverance, wherein we know our selves concerned: Our Fair-dayes, and Market-dayes, that meet us every week; upon that day who lyes in bed? or lazies abroad? are not shops filled, and sacks crouded, every one in his cal∣ling careful? And is it not more meet to mind the Lords day, in the serious observing of which consists the saving good of souls, and mens necessary com∣merce for heaven, and converse with God? And long we may not live to cele∣brate Sabbath-seasons. The Wise man Eccl. 3. sayes, There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye; he sayes nothing of any time to live. For what is our life? sayes the Apostle, Jam. 4. 'Tis but a vapour, that appears a little time, and then vanisheth away. Mans time in this world is certainly short, and how short
uncertain; and are his Sabbaths sure? The dayes of mans life are few, and are his Sabbaths many? Indeed he that hath not lived above twenty years, above a thousand Sabbaths have passed over his head, but whether his life will last to the light of another Lords day, he cannot say. Before the rest comes of another Sabbath on earth we may come to our Sabbath-rest by death. Thus we see the Equity. 2. Let us see the Excellency of Sab∣bath-time. The honour and dignity of this day is discoverable, Both as a holy Sabbath, And as a Christian Sabbath. 1. This day having holinesse hath honour: For what ever God sanctifies and makes holy, he dignifies and makes honourable, 1 Thes. 4.4. God hath much honoured this holy day, And this holy day hath much ho∣noured God. 1. God hath highly honoured this his holy Day, By precious Ordinances in it, and By glorious Exercises on it. 1. The Ordinances God hath put into
the day, adds to its honour. A ring that is it self gold, is of value; but put a precious Diamond into it, the weight and worth thereof is greater. Take a plot or parcel of ground that is it self good, yet if there be rich Woods, Springs, and Mines in it, costly houses, and stately buildings on it; this raises the price. Thus is the Sabbath it self holy, and highly to be priz'd. O but the rich treasures of Ordinances where∣with God hath adorned the day, draw up the dignity of it. Yea, upon the Sabbath day there is not onely some single Ordinance, but the Ordinances of God gathered; as then there is a meeting of good Christians at the Or∣dinances: So then there is a meeting of Ordinances for the good of Christi∣ans. Prayer sayes to Preaching, Come and help me. The Sermon sayes to the Sacrament, Come and help me. Upon this day they all joyn, which is indeed the honour of the day. Ahashuerus commanded Mordecai to be dressed in all his brave attire, and to have it pro∣claimed, Thus shall it be done to the man the King delights to honour. The Sabbath, 'tis dressed up with all the rich
attire, and stately furniture of glorious Ordinances, that we well may say, Thus shall it be done unto the day that God delights to honour. 2. Let us see what God for a further honour hath done upon this day. Upon this day God hath commanded light to shine out of darknesse, brought many a dead Lazarus out of his grave: upon this day God hath of stones raised up children to Abraham, of Lions made Lambs to God, out of sinful men con∣verted thousands of souls to the faith of Christ. Upon this day God hath made the blind to see, the deafe to hear, the dumbe to speak, and the lame to walk. Whereas the works of the first Creation were all done upon the six dayes, and none upon the seventh which was the Sabbath-day. All the works of the new Creation are ordi∣narily done upon the Sabbath day, rather then upon any of the six dayes. This, this hath been the Birth day of many spiritual Kings and Princes, Psal. 87.5. And of Zion it shall be said. This and that man was born in her. And of the Sabbath it may be said, This and that man was born therein. O blessed
day! Millions of Saints in heaven they blesse this day of God, and they blesse God for this day. I read of one that cursed the day of his Birth; but I ne∣ver read of any that cursed the day of his New Birth. This is the day of rescuing the prey from the mighty, the day of opening the Prison-dores, and setting the captive free. Exod. 12.42. It is a night much to be observed to the Lord for bringing them out from the Land of Egypt. This is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations. So may we say of the Sabbath, 'Tis a day much to be ob∣served to the Lord for bringing souls from the bondage of sin. This is the day much to be observed to the Lord of all the children of God throughout all generations. This hath been the day of many a spiritual Marriage, or the day of Gods espousing many souls to Christ. Thus hath God honoured this his holy day highly. And as for this holy day, it doth highly honour God, exalting all that appertains to God; It beautifies the service of God, It dignifies the servants of God.
1. Hereby the service of God is beau∣tified. Eccles. 3.11. Every work (sayes the Wise man) is beautiful in its season. Holy duties are best in season upon ho∣ly dayes. Preach the Word, sayes the Apostle, 2 Tim. 42. Be instant in season and out of season, rebuke, exhort, &c. In season;] That is, upon the Sabbath day. Out of season;] That is, in the week∣time. So several sound Expositors upon the place. Prov. 25.11. Words spoken in sea∣son, are like apples of gold in pictures of sil∣ver. Thus Prayers made, and Sermons preached in season, are as golden ap∣ples in silver pictures, one helping to honour the other. The golden apples grace the silver pictures, and the silver pictures set out the golden apples. Thus the Sabbath-service advances the Sab∣bath-season, and the Sabbath-season exalts the Sabbath-service; and all lifts up the honour of God, who hath pre∣pared silver dishes for golden apples, and put golden apples into silver dishes. Appointing blessed dayes for sacred duties, and sacred duties for blessed dayes.
2. Hereby the servants of God are dig∣nified. God in giving the whole Law, and so in proclaiming the Command for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, made use of the Ministery of Angels, not for neces∣sity to him, but dignity to them. 'Twas an honour to the Angels to be present and assistant when the Sabbath was set forth, Gala. 3.19.. Thus God in the continued management of the Sabbath, and carrying on the sanctification thereof in the world: makes use of the Ministery of men as a dignity to them. Among other respects there are two most remarkable things that do dignifie the office of Ministers above all other Functions: The subject they are imployed for, viz. The Souls of men, And the Season they are imployed in, viz. The Sabhaths of God. Other callings their work lies upon the week-daies, but the Minister in his businesse lies bound for the Sabbath. O let not any earthly discouragements sink the soules of my dear brethren: but let's honour that God who hath so honoured us, as to bend and bind our businesse to this blessed Day. Hath
God magnify'd our office to labour on this day? Let us magnifie our office by this days-labour. Steadfast, immovea∣ble, abounding in the Lords work upon the Lords day. That God who hath blessed the day for our work, will blesse our work in the day. 2. The Sabbath consider'd as Christi∣an, hath honour. Christianity brings on dignity. Theodosius accounted himself more noble as he was a Christian, then as he was an Emperour. Hence Luther pro∣fessed, He had rather be a Christian beg∣gar, then Heathen Alexander. Our Sab∣bath is Christian, and therefore excel∣lent. The excellencie of our Christian Sabbath may be seen by two sorts of things; Some more Principal. Some lesse Principal. The principall things that put a price upon the Sabbath, lie, In the appointing of it, and In the abyding of it. This day may appear precious, if we ponder The person by whom, and The reason for why 'twas appointed. 1. The person through whom this ap∣pointment
came, was Christ, and his Institution.August. de temp. Serm. 36. To this Austin applies that prediction of the Prophet, Psal. 118.24. This is the day which the Lord hath made, we will rejoyce and be glad therein. Jesus Christ himself set out this Sab∣bath-time. Christ in person, Christ in the Apostles. THE LORD CHRIST, Coelum e Christus non patiantur hyperbolen:O how excellent is he? Christ and Heaven, (says Luther) in their praise can be no excesse. Too little we may speak, never too much. All the excellencies of God and man meet in Christ. That then must needs be excellent whereof Christ is the Author. That Child is nobly born which can call Christ Father. The Sabbath derives its pedigree from Christ. 2. The reason upon which this Day was ordained, was Christ in his Resur∣rection. The Resurrection of Christ was the first degree of his exaltation. Had he not risen from the dead, he had never ascended into heaven, never sat down at the right hand of God. And therefore his rising day, may well be our resting day: that day on which Christ took the first step to all his great honours, is an
honourable day, and a day much to be honoured. God hath highly honour∣ed this day; As by converting on it the Souls of men, So by raising on this day the Body of his Son. 2. We may see this days excellency in its permanency. As the Priesthood of Melchizedeck was more excellent then the Priesthood of Aaron, because of its order for ever, Hebr. 7.17. So the Sab∣bath of Christians is more excellent then all the Sabbaths of the Jews, be∣cause it continues. To this Sabbath it might be said in regard of all the Jew∣ish Sabbaths, They shall perish, but thou remainest, and they shall all wax old as doth a garment. As a vesture shalt thou roul them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. Heb. 1.11, 12. To this day all the powers of earth & hell shall never put a period. Lastly, we may look into the large dignity of this Day, From the timing of it, and From the naming of it. 1. This day is so tim'd, as is a help to its honour: 'Tis the first day in the week. We have a rule, That the first in
every kind is more excellent then all the rest,August. de civit, De. ili. 11. Cypria. Serm. de Spir. S, Austin, Cyprian, and other of the Ancients much advance the excellency of the Sabbath from the circumstance of time: That 'tis the seventh Day: The number seven being most perfect & that which they say comprises many myste∣ries of moment. But that which is more meet for us to consider, is the settling of our Christian Sabbath upon the first day of the week. Luke. 2.23. we read how 'twas written in the Law, that every Male that first opened the womb, was called holy to the Lord: our Sabbath it is that day which first opened the womb of time, that day which first opens the womb of every week: and therefore may well be kept holy to the Lord, and be accounted honourable in the world. Whereas the Jewes Sabbath was upon the last, ours is upon the first day of the week. So that the Jewish Sabbath might well say concerning the Christian, as John Baptist of Christ, There comes one after me, that is to be pre∣ferred before me: 'Tis more excellent as 'tis time. 2. Our Sabbath as it is named, tran∣scends in excellency. Heb. 1.9. 'tis said
of Christ in respect of the Angels: He hath obtained a more excellent name then they; so may it be said of our Sabbath in respect of all the Judaicall Sabbaths, It hath obtained a more excellent name then they, it is called THE LORDS DAY. True, there is excellency in the name (Sabbath) as it signifies rest. Rest is the Centre to which all living creatures move. Rest is the perfection and satis∣faction of all creatures after their tyring and troublesome motions: But in this name excellencie more abounds, THE LORDS DAY. As it made much for the honour of Jacob when he had another name ad∣ded, Israel. Jacob signified, The sup∣planter of weak man: Israel signified, The prevailer with a strong God. The latter the far more excellent name. This is the honour of the Sabbath, it hath another name, and the former was not like this last. THE LORDS DAY. There is admirable excellency in all that is called the Lords. The Lords Gospel. The Lords People. The Lords Praier. The Lords supper.
1. The Lords Gospel;] There is excel∣lencie. The Law of God hath beauty, but the Gospel excells in glory. The Jewish Rabbins were wont to say, That upon every letter of Gods Law hang Mountaines of admirable matter. But Luther of the Gospel goes further, saying, That the shortest line, and the least letter thereof is more worth then all Earth and Heaven. The very Angels look out from Heavens Glory, stooping down to see into the glory of the Gos∣pell, 1 Pet. 1.12. 1. The Lords people:] There is excellen∣cie. They are the honour of the earth, the glory of the world, the ornaments of Townes and Cities. As one pearl (says Chrysostome) is more worth then a thousand pebbles: So one pious man is more precious then ten thousand sin∣ners. The whole wicked world may say to a Saint, as the people of Israel to Da∣vid, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2. Sam. 18.3. We may say of Saints in the world, as our Saviour said of the Li∣lies of the field, Solomon in all his glory was not cloathed like one of these, Matth. 6.29. 3. The Lords prayer;] There is ex∣cellency.
Some have called it, The Abridgement of the Bible; and others,Tertul. li. de orat. ca. 1. Cypr. ser. de orat. Dom. The Epitome of the Gospel. And se∣veral observe, that though it be little for phrase of words, yet it is great for matter, and sweet for order, pithy and precious in every part. A short prayer may be full of God, as there may be little of God in a prayer that is long. The Lords prayer is, as it were, a Bre∣viary and Compendium of the great God. Infolded. Gods worth, and Mans wants 4. The Lords Supper;] There is excel∣lency. 'Tis that Ordinance, wherein Saints the most excellent of persons, and wherein faith the most excellent of graces hath the highest activities. Here the precious blood of Christ, and the precious faith of Christians meet.Cypr. de coe Dom. Here faith (sayes Cyprian) layes its mouth close to the wounds of Christ, and sucks in sin-killing, and soul quickning blood. O blessed be God! Thus 'tis evident what is the Lords is excellent: And is not the Lords day? Let us observe, All time from the Beginning was pre∣cious.
Gospel-time is more precious then any before it. The Lords day is the most precious part of Gospel-time. 'Twas a brave expression of Galeacius Garacciolus that Italian Marquesse▪ when a great summe of money was offered him, to draw him to his own Popish Countrey and kindred: Let all their money perish with them, who account all the wealth of the world worth one dayes Communion with Jesus Christ. One Sabbath-dayes socie∣ty with a Saviour ought to be of higher esteem then all the honours of the earth. O let us not sink down the dignity of this day in our hearts, but every way let us labour to lift up its Honour higher and higher: For As 'tis sad to debase it, So to advance it is good. 1. To debase and despise the Lords day is common now in our Nation. Men for the most part make no more of this then of any other day, Cant. 5.9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved? say they to the Church extolling of Christ. Upon this she fell to a more full discovery of the dignities and excellencies of Christ. Some had
need set up Gods Sabbath-honour the more, there are so many that say in their hearts, What is the day of the Sabbath more then another day? yea, and indeed it is no more, as many in their lives sinfully make it. Dalilah pre∣vailing upon Sampson, he lost his locks and his strength, and became like another man. The Devil with divers hath pre∣vailed so far against the Sabbath, that it hath lost its life and lustre, glory and honour, and is become like another day; which I am sure is no sign of good to come. Some say, that if the Sun which is the chief of planets be Eclip∣sed, it signifies great Commotions, Mutations, Destructions. I dare say, that when the Sabbath which is the chief of dayes, is clouded and covered over with black opinions and practices, it intimates heavy evils to come. O how do men pollute that which God hath sanctified! and debase that day which God hath dignified! Act. 10.15. What God hath cleansed, call not thou com∣mon. And what God hath honoured O man, account not thou base. 2. To advance this day is its due, and our duty; And indeed could we in
England but recover the Sabbaths ho∣nour, that this Sabbath-Sun might shine again in its beauty and lustre, and our Horizon be filled with the bright beames thereof, it would remove the fogs of filthy errors, prevent the inflict∣ing of sad calamities, regain the credit of contemned Ordinances, Joh. 12.32. as there the Lord of the Sabbath said. If I be lifted up, I will draw all men to me: So may the Sabbath of the Lord say, If I be lifted up, I will draw all to me. Then all the things of God shall rise. As when Christ was risen, Matth. 27.52. Many bodies of Saints which were asleep in their graves, arose and went into the holy City, &c. Thus were the Chri∣stian Sabbath raised, the whole body of Christian Religion would be brought out of its grave, and many of Gods Saints that are as it were now asleep upon the beds of sad seducing errors, would arise and come forth to the holy service of God. Heb. 11.35. 'tis said of some Mothers, that they received their dead children raised to life again. O what joy would it be to poor Ministers, that they might receive again some of their spiritual children as alive from the
dead! Such things would be, were Sabbaths raised in their honour, that lye now under the worlds contempt. Indeed as the Lord in the Prophet speaks, Ezek. 37.3. Son of man, can these dry bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou knowest. Then saith the Lord, I will cause breath to enter, and the dead bones shall live. May not the Lord say, Can my dead Sabbaths live? Can my dry Or∣dinances be green, juicie, and sappy again? Lord, thou knowest. O would but God breath from above, and bring his Sabbaths up from below, then would come on that FIRST RESƲR∣RECTION! O that I might live to see somewhat of this! As there hath been a certain day of the Lords Resur∣rection: Oh that there might be a speedy resurrection of the Lords day! A day for the recovery of whose life, all ought to labour. A day for the clearing of whose honour, all ought to be earnest. A day that above all dayes ought to be had in very high esteem. This for the Excellency. 3. Let us mark the Commodity that accompanies the well keeping of this Christian Sabbath. That the profit may appear: Note,
The Grounds for it, and The Parts of it. Viz. Out of what it proceeds, and Unto what it extends. The grounds from which profit by the Sabbath proceeds, are Primary and antecedential, Secondary and consequential. The antecedent grounds through which proceeds Sabbath-profit for se∣veral purposes, are The pleasure of God for it, and The blessing of God upon it. 1. The pleasure of God;] This brings out abundant benefit by the Sabbath. This makes the Sabbath-Tree to bear plenty of precious fruit. As if we shall enquire upon what account, and from what cause there comes such a conflu∣ence of all good to be gathered in, and gained by Christ the Lord of the Sab∣bath? the Apostle makes it plain, to proceed from the good pleasure of God, Colos. 1.19 It pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell: So if any ask after the reason, why multitudes of mercies meet in the Sabbath of the Lord? 'tis because it seemed good in Gods sight: It pleased the Father to fill this day with all fulnesse of good,
fitting for glorious designs. 2. The blessing of God;] This brings benefit and good in abundance; from the beginning of the World, God sanctified this day, and blessed it, Gen. 2. Sanctified,] that is, separated the day from common things. Blessed,] that is, God consecrated the day to speciall ends. Junius observes,Juni. in Gen. 2. That the Sab∣bath besides the common blessing it had with other dayes by the law of Nature, it had a special blessing above other dayes from the Love of God. Gods blessing on his Sabbath, As 'tis abounding So 'tis abyding. As the precious portion God hath blessed his Sabbath with, Is double: So stable. Such a Sabbath-blessing as God will never reverse: But as Isaac said of his son, I have blessed him, and he shall be bles∣sed: So saies God of his Sabbath, I have blessed it, and it shall be blessed. Whence was it that Joseph was as a fruitful bough, whose branches run over the wall, &c. but that blessing that was upon him from his Father above
all his brethren? Genes. 49.22, 26. And hence is it that the Sabbath in the Tree of the week is the most fruitfull bough outrunning the rest of the daies in doing good; because beyond all the other daies it hath the blessing of God. The subsequent grounds of Sabbath-Benefit are: The promise of God to it, and The presence of God with it. 1. The promise of God,] This produ∣ces profit in the day. Precious promi∣ses God hath made to men minding his Sabbath,Teneamus fidelissimum debitorem, quia tene∣mus miscri∣cordissimum promissorem. Aug. in Psal. 32. Levit. 26.2, 3, 4, 5. Isay 56.4, 5, 6. Isay 58, 12, 13, 14. Jerem. 17.24, 25, 26. Let us but all here seriously consider, Gods bountifulnesse in making pro∣mises, And Gods faithfulnesse in keeping promises made. And none need marvel if mercies by multitudes meet in, and march out upon the Sabbath-day. The work of Gods promises, sets a promising God awork. 2. The presence of God,] This is pro∣ductive of Sabbath-profit. As the An∣gel
said to Gideon, Judges 6.12. The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of va∣lour; and hence he did great things, ver. 14, 15. thus may it be said to the Sab∣bath,Sicut Maria virgo inter omnes muli∣eres princi∣patum te∣net. ita inter caeteros dies haec di∣es omnium dierum Ma∣ter est. Hi∣eron. de re∣surrect. Do∣mini. The Lord is with thee thou migh∣ty day of Honour; and no wonder if thereon great things be done: or as the Angel saluted the virgin Mary, Luke 1.28. Hail, thou art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women. O the wonder of mercy that her womb brought forth! And thus may we bespeak the Lords Day with a Hail, holy Sabbath, thou art highly fa∣voured, the Lord is with thee, and blessed art thou among daies. And O the bles∣sed births that are from this womb! And O the abundant benefits that are in and by this Day upon these grounds! But I shall passe on to the parts of the profit, and discover where in the Sabbath-day is so profitable; viz. Against Evill, And for good. First, great is the profit of Gods precious Sabbath, Against evill things, and Against evill ones.
Evill things.] Gods holy Sabbath is good against The evill of sin, and The evill of punishment. First, the Sabbath it is good against the evill of sin: Iniquity now abounds, but O how would sin superabound were this world set Sabbath-free! Sin that is vigorous all the week, may be upon the Sabbath-day subdued. Exod 14.13. Moses said unto Israel, Stand still, & see the salvation the Lord will shew to day: for that very day God drowned the Egyptians in the water of the Red-sea, &c. The Sabbath is the day wherein God saves soules from their sins, drowning their corruptions this day in the Red-sea of Christs blessed blood. Or if sin does not immediately die; yet it may re∣ceive such a Sabbath-wound, as it shall never recover, but as the house of Saul wax weaker and weaker, till all comes to an utter end. 2. The Sabbath 'tis good against the evil of punishment, and all kinds of ca∣lamities. When Judgements desolating are up and down, O 'tis safe being in a Sabbath-sanctuary: when enemies are black and bloody, the Sabbath of God
will bring the God of the Sabbath to be on our side. Luther reports of a Bishop of Magdenburg, who being told that a Duke of Saxony prepared warre against him, answered, My care shall be to reform the Church and amend what is amisse in the Sabbaths and service of God, and God will fight for me: Which when the Duke heard, he disbanded his forces, saying, he would not contend with that man, that engaged God in his quarrel. Let who will resolve warre against us, this dayes reforming, would prevent the Lands ruining. Indeed while Reli∣gion is languishing, Nations are perish∣ing; while Sabbaths are sinking, Cities are shaking: O what a controversie hath God! O what a fire did God threaten within the walls of Jerusalem, for the breach of his blessed day! Jer. 17.27. Breakings of Sabbaths, brings burning of Cities. And the best way for the safe keeping of Cities, is the well keeping of Sabbaths. 2. The sanctification of the Sabbath is of singular use against evil ones; As the Devil, And Antichrist. Much good against the Devil may this day be done,
To the delivering from him, and To the conquering of him. O the rare rescues of souls from the power of Satan upon the Sabbath day! Luk. 13.16. We see a poor woman eigh∣teen years bound by the Divel, was upon the Sabbath-day loosed from her bond. Some under the sore bondage of Satan twenty, thirty, fourty years, have been delivered upon the Lords day. God hath made heavy chains to fall off, and Iron gates to fly open, which hath put the Jaylor the Divel in a rage to see up∣on the Sabbath souls pulled out of his prison, and sinners set free from his fetters. And O the successeful Battels that have been sought against Satan upon this day of the Sabbath! We read, Josh. 10. That when five Kings came out in Battel against Israel, there was a day the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed at the command of Joshua. And sayes the text, There was no day like that before it, nor after it, that the Lord so hearkened to the voyce of man; for the Lord fought for Israel, and they had that day a very great victory, vers. 13, 14, &c. Thus upon the Lords day combinations of Devils have been broken and bea∣ten;
no day like this, wherein God hearkens to the voyce of man, Heaven and Earth stand still, God fights, and the Divel falls, Luk. 10.18. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Yea, and much good may be done this day against Antichrist, and all his Adherents, both by The preachings of Christs Gospel, And the prayings of Gods people. This dayes preaching of the Gospel brings on Babylons fall, Rev. 14.6. An Angel flies in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to men that dwell on the earth. And what followes? v. 7, 8. Another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. The words are doubled, to foretell a double fall of Babylon, The one Spiritual, The other Literal. Babylons spiritual fall, viz. in the hearts of Princes and people, this is wrought by the Word. Babylons literal fall, viz. in its vi∣sible pomp and power, this shall be done by the sword. The former falling makes way for the latter. The more purely the Word is preached, and the more clearly the Gospel shines, the
more the Mysterious workings of that man of sin is made manifest, and the more he loses in the minds of men, 2 Thes. 2.8. Then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightnesse of his coming. It notes the coming of Christ in the clearnesse of the Gospel, to cast down Antichrist, and call home the Jewes. Amen, Lord Jesus, come quickly. 2. Sabbath-dayes prayings of the peo∣ple of God, this brings Babylon down. Luther was wont to call his and the Chur∣ches Teares and Prayers their great Guns and Cannons. Upon the Lords Day the Lords people play with their Cannons aganst the walls of Babylon and make irrepairable batteries and breaches, Jo∣shua 6. Every day the army of Israel went round the city of Jericho, but on the Seventh day they compassed the city seven times. And at the seventh time the Priests blew the trumpets, and the people shouted; and then the walls fell, and the City was ta∣ken. Every day the Saints of God in their sighs and suits should besiege Ba∣bylon, but on the Sabbath day beset it seven times: Ministers preach, and peo∣ple
pray. Upon this day all the soul∣diers of Jesus Christ must march out of their quarters into the open fields to fight the battel of the Lord against Satan and Babylon, Hell and Rome: and when they be in prayer fervent, then they are in the heat of battel; then shout, shout, this would make walls fall. O even upon this account let us keep up Sabbaths, and therein cry mightily, Jerem. 50.14, 15. Put your selves in aray aginst Babylon round about, all that bend the bowe, shoot at her, spare for no arrowes: shout against her round about, her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down. Upon this day let all Gods people in all parts, put themselves in aray against Rome, Mysticall Babylon; pour out teares, put up prayers, all Artillery-Christians, bend the bowe, shoot, spare for no arrowes; cry again and again. With the hands of the Prayer of faith lay hold, as Samp∣son upon the pillars of the great Phili∣stine-house, bowing himself with all his might, & then down it fell, Judges 16.30. O let us every Lords day bow our selves with all our might. 2. Samuel. 17.13. Counsell was given to Absalom that if David were got into a City, all Israel
should bring ropes to that City, and draw it into the River, till not one small stone be found there. Is not Antichrist got into a City? Every Sabbath let all Gods Israel bring their ropes, pull hard by holy prayer, draw all into the River, till not a stone be left upon a stone. No marvell Antichrist and the divell seeks to throw down Sabbaths; for Sab∣baths will throw down the divel and Antichrist. Again, great is the profit of this pre∣cious Sabbath: For good things towards men, and For men towards good things. First, this brings on things that much concerns mens good, In Church, And in State. Let Sabbaths be well observed, and we shall see Good Governours to be obeyed, and Good obedience to Governours. To keep holy the Sabbath is a sure way to settle a succession of Gover∣nours that are good, Jerem. 17.24, 25, 26. If ye diligently hearken to me, saith the Lord, and hollow the Sabbath-day, Then shall there enter into the gates of this City
KINGS and PRINCES sitting upon the throne of David, riding in Chari∣ots and on horses; they and their Princes, the men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever. This speaks good things to the State. And they shall come from the Cities of Judah, and the places about Jerusalem, and from the Lana of Benjamin, &c. bringing burnt-offerings and Sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. This speaks good to the Church, and all upon this ac∣count, The well keping the Sabbath. If then in Church and State we would have things go well, and do desire a se∣ries of such settled as may govern for God, let us see to the Sanctification of the Sabbath. God he makes breaches in mens Government, when men make breaches in Gods Commandement. The way to keep good Government whole, is to keep Gods Sabbath Ho∣ly. Yea, this will bring on obediential re∣spects to governours that are good. Peo∣ple that profane and pollute Gods Sab∣baths, will contemne and reject good Rulers. That is a sad case, Lam. 2.6. The
Lord hath destroyed the places of the pub∣like assemblys, he hath caused the Sab∣baths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath de∣spised in the indignation of his anger, the KING and the PRIEST. [That is, God, then as a testimony of his terri∣ble displeasure, did suffer such to be de∣spised. Where Sabbaths are not remembred, There Superious are not regard∣ed. None so soone give to Caesar the things that are Caesars, as they who first give to God the things that are Gods. Remarkable is Gods Method in the ten Commandements: Remember, the Sab∣bath:] and then the next, Honour thy Fa∣ther,] whether they be Natural, Civil, or, Spirituall. Fathers. The way to honour the Father, is first to remember the Sabbath. No marvell if such as make little of the fourth Com∣mandement, make nothing of the fifth. Indeed none will make more of the fifth Commandement, then they that make most of the fourth. We shall find it clear,
That such as most imbrace Gods Com∣mandements, They will best obey Gods Vice-ge∣rents. 2. The men, this sanctifying the Sab∣bath is profitable for, are Sinners, and Saints. Men that remain in their finfull estate, the Sabbath is good, For their conforming in some part, & For their transforming through∣out. Through Sabbath-day-impressions some men bad are brought to the out∣ward performance of religious actions. As Herod hearing John Baptist preach (probably at such appointed times) was so far wrought upon, that her eve∣renced John, and did many good things, Mark 6.20. If Sabbaths were laid aside, men would not have the face of visible profession, nor so much as keep the tongues of Christians, but turn into absolute Atheisme, yea, brutish Bar∣barisme, forgetting the Lord to be God, and themselves to be men. Chri∣stianity would soon cease, and not long after humanity sink. The Name of God,
the knowledge of Christ, civilities among men, are all kept up by a Sab∣bath-support. Yea, besides such more common com∣modities, some by Sabbaths-meanes are brought to a soul-saving change. In that glasse of the Gospel which this day is held up, some beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. This is the day where∣in the net is cast out, that drawes many to shore. Yea, fishes that could never be caught, are brought in by a Sabbath-tyde. Through the warme beames of a Sabbath-sun some new creatures are in∣gendred, that were before but as filthy dung. Such ciences of saving graces are graffed into the soules of some upon the Sabbath-day, as that after they prove trees bearing the best fruit, who were before but as Crab-tree-stocks. Men that are removed into a sancti∣fied estate, the Sabbath does exceeding∣ly concern their good: That they which are fallen may stand, and That they which stand, may not fall. Such as are fallen through sin are set
up through Sabbath-helps. The helps of a Sabbath have recovered decayed Christians, impoverished places and persons have been relieved by Sabbath-Collections, and so by Sabbath-peti∣tions, have some had sweet relief who were sunk low in their souls estate. Nothing better by way of means, then holy Ordinances upon the Lords day to recover soul-Consumptions. Some that have been as Aarons dry Rod, yet through this dayes blessing, have blos∣som'd and born abundance after of the best fruit. Mark 2. we see our Saviour upon the Sabbath day healing of a man that had a withered hand. O how many withered hearts bath Christ upon the Sabbath cured? How many cast down by the Divel, hath the Lord upon this day raised, Matth. 12.11. And Jesus said unto them, What man among you, ha∣ving his sheep fallen into a pit, will not pull it out on the Sabbath day? Out of deep pits of Apostasie the Lord hath pulled poor relapsed Saints upon the Sabbath day. 'Twas upon this Lords day that Paul raised Eutichus fallen down from the third loft, Act. 20. O how many
in our dayes are fallen from the third loft, lamentably lapsed, In judgement, Affection, and Practice! Yet we hope that in some of them there is some life left, and that the Lord will ere long raise and recover them through tht benefit of this blessed day. Others that have not yet fallen, the Sabbath is of singular use to settle them fast. 'Tis conceived by sound Au∣thors from several grounds, that our first Parents fell from their created In∣nocency, upon the sixth day of the week, the very same day wherein God had made them: Should they have stood up, and possessed out the service of the ensuing Sabbath, they would have been more settled in their obedience, and better confirmed for their continu∣ance; but Satan subtilly assaults them before the Sabbath, or the seventh day comes, and so more easily were they conquered, and cast down. The Sabbath with the service thereof is soul-quickning, Saint-strengthening. The Christian Sabbath is the main sinew of
Christian Religion; if this be stopt or obstructed, and vital blood does not well passe, all the parts weaken, wi∣ther, waste and die: but if all passes well in Sabbath-veines, then all grows and gathers strength, and is more vigo∣rous, lively, and lasting. Sabbaths serve to make the Saints of God more pure, perfect, and permanent. That's holy which the Sabbath sanctifies, and that is strong which rhe Sabbath ratifies, and that is blessed upon which passes the blessing of the Sabbath. Some Collect from Levit. 22. & 27. that the Lamb appointed for the Paschal sacri∣fice, was not allowable before it was eight dayes old: And some of the Rab∣bins render this reason, because nothing in the world was to be reputed per∣fect, untill a Sabbath had passed over it; but then was a thing clean, compleat, and blessed, when it had gone under the blessing of a Sabbath. Yea, such is the benefit of this blessed day, that as it brings all things to be blessed to us: so it brings us to be in all things blessed, Isay 56.2. Yea, all things that concern our good, not onely for time, but eter∣nity, are brought in at this Sabbath-door,
Isay 56.5. As Caleb gave his daughter the upper and the lower springs: so God hath given his day the good things both of Earth and Heaven. Thus the careful keeping of Christian Sabbath is profitable. Lastly, the Lords day duly kept, is delectable. For the delights and com∣forts that do accompany the carefull keeping of this holy day, consider Both the persons they are to, And the properties they are of. 1. The persons to whom the Lords day well kept is a delight, are, Superiour, and Inferiour. Persons superiour that herein take pleasure, are God, and his Holy Angels. 1. God himself [Father, Son, and holy Ghost] take herein great delight. A Sabbath well spent, As it is formidable to the Devil, So 'tis acceptable to God. We go from Sabbath-day-duties, Prayer well made, Sermons well heard, and Sacraments well received (sayes Chrysostome) as Lyons breathing fire,
terrible to the Devils themselves. But that which is bitterly displeasing to the De∣vil, is most sweetly pleasing to God. So Calvin expounds that place of the Pro∣phet Isay 58.13. Thou shalt call the Sab∣bath a delight. Or [Delights] in the plural, as that worthy Interpreter ren∣ders it from the Hebrew, and refers it not to men, but to God, saying, That the right observation of the Sabbath is [the delights of the Lord,] nothing to God more grateful. And indeed no lesse from the place appears; Thou shalt call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, HONOƲRABLE, and shalt ho∣nour him. The Prophet seems to set down a double reason, why the Sabbath should be the delights of the Lord, viz. 'Tis the holy of the Lord, and 'Tis the honour of the Lord. That sure is the delight of the Lord, which is the holy of the Lord. A holy God cannot but delight in a holy day. That which is so suitable to him, must needs be acceptable with him. And that which is the Lords honour, is cer∣tainly the Lords delight. The Sabbath it is the honour of God displayed;
'tis the great Engine God moves in this world, to make out his honour. As God hath honoured this day by making it holy for us: so we much honour God by keeping it holy to him. What is his honour, is his pleasure. 2. The Angels of God are greatly delighted to see Sabbaths observed; which may arise from a double advan∣tage, viz. To themselves, and To others. Through our Sabbath-day-exercises Angels do much advantage themselves, in that their knowledge comes hereby constantly to encrease. Austin well observes, that the Angels of heaven have, Both their Morning, and Also their Evening-knowledge. Their morning-knowledge;] This they have by Creation from the Worlds beginning; as soon as they were made, they were able knowingly to contem∣plate God, heavens glory, and their own felicities. Their evening-knowledge;] This they have by inspection and diligent obser∣vation of the affairs of the Church,
and Mysteries of the Gospel made manifest in the end of the World, Ephes. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12. Those Gospel-dis∣coveries of Christ upon the Lords day the Angels delight fully to look into, and enlarge their knowledge by. 2. Through Sabbath-day-exercises Angels see great advantage to others, and this makes the day their delight. This being the day wherein lost Goats are found, strayed sheep are brought home, and prodigal sons return to their Fathers house. O the musik it makes in heaven, and joy among the Angels of God, Luk. 15. Luk. 2. we see what re∣joycing was among the Angels upon the day of Christs Birth, singing, Glory be to God, good will to men. Tydings of great joy, To you is born this day, in the City of Da∣vid, a Saviour which is Christ the Lord. If Angels reioyced at the day when Christ is born to men; do they not rejoyce on the day wherein men are born to Christ?Ut homnes nascerentur ex Deo; primo ex ipsis na∣tus est Deus. August in Joan. c. 2. The very end (as Au∣stin observes) why God was first born of men, was that after men might be born of God. Therefore Angels who rejoyced at the other, may well rejoyce at this. Yea, Angels who are present
in the publike Assemblies of Gods Saints, 1 Cor. 11.10. not only to observe, but to assist them in Sabbath day-du∣ties; O how much is it Angels delight, to find us this day fervent in praying, pain∣ful in preaching, diligent in hearing, &c? Persons inferiour that herein find pleasure, are Faithful Ministers, and Faithful Christians. 1. To Ministers that are faithful, the Sabbath is a day of sweet delight. Upon the Lords day labouring, Either they have herein their desired successe: Or they have not that successe herein they do desire. Sometimes God gives them good successe in their Sabbath-Day-endea∣vous, that is their delight. Austin ha∣ving preached an excellent sermon, some of his hearers thinking to please him with their applause, fell into his high praises; the good man sighed, saying, Alas, these are but leaves, it is fruit we delight in. The peoples fruit and profit is the Ministers delight and pleasure. Let a faithful Minister meet with never so many molestations all the week, yet if upon the Sabbath God prospers, and
the peoples profit, lo this is his de∣light and comfort, this his crown and joy. John 16. it is said of a Mother, she forgets her pain and travels for joy that a man-child is born into the world: Thus a good Minister forgets all his week-day-difficulties and discourage∣ments in the world, for joy that a soul on the Sabbath is born again to God. And if they have not such successe, yet the day of their labour is the day of their delight, 2, Cor 12.15. I will ve∣ry gladly spend and be spent for your soules, though the more abundantly I love you, the lesse I be loved. Here the Apostle in all his Ministerial paines seemes to have poore successe, cold encouragement. Little love for great labour. Yet for the desired good of souls he gladly, yea very gladly spends himself, & is spent. Faithfull Ministers if they find good successe of their Sabbath-service, then they rejoyce, because they have a sure reward from God. If upon the service of the Sabbath they have no such successe, yet they can rejoyce, be∣cause they have asure reward with God, Isay 49.4. I have laboured in vain, I have
spent my strength for nought, yet SƲRE∣LY my Judgement is with the Lord, & my REWARD with my GOD. Vers. 5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. If Israel be gathered, then are we glorious in the eyes of men. If Israel be not gathered, yet are we glorious in the eyes of God, who looks more to our sincere intent in our work,Nos octavâ die (quae ip∣sa prima est) perfecti Sabbeti fe∣stivitate lae∣tamur. Hi∣lar. Prolog. in Psal. pag. 335. then at the successeful event of our work. We may well therefore make our labouring day, our delighting day. The day of our greatest paines, the Day of our sweetest Plea∣sure. 2. To Christians that are fruitful, the Lords Day is a day of large delight. This is the day which the Lord hath made, we will rejoyce and be glad therein. Psal. 118.24. As there is not a day, which the Lord hath not made: So there is not a day, wherein Saints may not be glad; but as the Lord hath made this DAY to differ from all the rest; so saints may be otherwise glad on this day, then at any other times. Which will be evident if we consider, 2. The properties of Sabbath-joyes as to Gods Saints,
They are The safest, and The sweetest. They are The firmest, and The fullest joyes. 1. These are the safest joyes.] Take week-day-delights, as in worldly matters, and ordinarily there is a deadly hook within a pleasant bait. Our Mother Eve, Gen. 3. look∣ed upon the fruit of the forbidden tree, and it was pleasant for her eye. Ai, Ai, but that which was pleasant for her sight, it was perillous for her soul. It was but week-day-pleasure in a Garden-tree: had she continued in∣nocent, and tasted of Sabbath-day-de∣lights in a glorious God, of that fruit she might have eate, and at that Fountain she might have drunk safe∣ly. 2. These are the sweetest joyes.] Week∣day-sports in lawful delights, are but as pills rolled up in Sugar, bitter-sweet, sweet without, & bitter within. As the Prophets Book that was as honey in the mouth, and as gall in the belly. These earthly pleasures are as garden-Roses,
which as they have their pleasant leaves; so they have their pricking stalks. Whereas true Sabbath-delights are throughout sweet. Some bitter drops may possibly fall in them, but they are not properly of them. For as there is saltnesse in every drop of Sea-water; So there is sweetnesse in every dram of true Sabbath-com∣fort. 3. These are the firmest joyes.] Unto sinful men their week-delights are weak delights, that rise and soone fall, that spring up and soone wither away. One blast of Gods displeasure it blowes out those Candle-comforts: One drop of a troubled conscience (sayes Luther) swal∣lowes up a Sea of worldly joy. Whereas to Gods Saints Sabbath-delights are su∣rer delights, stable and strong. As the strength of the Lord is their joy, So the joy of the Lord is their strength. Their delights in the Sabbath of the Lord, Is by delighting in the Lord of the Sabbath. Isay 58.13. Thou shalt not do thy plea¦sure
on my holy day, but call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable, and shalt honour him, not doing thine own wayes, nor speaking thine own words. What then? Then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord. I will cause thee to ride upon high places, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father. Here is a firme foundation for Saints Sab∣bath-delightings, viz. God and his gracious dealings. 4. These are the fullest joyes.] Sab∣bath-feasting-delights are soul-filling-delights. Week-day-pleasures in world∣ly matters are ever swelling, but never filling. They are windy, and empty, and so apt to swell men with pride, and self-conceits: But they do not fill men so as to give them any good satisfacti∣ons. Soul-satisfying joyes, are Sabbath-sanctifying joyes. Comforts in, and communions with God, give full content. Some of Gods Saints who have had their souls filled with sorrowes all the week, yet upon the Sabbath God hath turned their wa∣ter into wine.August de tempore Serm. 154. Austin is of the judge∣ment that that Marriage in Cana of
Galilee, Joh. 2. was upon the Sabbath-day, when the six water pots being fill'd with water to the brim, Christ made all into wine. When with some the six-week-dayes have been like those six water pots, all fill'd brim full with the waters of sor∣row, the Lord upon the day of our Christian Sabbath hath changed all in∣to the best wine of soul-refreshing com∣fort.Joseph. de bello Judai∣co. lib. 7. cap. 24. Josephus writes of a River near Jerusalem, that upon the six dayes in the week was dry through the failing of the water from the spring head; but upon the Sabbath which was the seventh day, the springs sent out so fast, that the banks were filled; whereupon it was commonly called, The Sabbath-River. I cannot affirm the truth of this: But this is truth; There are that can by experience speak it. When little hath come from the spring head of comfort all the week, yet upon the Sabbath day soul-eomforts have flowed in, and filled up amaine. About the tents of the Jewes Manna fell from heaven onely upon the week-dayes, none was found upon the Sab∣bath. 'Tis otherwise with Christians, that Manna of heavenly joy, that falls
not all the week, is to be found upon their Sabbath day; so as that there∣with their souls are safely, sweetly, and firmely filled. O how much might this promote among us the careful keeping of our Christian Sabbath, viz. The profitable comfort, and the comfortable profit, that may in the same be possessed! Yet upon the souls of several of Gods Saints, some things may be sup∣posed sadly to sit. Some complain that though past, there hath been a long continuance of the Sabbath, yet they have found no such profit and comfort. Others confesse they have found much comfort and profit, but they fear a short continuance of the Sabbath for the future. The former are damp'd in the duty and service of the day, because they feel no present profit and comfort com∣ing. The latter are damp'd in their com∣fort and profit for present, because they fear the day will not publickly en∣dure. But that, neither the want of the comfort of the day, may dishearten the duty;
Nor the doubt of the continuance of the day, may diminish the comfort: Some things suitable to both sorts, may be said to help in such cases of sadnesse. First, for such of Gods Saints as are under temptations, discouraging from the service of the Sabbath, be∣cause they have not had such good successe in Sabbaths observed. 1. Be it so, yet such ought in the Sabbath-day-duties, to continue their diligence. We are bound to perform duty, though we should not receive mercy: 'tis the mark of meer Merce∣naries, without some recompence, no obedience. Indeed the recompence of reward may be in our eye, though it be not our end. In our work we do, we may have a love to the reward; but for meer love of the Reward, we are not to do our work. God is our great Lord and Master; though 'tis not servile obe∣dience, yet 'tis obedience of servants we owe to him daily, and much more upon his holy day. If he should not be as a liberal Master to pay us wages for it, yet we must be as loyal servants to perform his work in it. A learned
Author reports,Cassianus, lib 4 cap. 24. that he knew a young man, who meerly in obedience to a superi∣ours command, for a whole year together he went two miles every day, onely to poure water on a dry withered stick. We ought every Lords day to come under Gospel-waterings, though our hearts should remain as withered, dry, and dead sticks, or hard stones; though we should feel no softenings, quickenings, comfortings, 'tis enough we have a command; the duty is ours, the day is Christs, who is over all, God above all, blessed for ever. 'Tis a favour God will imploy us, though he should not reward us. Angels are glad God will send them on his businesse, though they have no new recompence. They are chearful to in∣crease their duty, though they do not enlarge their glory. We be not to con∣ceive of the Angels, that some God hath to stand up by him, and others are sent out of him; for, sayes the A∣postle, Are they not all ministring spi∣rits, sent forth to minister? Heb. 1. Yet this is their property, they all think themselves happy, in that God thinks them worthy to do his work in the world. And as there are special per∣sons
they are imployed for: So there are special seasons they are imployed in: Most for Gods servants, and Most on Gods Sabbaths. Job. 1.6. Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves be∣fore the Lord, Job. 2.1. And again, There was a day when the sons of God came to pre∣sent themselves before the Lord. This day is by some applyed to the Sabbath, on which day the Angels more then ordi∣nary tender themselves to God to go out as Assistants in his Sabbath-service. Bernard was wont to say, The holy Angels helped him to preach every Lords day. Though hereby there be no actual addition to their essential holinesse, or Celestial happinesse; Their very imployment is their plea∣sure. Suppose hereby they may come to a greater knowledge of Christ: yet hereby they do not gain a nearer ac∣cesse unto God, to see any more of his face then they did, or to receive any more glory in heaven then they had. What then? Notwithstanding they stand ready every Sabbath day, if God will send them out, then to assist in his service
And shall not we be willing to per∣form Sabbath-works, though we re∣ceive no Sabbath-Rewards? We that are Ministers must not in our places lay by the businesse of the Lords Day, be∣cause we cannot have that comfortable successe, which the Searcher of all hearts knowes, is our soules desire, in converting sinners to God.Chrysost. Hom. 15. in Matth. Chrysostom hath a good expression, As fountains send out water, though no pitcher be brought to fetch from them: So Pastors ought to preach, though none receive fruit or profit by them. And thus other Christi∣ans must not cast off the service of the Sabbath which concerns them, because they cannot come up to those encou∣ragements they carry in their eye. 2. Say, some serving of God upon the Sabbath-day should not be successeful in that plenty of peace and profit they expect; yet what peace or profit could such expect, should they lay aside the service of the Sabbath? upon the same account, at all other times all the exer∣cises of religion might be left off, and what good could then be looked for? Jerom upon that place of the Apostle. Rom. 9.16. It is not of him that willeth, nor
of him that runneth;Hieron. in Psal. 107. but of God that shewes mery: Sure then (says he) it is not of him that sleepeth, nor of him that idleh, nor of him that neglects duty: for on such the Lord will have no mer∣cy. And Chrysostom well observes up∣on that saying of our Saviour, Matth. 16. If any will come after me,Chrysost. in Matth. Homil. 56. &c. Christ sayes not, If any will stand still, or sit down: for (sayes he) the Kingdom of God is not given to standers and idlers; but to walkers and workers, &c. So say I, the comforts of God are not given to any person upon any pretence whatsoever, that shall neglect his duty, especially upon the Lords Day. For any to pretend they have performed du∣ties, but see no good successe; what good successe are any like to see upon the ceasing of their duty?Non est glo∣riosa victo∣ria nisi, ubi fuerint la∣boriosa cer∣tamina. Ambr. If in the Day of battel he that fights may not win the field, sure he that is loath to combate will lose the Conquest. If such as look well to their seed-time, plow and sowe, misse their crops; what harvest can they hope for, who in due time do not sowe their seed? If such as are provident and diligent in their callings all the week, yet decay and sink in the world;
are they like to thrive if they throw by their businesse? As if some on the Sab∣bath industrious in duty, yet perceive their soules sinking, and no comfort comming; what comfort is like to come by casting off the duties of the Sabbath? If men may use the meanes, and yet misse the end: sure such must misse the end, who do not use the means. Let none think to better their soules condition, by ceasing Sabbath-transactions. 2. When Christians have performed Sabbath-day-duties, and do not find such desired successe in comfortable communions with God, it should pre∣sently put them, Upon self reflectings, and Not upon Sabbath-neglectings. Instantly to enter their own hearts, enquiring the cause. The Word is a fire, why am I cold? The Word is quick∣ning, why am I dead? Ordinances are the meanes of comfort, why have I no comfort by the meanes? Some are at Sermons and Sacraments with their hearts leaping, and go away with their faces shining, that such as see them may say, They have been with Jesus: why
go I drooping all the day? yea, when Christians find their Sabbath-perfor¦mances yield them no fruit, it should presently put them Upon the amending their du∣ties, Not upon the omitting their du∣ties. As Fisher-men in the use of their Nets, having caught nothing, they fall to turning and mending of their Nets with care: and not to casting away of their Nets with discontent. An Archer in the use of his Bow, if his arrow flies wide, or falls short, he shoots again, directs his arrow more straight, drawes his bowe with more strength, that yet if possible he may not misse the mark; Thus in the discharge of the Lords-day-duties, if we misse Gods desired mercies, we must stir up our selves, and strive with the more strength, quickening up the greater care in a Sabbath-course. We must not conclude through humane frailties, we will do this dayes work no further; but we must resolve through di∣vine abilities to do the work of this day better. 4. The Sabbath-performances of
soule-afflicted Saints, although they are not Sensibly good and comfortable to them, yet They are certainly good and accep∣table to God. God sees that in their aimings, which they cannot see in their actings. That which they cannot see in their work, God sees in their will. God knowes after what all the day long the set de∣sire of their soules reacheth, not a bare being in duty, but therein a clear behold∣ing of God, a close comming in to Christ, to keep up their entercourse with Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 'Tis not so much the Ordinance of God, as God in the Ordinance they look for. I know whom you seek (sayes the An∣gel, to the women, Luk. 24.) Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified. There they saw the Sepulchre wherein Christ was laid, and there they saw the linnen clothes wherein Christ was wrapt, but all would not satisfie. It was not the Sepulchre of Christ, but Christ in the Sepulchre they sought for. So 'tis not so much the Sabbath of Christ, as Christ in the Sabbath, nor
so much the Gospel of Christ, as Christ in the Gospel they groan after. Some∣thing like that of Bernards, is a true Christians cry, Lord, unlesse that I give thee my self, 'tis not all my duties on the Sabbath will satisfie thee, nor is it thy Sabbath with all its duties or mercies can satisfie me, except thou give me thy SELF. Now such as in the Sabbath seek God giving himself unto them, and in the Sabbath seek to give themselves unto God; Oh how well pleasing is this? In Cains sacrifice God took no content, but to Abel and his offering God had re∣spect,August. de civit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 7. Gen. 4. Austin renders this reason, Cain gave some sacrifice, but not himself unto God: Abel offered up himself to God with his sacrifice. O how sweetly does God accept such in the service of Sab∣baths, though in Sabbath-service such cannot find sweet refreshings from God? Gods face towards them hath smiles in it, although a vail over it. Though Gods mercy is not perspi∣cuous to them, Yet their duties are wel-pleasing to God. Object. Ai but alas, I cannot believe
it, and whosoever is not in the faith cannot please God. Answ. It is very requisite here to distinguish Between the state of faith, And the acts of faith. True, it is not possible a person should please God that is not set into a state of faith; but God may possibly be pleased with a person that does not move in some acts of faith. A true Christian, though all the Lords day long, he hath no fiducial acts as are comfortable to himself, yet he doth such obediential acts as are acceptable to God. 5. All those that are faithfull in per∣forming upon the Lords day their duty, though comfortable successe Is not sensible for present, Yet 'tis certain for future. 'Tis the fault of some Christians (as Luther upon Esay 54. and vers. 7th. ob∣serves) that they will close with nothing, learn nothing, meditate nothing, hear nothing, see nothing, but what suites with present sense, and according to what feeling affords. Feeling and sense set aside, faith in the Lord, as well as obedience to the Lord,
especially upon the Lords day, should be drawn out, so as that what comfort we cannot by sense perceive, we should by faith believe. Because we sudden∣ly see not our selves successeful in our services, shall we think God is unfaith∣full in his promises? In promises God hath engaged himself certainly to re∣ward a good man for all that good seed, which he upon the Sabbath sowes. Ʋnto him that soweth righteousnesse, shall be a sure reward, Prov. 11.18. A Chri∣stian sincere every Sabbath day, he sowes the seed of joy, and God will assuredly reward him with the sweetest fruits of joy. And though he hath not comfort in his way, yet he is in the way of comfort. For as God hath bound man to transact Sabbath-duties; so he hath bound himself to vouchsafe Sab∣bath-mercies. And though upon this day, mans discharged duties may not leave in his soul the sense of sweet delight; yet Gods engaged mercies, they lay the sure grounds of sweet de∣light in his soul. And as none shall receive the mercies, but who performs the duties: So whoever faithfully performs the duties, shall assuredly re∣ceive
the mercies. And the lesse mercy good men meet for present, the more is to come. Many men upon the Lords day do the works of the Devil, yet for present they have no punishment of body, no perplexity of soul. Ai but there is the more terror and torment to come. So there are some of Gods Saints most serious in the service of the Sabbath, that yet have no sensible peace, no soul-satisfying comforts. There is the more plenty of peace and comforts to come. Christ in the great work of mans Redemption by his death and sufferings, his soul was in sorrowes, yet there was joy set before him, Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the Crosse, despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. Christians who seek to sanctifie the Sabbath, yet can see no∣thing but their own sadnesse and bad∣nesse, however there is joy set before them, which may support them against all despondency, and encourage them in the course of their duty. Luk. 5.5 6. Master, (sayes Simon to our Savi∣our) we have fished all night, and caught
nothing: neverthelesse at thy Word we will let down the net. And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes. Expositors observe, how they fished in the fittest place to take,Aretious, & Hemingius, & Maldo∣at. in lo∣cum. viz. the deep; the fittest time to take, viz. the night, yea, all night, but nothing caught; however they go again to work, and afterward even with the same net, and in the same waters where before they could find nothing, they have a very great draught, insomuch as their ships were filled with fishes. It is the sigh, and sad saying of some of Gods Saints, Lord, we have laboured all the day, many dayes, and yet got no good: in private, in publick upon the Sabbath, time and place probable for soul-peace and profit, yet no successe: however let them seek again the next Sabbath, in the same Ordinances, and by the same Ministery they may find that which will fill their souls with refreshing comforts. Abraham when he eyed God, and did not meditate his own oldnesse, nor the deadnesse of Sarahs womb, then he had a son born, an Isaac, whose name signi∣fied laughter, joy, joy. O let none of the sons or daughters of Abraham sit
thinking of the late deadnesse of the Sabbath-womb, how few births have been brought forth for God upon this day! nor so sit thinking of the badnesse and barrenesse of their own hearts as to break off, or not to bear up in the bu∣sinesse of this blessed day! Yet Sarah may be fruitfull, and an Isaac may be born; yet the Sabbath may be successe∣full, and their souls joyful. O, brethren, yet be stedfast, immoveable, abiding, and abounding in the Lords work upon the Lords day, your labour shall not be in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Lastly, for them that have drunk deep of the sweetnesse of Sabbath-suc∣cesse, but now find some bitter drops to fall from thoughts of fear, lest the present publick use of Sabbaths should cease; Let such consider, 1. That if in the Land our publike li∣berties on the Lords Day should be lost, and the Sabbaths of God be as it were carried into captivity; yet it would not be long before their return. Touch∣ing that great Question, about which are such various apprehensions, Whe∣ther the witnesses or no be as yet slain? should we determine the negative, yet
after their death it is not long before their resurrection will be, Revel. 11.11. And then dead Ordinances, dead Chri∣stians, dead Sabbaths will be assuredly raised to their primitive life, and lustre. O let me not live to preach the Fune∣rall Sermons of Englands Sabbaths! that would be a dark day. When as the Lord of the Sabbath dyed, darknesse was over all the Land for some few hours: And should the Sabbath of the Lord die, darknesse might be over all the Land for some few years. Those strange astonishing turnings which we have seen in our times, whether they tend to the overturning of the holy times and things of God, God knows. Should we have our deserts, and some their desires, there would soone be seen a sad sinking of Sabbaths. Should some succeed in their designs, yet the Day of God might say, as the Church of God, Mieh. 7.8. Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise, &c. Yea, and 'tis hopeful it would not be long after its falling, before it is ri∣sing. We are in the last; times, wherein God, as he hath great works to do, so great works he may permit men to
do, yet in all he will have quick dis∣patches. Should the Gospel-Sabbath, and the Gospell with the Sabbath be beaten down in England, yet mangre the might and malice of all their ene∣mies, we have some grounds to hope, it would not be long, before the Lord lifts them up again. The time for the conversion of the Ancient Jews, and the subversion of the Antichristian Rome, now draws nigh, for the batte∣ries of whose external part, God will make use of Externall Powers. And it appears by consulting Revel. 17. that these Nations of Europe who have taken part with the beast, and born her up, shall beat her down. The most Ortho∣dox that I meet, make England one of those ten hornes, which shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and na∣ked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Now sure it will be Eng∣land, beset with Sabbaths that shall send out, and be assistant in this Service. When Joshuas shall be forth abroad with their armies in the valleys, many Moses's shall be at home in the mount, especially on the Lords Day, preach∣ing and praying with hands lifted up
unto the most High God: then shall be the ruine of this Romish Amalek, this day drawes near. I think indeed it is impossible punctually to determine the time of Romes finall fall, except we could be exact in the time of Anti∣christs first originalls: but certain that time does apace approach. Therefore should any party acted by the Spirit of Antichrist, for a time interrupt the Lords Day, and oppresse the precious privi∣ledges thereof: yet they shall not long prevail, they shall prove but as Atha∣nasius said of Julians power, A cloud that will presently passe. Indeed should Sabbaths fail and fall, in respect of sinfull men (as I have said before) there would be grounds of great fear, that it might be a long time before God returns them: but in re∣spect of good men, there is and will be good grounds of hope, God will shorten that sad time: For the Elects sake those daies shall be shortened, Matth. 24.22. Our Saviour there speaks of such a sad time, as even upon Sab∣bath-days, there might be such dangers, that men instead of resting and serving God, they should then be running to
preserve themselves, verse 20. Ai but such a time should not be long. For the Elects sake God would cut it short; Indeed as the least time of the Lord of the Sabbaths absence: So the least time of the Sabbath of the Lords hinderance to gracious hearts will be grievous long. Bernard upon that saying of our Saviour. John. 16. Yet a little while, and ye shall see me: and a little while, and ye shall not see me. A little while, Lord? (says he) A little while? Thou canst not be gone the least while, but it will be a long time. So the Sabbath cannot cease the smal∣lest season, but the time to Gods Saints will seeme exceeding long: and there∣fore that time which in it self and to others would indeed be long, God for their sake makes it short. 2. There is a possibility, notwith∣standing the projects of men and perils we are in, to preserve with us the pre∣sent liberties of the Lords Day. But then let us observe Some things towards the Sabbath of the Lord, And some things towards the Lord of the Sabbath. Towards the Sabbath of the Lord, let us labour
To advance Sabbath-esteemes, and To revive Sabbath-decays. The Sabbath we ought all to con∣sider, in respect Of its worth, And its work. In its worth, let us rise to higher opi∣nions, and In its work, let us strive to quicker affections. 1. Let our opinions rise higher in the worth of the day. Indeed with the best, Gods holy times are of too low esteemes; but with the most, Gods glorious Day is covered with great con∣tempt, buried in the minds of men un∣der the Tombestone of deep forgetful∣nesse, or under heapes of base and unbeseeming thoughts. Lamentations 4.2. The precious stones of Zion compa∣rable to fine gold, how (sayes the Pro∣phet) are they esteemed as earthen Pitchers, the work of the hands of the Potter? So (may I say) the precious Sab∣baths of God better then the finest gold, how are they esteemed as ordi∣nary week-dayes, fit onely for the com∣mon work of mens labouring hands? But let us estimate this above all other
times and things. Let God and his holy Sabbath have the highest roome in our hearts, and the chief place in the prime of our thoughts. The Jewes were wont to call the whole week by the name of the Sabbath, and to say,Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 16. Hom. 43. Hie∣ron . ad Hedibi. Quaest. 4. Theophyl. in Luc. 18. Lyra. in eundem. Beza in. 1. C. 16. 1. Tremel. in Syriac. Paraphras. Matth. 28.1. &c. the first, second, third, &c. Day of or after the Sabbath; and so the Greek in some texts of the New Testament reads it, as Luk. 18.12. Mark 16.2. &c. This they did, as learned Writers ob∣serve, 1. For to discriminate themselves, in calling the dayes of the week other∣wise then the Gentils, who called them by the names of their Idols. 2. For to demonstrate the dignity of the Sabbath-day, and that above all the dayes of the week it was with them of the greatest account, they had that re∣verend esteem thereof, as to denominate the whole week thereby. And ought not Christians much rather to hold up an high and honourable esteem of the Gospell-Sabbath, as a more glorious day? 2. Let our affections become quick∣er in the work of the day. O, how of late hath the Lords day layen a dying,
through the dulnesse, yea, deadnesse of Christians in the duties thereof! The way to revive the Sabbaths of God, is to revive the service of God; and the way to revive the service of God, is to revive Gods Saints in the service. And if that we would have such Sab∣bath-revivings, Therein Let our visions of God be clearer, And our approaches to God be closer. 1. The clearer upon the Sabbath we can see God, the better will our re∣vivings be. It is said, Gen. 45. that when Jacob saw the waggons that Joseph his Son had sent, his spirit within him revived. Did his spirit revive when he saw the waggons his Son had sent? O what were his revivings of spirit, when he saw his son who sent the waggons? The Ordinances upon the Lords day, they are the waggons that for us God hath sent, it is some reviving to see them; O but to see God whence these waggons are, and whose the Ordi∣nances be, how reviving is that? O, sayes David to God, that I may see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee
in the Sanctuary, Psal. 63.2. 2. The closer upon the Sabbath we can draw to God, the better will our revivings be. We read, 2 King. 13.21. of a dead man, that being let down into the Sepulchre of Elisha, as soon as he touched the bones of the dead Prophet, he presently revived: Thus Christians whose hearts are dead, yet coming close to God in the Sabbath, have sudden soul-revivings, and most comfortable quick∣nings. And this is the way to recover the life of the Lords day, and so to settle the liberties thereof, which at least to some seem to be shaking. To∣wards the Lord yet further that his day may endure, let us Keep in the presence of the Lord, & Keep up prayer to the Lord. 1. The presence of the Lord kept in with us, will hold holy Sabbaths a∣mongst us. Indeed let the Lord depart, and then the dayes of grace, and means of grace will immediately remove. When Christ goes, he calls, Come with me, my Sabbaths, Ordinances, and all my holy Institutions. Time was, Christ walked in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. That is, those
seven once famous Churches of Asia had the presence of Chirst with them, and the Ordinances of Christ among them, the Lords day was a known day. But now the Sabbath of the Gospel, and the Gospel with the Sabbath is gone, because Christ there was not kept. O, sayes Martha, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died: If thou hadst been present my brother had not departed. So may those Asian people now say to Christ, Lord if thou hadst aboad with us, thy holy Times and Things had ne∣ver been stirred. Matth. 28.20. Christ there hath promised his presence, even in the use of Ordinances, unto the end of the world. The way to retain Christs presence, Is to believe his promise. No hands like faith to lay hold upon Christ. Faith (sayes Luther) is like the beloved Disciple, it leans in Christs bosom, it will not leave him, nor let him go. Faith it produces A vigorous love, and A vertuous life. Unto a people both will bind Christ. 2. Prayer to the Lord kept up by us,
will hold holy Sabbaths amongst us. In the land were the Spirit of prayer up, Sabbaths would never go down. In∣deed it will be a hard matter to make Sabbaths stand, if still praying hands fall. O pray, pray, pray: And in prayer plead with God, To send out more Sabbath-labourers, and To blesse Labourers more in the Sab∣bath. 1. Pray, that more may be sent out, who will be faithful in the labours of the Sabbath, Matth. 9.37, 38. The harvest is plenteous, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the har∣vest, that he will send forth lavourers into his harvest. Many places in this Land are as fields of ripe Corn; and alas, how do the Divels, [those fouls of the air, Math. 13.4.] and wicked men [those swine of the earth, Matth. 7.6.] wholly waste and spoil all, for want of Sabbath-labouring men, to gather into Gods Barn. In divers places upon the Lords day, O what dark doings! people being as a black Lanthorne with∣out any Candle. And shall not we pray that God would set up lights, and
send out labourers, that his day may be duly observed; and that we may pre- his day? 2. Pray that those who are sent out may be fruitful in their Sabbath-la∣bour; that they may see the travels of their souls, and be satisfied: That Gods good work may prosper in their hands, and their peoples hearts: That every Sabbath they spend, and every Ser∣mon they preach, may prove as the bowe of Jonathan, which from the Bat∣tel never returned empty. There is a precious promise fit in prayer to be pressed, Esay 54.10, 11. As the rain comes down, and the showers from heaven, and returns not thither, but watereth the earth, making it bud and bring forth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; So (sayes God) shall my Word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return to me void. O pray we that neither the Red or the Black horse be harnessed out to the Battel, But that Christ on the white horse may conquer, Rev. 6. Many souls in the Sabbath by the Gospel may be gained over to God. This would perpetuate Sabbaths, and make the Lords day last∣ing.
Last of all, unto Gods Saints a Sab∣bath in some sense is sure never to cease. Gods people Shall either have the Sabbath of the Lord, Or to them the Lord will be a Sab∣bath. Ezek. 11.16. Thus saith the Lord, I will be to them as a little Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall come. Gods people in Babylon, when they could not go to worship God in the great and beautifull Temple at Jerusalem, yet then God was as a little Temple to them, [And this little Temple was better then the great.] Thus the Saints of God, when they cannot have the Sab∣bath that is present, God will be to them a Sabbath more precious, [God is the best Sabbath.] 1 Sam. 1.8. Elka∣nah sayes to Hannah his Wife, Am not I better to thee then ten sons? One God better then ten Sabbaths, and twenty Sermons, to the souls of his Saints. No Sabbath of God, is like [God, a Sabbath;] no Sabbath-rest like to the rest that is in this Sabbath; no comfort in a Sabbath, like this Sabbath of com∣fort. Yea, let Gods sincere Saints live or
die, they have a Sabbath will last, an everlasting Sabbath. If they live, their Sabbath will be ever with them; and If they die, they shall be ever with their Sabbath. Ambros. in Psal. 119. August. de cavit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30.Some of the Ancients were wont to call that eternal life God gives in hea∣ven [The great Sabbath] And [That long Sabbath-day, that hath no night:] O but then God himself who in heaven gives life eternal, what a Sabbath is he? O the height, and depth, breadth and length of this Sabbath! [Christus] est magnum sempiter-numque Sabbatum, cujus par∣vum illud [Judai∣cum] exem∣plar; in illo siquidem Sabbato re∣quiescimus, cum in illo solo spem ponimus; cum hunc toto cordis amore diligimus, &c. Epiphan. lib. 1. Haeres. 30 Greg. Nyss. de Resurre. Orat. 1.Yea, I find of the Ancients, who af∣firme, that to Gods dear Saints in the dayes of the Gospel, there is a double enduring Sabbath, viz. Christ, And a good conscience. Christ is the great and eternal Sabbath which in the Gospel God hath set up, and in this Sabbath we rest, when we repose our hearts and hopes upon him. This is an unchangeable Sabbath; Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.
Christ who is The Lord our righte∣ousnesse, he is the Lord our Sabbath; So chat we shall have a Sabbath last, as long as Christ lives. A good conscience,Sabbatum Dei illud quo exterius b opere ces∣sasse dicitur, Sacramen∣tum est in∣terioris Sa∣bati ubimens sancto per bonam con∣scientiam a peccato quiscns &c. Hugo. Chrysost. Homil. 17. in Genes. August. Serm. 10. ad fratres in Exem. as it is a con∣tinual feast, so a Sabbath of rest, Prov. 15.15. Esay 57.20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea., that have no Sabbath of rest. Tell me not, (sayes Chrysostome) the man hath a sumptuous Table, is cloathed mith silks, attended with servants; shews me his conscience, there is a hurry of lusts, a tumult of sins. [A continual Sabbath-lesse man.] A good conscience, 'tis (sayes Austin) the bed of God, the Palace of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost, the Paradise of delights, the standing Sabbath of Saints, &c. Let us be faithful in the Sabbath, that may possibly cease, and then may we be sure of a never ceasing Sabbath. In the saddest & most unsetled seasons, when customes are changing, and King∣doms are shaking, and all Gods Or∣dinances seem to be taking their leave in a Land, yea, when all externals in the world are at worst, yet there is an in∣ternal Sabbath in the heart, and an eternal Sabbath in the heavens, whereof
every Saint may be sure.Sabbatum duplex. Pe∣ctoris, et Temporis. Aquinas 12ae. quest. 100. Art. 5. Suppose there should be here no more Sabbaths re∣maining, yet there is a remaining Sab∣bath, Heb 4.10. And though the Lords day will end: the Lord himself will be a never ending day.
THE LORDS DAY Enlivened. Revel. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. THe holy Apostle in the words present plainly reports, The Season upon which he was set, and The condition into which he was put. The Season which he was on,] It was the Lords Day. The condition which he was in,] He was in the Spirit.
I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. The Point we are next to prosecute, is, That it is sensible to some, and pos∣sible for all pious men, to be in the Spi∣rit on the Lords Day. This Doctrine I shall endeavour To clear, To prove, and To presse. For the clearing of truth, it is fit to unfold, What is the Spirit in which they may be on the Lords Day, and What it is for them on the Lords Day to be in the Spirit. Spirit;] This is to be considered both as it relates, To God, and To Man. Omnes No∣menis Jeho∣vae literae sunt spiritu∣ales, ut de∣notetur De∣um esse Spiritum. Alsted.Spirit,] This as unto God, does im∣port, Either the whole divine Essence, Or one personall subsistence. The whole Essence of the God-head is [Spirit;] As Christ, King, Priest, and Prophet is one compleat Saviour: So God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost is one spirituall being. And as in the Spirit, they are but one being;
So in their being, they are but one spi∣rit. Thus God is a Spirit, John 4.24. Thus Spirit is attributed as unto God, 1 Tim. 3.16. 1. Pet. 3.18, &c. 2. The third Person subsisting in the God-head is [Spirit.] As there is God a Spirit, So there is the Spirit of God. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, Rom. 15.19. The things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11, &c. This is called, The Spirit of truth, John. 14.17. The Spirit of life, Rom. 8.2. The Spirit of holinesse, Rom. 1.4. The Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Spirit,] This as appropriate to man, implies, Either the whole soul of man, Or the superiour facultie of the soul. 1. For the soul wholly in the sub∣stance thereof. As every individuall man hath his soul, So the soul of every single man it is his spirit. Each man is a compound creature, made up of soule and body. Hence men are compared to Gideons souldiers, Judg.
7.16.Ambros. de Spir. Sa. lib. 1. cap. 16. Each having his, arthen pitcher and Lamp therein: when the earthen pitcher of mans body is broken by death, the Lamp of his soul abides burning either in heaven or hell. Thus, Matth 10.28. Mans soule while in his body is called [his Spirit.] Isay 26.9.Ex egests. vid. Au∣gustin. in lo∣cum, et Am∣bros. Com. in loc. With my soule have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Luk. 1.46, 47. Ma∣ry said, My soul doth magnifie the Lord: and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour. 2. [Spirit,] That is the soules supe∣riour facultie. As the soule it is spirit, So there is the spirit of the soule. Or, The spirit of the mind, as the Apostle calls it, Rom. 12.2. This is the intel∣lectual, or the knowing power of the soule. Who knowes the things of man, save the spirit of man which is in him? 1. Cor 2.11. Thus, 1 Thess. 5.23. the Apostle mentions body, soul, and spirit. In∣deed this is most applicable to man as born of God, considered Not onely in his proper constituti∣on:
But also in his further restitution. As the woman in the Gospell who hid her leaven in three measures of meal, till the whole lump was leavened; Thus the Lord layes his Grace in these three parts: body, soule, and spirit, till the whole man is sanctified. Now such a man so spirited, is fit to be in the spi∣rit on the Lords Day. On the Lords Day in the spirit. [Spirit] it is taken as refer∣ring both to God and man. The Spi∣rit of God, and the spirit of man meet∣ing. 2. What it is for a godly man, on the Lords Day to be in the Spirit. [In the Spirit,] This notes, Both his soules habitual condition, as settled; And his soules actuall condition, as moved. 1. The soul of a sanctified man accord∣ing to his settled condition considered, is [in the spirit,] Being by grace habi∣tually planted, and effectually put into God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. John. 17.21. That they (sayes Christ to his Father) may be one in us. [In us] That they are, not in thee onely, nor in
me alone, but [in us,] viz. Father, Son, and holy Spirit. Every gracious soul Rests in God, Abides in Christ, and Lives in the Spirit. Bernard.1. In God there is a resting, Psal. 37.7. The soule of every true Believer (sayes a learned Writer) Hath a double Mansion, One wherein it rules, viz. the bo∣dy, and The other wherein it rests, viz. God. The soule of every Saint is settled in God, as in its centre. The force of some temptation may seeme to unsettle his soule, and as it were to separate it from God, but then as Noah's Dove out of the Ark it finds no rest, back again it comes. God is its centre; and out of God truly it can never be taken. mau∣gre all the malice of hell. 2. In Christ there is his abyding, John 15.7. In the heart of Christ, and In the hand of Christ. As by force none can pluck him from the strength of Christs hand: So by
fraud none can take him out of the lov of Christs heart. In Christ Not onely as a man, But as a member. Not the least bone of Christs mysti∣call body can be broke off, nor the smallest stone be struck out of this building. The weakest branch ever abides in this vine. 3. In the Spirit, there the believing soul lives, Gala. 5.25. If ye live in the spirit, walk in the spirit. That life by which the soules of Saints live, Both for its entrance, And its progresse, It is in the Spirit; the Spirit being the Principle, From which their life was first recei∣ved, And by which their life is after pre∣served. As man is kept alive by his soules be∣ing in the body; So a Saint is kept alive by his souls being in the Spirit. It is through the Spirit that converted Christians are set into God, and put into Christ. Therefore sure the ho∣ly Spirit does not leave their soules
out of himself, but they are likewise in the Spirit, Rom. 8.9. Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. In the Spirit thus are not onely some, but all the Saints of God. And in the Spirit thus are Gods servants not onely upon the Sab∣bath-day, but at all other times; they are never out of the Spirit, nor ever shall. Yea, in the Spirit thus is the whole man of every good man; The man whole, if Not the whole man. The man whole is so in the Spirit, as that he is a spiritual man, Gal. 6.1. Take him with his bodily part, and about his weekly work, yet he is a spiritual man, and a man that is in the Spirit. Now to be in the Spirit on the Lords day, though 'tis to be in the Spirit thus; yet it is more then thus, to be on the Lords day in the Spirit. So in the Spirit signifies the spiritual transactions of mans sanctified soul, as it is moved and acted by the Spirit of God, and as mans renewed spi∣rit, through the Spirit of God moves and acts, upon the Lords day exercised in the Spirit; That is, In the graces of the Spirit, and
In the comforts of the Spirit. 1. In the Spirit,] That is in the graces of the Spirit exercised all the Lords day: then acting in graces Various, and Vigorous. On the Sabbath the soul is set a work in several graces, and such as seem to be of a differing nature, as faith, and fear, heavenlinesse of mind, and hum∣blenesse of heart, repeatings for sin, yet relyings on God: Tremblings of soul, yet restings on Christ. Dreading God in the justnesse of his Judgements, yet loving God whose judgements are just: A real longing for promised mercies, and yet a quiet staying for those mercies long: By hope expecting good things to come, and yet by faith possessing the same things at present: Utterly unsatisfied in Gods hiding his face, yet patiently waiting for God while his face is hid. And though this be the continued posture of gracious souls, yet into this they are put, and on in this they are kept through Sabbath-day-quicknings. [In the Spirit.] On this day grace is enlivened in them, and they
lively in grace. In gracious actings their hearts were before as the Cha∣riots of Pharaoh, that drove heavily: now in the activities of grace their hearts are as the Chariots of Amminadib that ran swiftly. Before the members of the new-man were as the lame Crip∣ple that lay at the gate: but then they became as the cured Cripple, Whose ancle-bones receiving strength, he stood up, and went on leaping and praysing God, Act. 3.8. Yea, upon the Lords day the soul of a sincere Saint may be in the lively actings of grace, Both reflect, And direct. 1. Reflect actings;] That soul which in the week-season walks out in & with the body about the businesse thereof, upon the Sabbath-day it turns in upon it self, most seriously considering its own concernments.Gregor. moral. lib. 31. cap. 17. An ancient Writer spiritually expounding that place, Prov. 24.27. Prepare thy work without in the field, and afterward go in, and build thine house. Understands by the field man's body, and by the house the heart and soul of man. In the week a mans work more
lyes in the field, viz. about the busi∣nesse of his bodily being: but upon the Lords day his work more lyes in the house, viz. the work of the soul is more gathered then within it self. And as Christs Spouse-sayes, Cant. 1.7. They have made me to keep other Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept: So up∣on the Sabbath (sayes a good mans soul within him) all the week I have been made to minde a multitude of worldly affairs, but mine own concernments have been set aside. Now return into thy self, O my soul: O my soul, now be∣think thy self. And is not this to be in the Spirit upon the Lords day? the soul of a Saint being then seriously set Upon deep intuitions, and Diligent Inquisitions. Narrowly looking in it self, and Throughly searching of it self. One of the Ancients compares holy men on the earth,Gregor. moral. li. 19. Sect. 30. unto those holy An∣gels of heaven, Revel. 4.8. that are said to be full of eyes within and without. In the week Gods Saints make use of their eyes without, looking after their necessary callings and occasions in the world: but upon the Sabbath they
more solemnly set a work their eyes within, looking inward upon the true estate of their souls. Upon the Sabbath are a Saints most serious soul-searches, and heart-discourses: I communed with mine own heart, and my spirit made dili∣gent search, sayes David, Psal. 77.6. Upon the Lords day with great diligence is the soul of a Saint set, To find out things that are, and To find up things that were. Within he finds so much of sin, and so little of God, as makes his heart lie low, and brings him to be in spirit poor, Matth 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit.August lib. 1. de Serm. Do. in monte Ambros. lib. 5. in Luc. cap de bea∣tit. Basil. in re∣gulis con∣tract. quaest. 205. Not poore of spirit, as if any without the Spirit of God were blessed; but poor in spirit, that is, good men poore in the spirit of their own mindes, out of a sight of soul-sins, and sense of soul-wants: or poor in spirit,] That is, sayes one, poore for the spirit. Of the spi∣rit they may discern little, but desire much. That good they seek after which they never possesse; And that good they seek for which seemes to be lost. The woman in the Parable, Luk. 15.
having lost a piece of silver, She lights a candle, and sweeps the house, and seeks di∣ligently till she finds it. O this is good seeking in the spirit; upon the least losse of God, to go into the house of the Heart, and there using The candle of knowledge, and The Besome of Repentance. Diligently seeking till somewhat more of God may appear. When hearts and hopes have been down and dead, yet then to look back, and call to mind mercies of old, tracing the former foot-steps of God in their soules, looking up, and reading over the Lords love let∣ters long since sent, and then comes quickening life into their hopes and hearts, Psal. 77.5, 6, 7, 8. Lam. 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And though these gra∣cious actings may be at other times, yet I appeal to the most experienced Chri∣stians, whether they have not found themselves best bent about such Soule-work upon the Sabbath-day. 2. Direct actings.] Upon the day of the Sabbath the soules of Gods Saints may be set a work, Onwards towards the People of God, and
Upwards towards the God of his People. In grace admirably acting towards their Brethren. Both in sufferings scattered, And in service assembled. 1. Where ever a good mans body be found or fixed, yet in spirit he goes vi∣siting his fellow-servants in prisons, and the forreign Churches of Christ in all their afflictions. Beza reports of Calvin, That he was so tenderly affected to Christi∣an Churches remote, as if he had carried them on his shoulders, or born them in his bosome, often sighing out, Ʋsque quo Do∣mine, How long Lord? more lamenting the Churches calamities, then his own ad∣versities. Thus the holy Apostle, 2 Cor 11.28, 29. Besides those things that are without, viz. severall sad af∣flictions upon his own body, that which cometh upon me daily, (more then all the rest) the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not, &c. Yea, and in such Christian compassions to others in affliction Gods dear Saints are most deep upon that day, wherein they see their own sweet liberties, priviledg¦es,
and Gods precious things peaceably possessed. 2. Where ever a good mans body abides, yet in soul he will be sure at some place in which Gods People pub∣likely meet for Sabbath-service. Da∣vid when in body he was banished, and lay hid in the Land of Hermon, yet he was in spirit at Jerusalem, and went with good people to the Temple for the ser∣vice of the Sabbath. My soul (sayes he) thirsteth for God, for the living God: Oh when shall I come & appear before God? [viz. In body also.] When I remem∣ber these things I pour out my soule within me; for I had gone with the multitutde, I went with them to the House of God with the voyce of joy, and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy Day, Psal. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. The Jewes that were bodily at Babylon, yet in soule they kept their Sabbaths at Jerusalem, Psalme 137.5, 6. Jonah, though his body was in the bottom of the sea, and belly of the Whale, yet in spirit he was in the Temple at Jeru∣salem: Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again towards thy holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. Though the body of Saint John was a prisoner at
Patmos, an Island as some write near Affrica, yet was he in spirit with the Churches of Christ at Asia, and with them he kept the Lords Day. When Saint Paul was in body at Philippi, yet in spirit he was with Gods Saints in their assemblies at Corinth: I verily as absent in body, yet present in spirit, have judged concerning him that hath done this deed, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when (viz. on the Lords Day) ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan, &c. So when he was in body at Rome, yet in spirit he was with Gods assem∣bled Saints at Colosse. Though (sayes he) I am absent from you in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit rejoycing to behold your order, (viz. in their Church-assem∣blies, &c. Colossians 2.5. But above all are the soules Sabbath-actings in Grace God-ward. Though the body is then carried out by the soul, Yet the soule to God is then carried beyond the body. A mans soule is then so set, as that it incites the body, and the body is so
brought on, that it sayes to the soule, as Ruth to Naomi, Whither thou goest I'le goe, where thou stayest I will stay, thy God shall be my God, and thy peo∣ple my people, nothing but death shall part thee and me. As Joseph and Ma∣ry went together to seek Christ: So on the Sabbath soul and body in publike and private go together to serve God. Even upon week-dayes, when the body as Martha is about worldly and house∣hold-businesse, the soule as Mary sits at the feet of Christ. But upon the Sab∣bath, when they be both serving of God, yet the soul does the most and the best work. Body and soul are upon the Sab∣bath, as those two Disciples that went out to Christs Sepulchre, but the soule is as that Disciple which out-ran his fellow, John. 20.4. It comes quickest in, and closest up to Christ. Yea. suppose the heart and mind of a good man may all the week-time be as a boat that beares upon the ground: yet upon the Sabbath the soule may be set as a boat upon a strong stream, and goes as a Ship full saile for God; In meditations of him,
And applications to him. O the admirable meditations this day on God! The mind that in the week hath been as the foot of Jacobs ladder stand∣ing upon the earth, upon the Sabbath the soule hath been as the top of that ladder reaching up to heaven in high thoughts of God. One observes of the Virgin Mary,Hieron. Epist. 17. when the holy Ghost had over-shadowed her, and that holy thing was conceived in her womb, she arose & went up into the hill-countrey, Luke 1.39. When the holy Spirit comes upon the soule of a Saint, and holy thoughts are conceived in the heart, O how the mind mounts up hill to God in heaven! Such a soule-frame is most frequent in Sabbath-time. And O the close applications this day made to God, In prayer, and In praises! A good Expositor gives this glosse upon what the Apostle does here ex∣presse,Vid. Aret. in Locum. I was in the Spirit; That is, he was in prayer upon the Lords Day. It is one thing to be at prayer, And another to be in prayer.
There is never a day comes over a good mans head, but he is at prayer;Bernard. in Fst. Pen-Pentec. Serm. 1. but to be in prayer on the Lords Day, that is more. Not only praying by the Spirit: but in the Spirit of prayer. Prayer does not onely ascend to God from the soule: but the soule it self ascends to God in prayer. In prayer wrestling with God, and With God reasoning in pray∣er. So that such beames break out,Greg. Orat. de laudib. Ba∣silii. as make the mans heart burn, and his face shine. It is reported of Basil, that the Emperour Valence coming in upon him while he was in prayer, he saw such lustre in his face, as struck him with terrour that he fell back. Luk. 9.29. And Jesus went up into a Mountain to pray: and as he prayed, the fashion of his counte∣nance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering. Thus for a Saint to be set in Sabbath-Prayer, that his grace is vigorous, and his face is glorious; This is then to be in the spirit: Yea, upon the Lords Day to be in the pray∣ses of God on high, and in the high praysings of God, As adoring God for his goodnesse
received from him, So admiring God for goodnesse per∣ceived in him. In such Sabbath-celebrations of God blessed for ever, and of Christ for ever blessed of God, as to say, Psalme 45.1, 2. My heart is inditing of a good matter, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Thou, O King, art fairer then the Children of Men, God hath blessed thee for ever, &c. Some birds how sweetly do they sing, when they soare up into the aire, and in a sun-shine-day, sit in trees, upon the highest Twigs! Thus some of Gods Saints upon the Sabbath-day with hearts meeting, and mindes mounting, O the melody that they make in heavenly Hallelujahs unto God. Of such it may be safely said, they are in the spirit upon the Lords Day. This will be further unfolded In that which followes. In the Spirit;] That is, in the com∣forts of the Spirit, considered In their heights, And breadths. Heights of comfort.] Upon the Sab∣bath the soul sanctified may be carried in comforts high,
Both for matter, And measure. The matter of the comforts wherein the soul of a Saint may upon the Sab∣bath ascend, is exceeding high. Higher comforts had John in Patmos, then Adam in Paradise. The Apostle upon the Lords day had comfortable conver∣ses with God in Christ, which our first parents had not in the day of their In∣nocency; They rejoyced in God a Creator, But not in Christ a Redeemer. And they be far lower delights in which the most of men, do since solace themselves upon the Sabbath-day. Up∣on Gods holy day men find onely their own pleasure, Esay 58.13. But Gods Saints can find soul refreshing comforts in Christ the Lord, upon the Lords day. With delights in the Lord their hearts leap. Yea, and the measure of their comforts may mount their minds so high upon this holy day, as to make them to be like Moses upon mount Pisgah, viewing Canaan flowing with milk and hony. The soul of a sincere Christian upon the Sabbath may be as it were swimming in a Sea of sweet de∣lights
unto the Land of promise. He whose heart hath been as a Boat that could not be got up because of low water all the week, yet it hath been brought up in a high spring-tyde of spiritual comfort upon the Lords day. Comforts so high that he is ready to sing with Simeon a Nunc dimittis: Now Lord, let thy servant depart in peace. Now the man would gladly die, and be gone to God: content never to see his ha∣bitation or relations on earth more, his soul being so fired and filled with joy, upon Gods holy day, in his house of prayer, Esay 56.7. Breadths of comfort.] Upon the Sab∣bath the pious soul spreads it self in sweet delights, God having given to a good man for his comfort, as Caleb did to his Daughter, the upper and the lower springs. A Christian in his lower comforts the further he goes, the narrower they grow, and the lesser they be: but in his comforts upward, the higher he rises, the greater are their en∣creases: when he is most lively let in, they are most largely let and laid out. Sabbath comforts may be exceeding broad:
All things that meet being made in∣to comforts, and. All things for comforts being made to meet. Into comforts are made all things that meet the soul of some Saint in the ser∣vice of the Sabbath: The crosses of the world are the encreases of comfort. Gods rod and his staffe cause comfort, Psal. 23.4. As sufferings abound, conso∣lations abound, 2 Cor. 1.3. The more outward troubles, the more inward tri∣umphs. The Apostle was never so in the Spirit of comforts, as when he was a prisoner at Patmos. Under his great∣est confinements he had his sweetest enlargements. His every day-afflicti∣ons encreased his Sabbath-comforts. To his soul nothing was sad when the Sabbath came. Yea, upon the Lords day a believer being in the Spirit, the worst evils greaten the best com∣forts. Sin remitted, Hell removed, Death vanquished, Divel conquered, do all encrease his comforts. Out of every eater comes meat. He gathers grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles. Upon Sodom (sayes Salvian) God rained hell out of heaven. Upon the Sabbath God
to his Saints raises Heaven out of Hell. Hell, Divel, Death, Sin, Crosses, Cur∣ses, all encrease their Sabbath-Cor∣dials. Yea, upon the Sabbath, a gathering of all comforts, considered according To several sorts, And seasons. Comforts of differing sorts receive a Sabbath-change: Earthly comforts are made heavenly, those delights that lye in worldly relations, possessions, pro∣motions, creature-accomodations and contents, in the Spirit are made spiritu∣al. As a man in carnal comforts makes all comforts carnal: so a Saint in spi∣ritual delights makes all delights spi∣ritual. The upper and lower springs run all into one stream, and upon the Lords day become all as of one kind. Comforts of differing seasons are brought within the Sabbath-compasse. A Christians case becomes such, That in Spirit good past is then with him presenr, And good future he is then present with in Spirit. Things past come in for comfort at present. Luther reports, that sometimee,
and especially upon a Sacrament-day, the death of Christ was as full and fresh upon his spirit, as if he were then at mount Cal∣vary, and as if that were the very day and hour wherein our dear Lord died: Thus a Christian may be so in the Spirit of comfort upon the Sabbath-day, as if that were the very day when Christ broke the bars of the grave, flung the stone off the Sepulchre, and rose again from the dead. Or as if it were the very day when with the holy Apostles he stood and saw the Lord Christ taken up into heaven, to sit down at the right hand of God. Now to his comfort he can recal the comforts found in former dayes and duties. That very Sabbath his soul comfortably possesses all the Ordinances of Jesus Chhist. He sees as it were the Lord opening his bowels, his bosom, and drawing out both brests of his blessed Word and Sacraments, bidding his soul suck, and be fully satis∣fied. And unto things future he comes for his present comfort. Not onely as at a distance a believer may look at heaven, and the felicities thereof, but his soul in the Spirit of comforts may be so carried out, as if heaven were already
possessed. 'Twas a brave expression of the Martyr to his cruel tormentors: Work your will upon my weak body, as for my soul it is in heaven already, and over that Caesar hath no power. And as such may be a Christians case in the day of his sufferings: so may it be in THIS DAY of his service. Jerom professes that he had sometimes found things so with himself,Hieron. in lib. de vir∣gin. Seru. that it seemed to him, as if he had been triumphing among Troops of Angels, and singing Hallelu∣jahs with the Saints in heaven; Yea, walking arme in arme with Christ in the Galleries of eternal glory. The Apostle is to this purpose, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3. I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body I cannot tell, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knowes; such a one caught up into the third heaven. And I knew such a man, whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell, God knowes; how he was caught up into Paradise, & heard unspeakable words, &c. This of the Apostle St. Paul does import the highest pitch of a persons being in the Spirit. And of such a being in the Spirit the Apostle St. John does here speak his experience, I was in the Spirit on the Lords day. This for Explication.
Now for Confirmation. Upon the Lords day good mens thus being in the Spirit, See Why 'tis sensible to some, and How 'tis possible to others. 1. Some of Gods Saints are sensibly in the Spirit upon the Sabbath-day. Indeed, This day is fittest for the Spirits working; yea, And they are fittest this day for the working of the Spirit. The Sabbath it is a fit day for the Spi∣rit thus to work: for 'Tis a day blessed, Gen. 2.3. and 'Tis a day sacred, Exod.. 20.11. 1. The Sabbath being a blessed day, it is fit for the blessed Spirit to be about his work. [Day blessed;] Note, The blesser of it, and The blessing on it. The blesser of this Sabbath-day is God; God above all blessed for ever, hath made this day blessed. As that is cursed which God curses, So that is blessed which is blessed of God. The blessing of this Sabbath-day is great. As God hath blessed his Servants above other men,
So he hath blessed his Sabbaths above other time. As Isaac had a blessing for Esau, but no such blessing as had passed upon his brother Jacob: So God hath a blessing for every day, but no such blessing as he hath passed upon his Sabbath. The very blessing of blessings, is the blessing on the Sabbath: so that well now may the blessed Spirit be about his most blessed works, this being the most bles∣sed day. 2. The Sabbath being a sacred day, a day sanctified, and made holy, it is meet for the works of this holy Spirit. The holy Ghost, As he loves to live in holy persons, So he loves to move in holy seasons. And so working, there is Holy, Holy, Holy, Viz. Gods holy Spirit, the work is by; Gods holy servants, the work is in; Gods holy Sabbath, the work is on. God hath poured out the holy oyl upon the head of the Sabbath (as the precious oyntment upon the head of Aaron,) some drops of which may indeed run down upon the other dayes. Upon the head of this day God hath set the
holy Crown, whence the Ancients well call it, The King of dayes. The Spirit of God, tis termed a Kingly, or Prince∣ly Spirit, Psal. 51.12. Ʋphold me with thy free Spirit. Or, as the Septuagint reads it, Thy Princely Spirit. The works of Gods Princely Spirit, are most pro∣per for this Princely day: this high and holy day, it best suites to the work of the most high and holy Spirit of God. Gods holy Spirit may (its true) take A sinful subject to work in, And yet a holy Sabbath to work on. But his best works in souls sanctified, are most seasonable upon this sancti∣fied day. Yea, and the holy Spirit be∣ing now about his best businesse, Both honours the Lord of the Sab∣bath, And honours the Sabbath of the Lord. The Lord is highly honoured in the holy Spirits workings; for He brings in Christs presence, through his Ordinance; And he drawes up Christs Ordinance, through his presence. The presence of Christ is by the Spirit so brought in, & by the Spirit the Or∣dinance
of Christ is so wrought up, as lifts up the Lords honour high. The Lord never hath so high honour in a Sabbath-Ordinance, as when therein ap∣pears his Sabbath-presence. The holy Spirit by Christs presence supplies the want of an Ordinance, & improves the worth of an Ordinance by the presence of Christ. And by all this is Christs honour held up, in being the Lord of the Sabbath. Yea, the Sabbath it self is much ho∣noured thereby. Gods people whose hearts have been made to sparkle and spring through the Spirit of God upon the Sabbath-day, they esteem the day of the Sabbath, Not onely as their resting day, But rather as their rising day. A day Not so much for the earthly easing of their bodies, As for the heavenly actings of their souls. This day in their hearts they so high∣ly honour, that for it they long, and in it they labour, and all with delight. O how honourable in the heart of this Holy Apostle was the Christian Sab∣bath, having there on been ravished in
the Spirit! He writing to the Church∣es of Christ, first gives it this high Ti∣tle, THE LORDS DAY; For the honour both of the Lord, and the day. Upon such accounts, the Holy Ghost may well to chuse take up this as a day most fit for his great and wonderfull works. 2 The Sabbath it is the day wherein Gods Saints are most fit for these won∣derfull workings in the Spirit. This day they being From the world most severed, And with themselves best gather∣ed. 1. Upon the Sabbath Gods Saints are most remote from the world,Greg. Moral. lib: 1. and so meetest for the Lord, and fittest for intimate converse with God. One ob∣serves, that our Saviour being entred into a ship, Mark 4. He commanded his Disciples to put a little from the shoare, but not to lanch out into the deep; Thus true Christians in the week-time may put the ship of their soules a little off from the land, removing so far from their world∣ly affaires, as by and by to step back
into the businesse of their lawful cal∣lings: but on the Sabbath they put the ship further off from the shoare, and lanch out into the deep, withdrawing themselves quite from their earthly oc∣casions, and applying themselves wholly to the solemne service of God. Another speaking to the Church of Christ, does something thus expresse himself; O chaste and holy spouse,Bernard, Christ thy hea∣venly Husband that will not all the week crowd in to thee through a throng of worldly cares, yet upon the Sabbath will give thy soule most sweet visits. While Zaccheus was among the presse of people, he could not behold Christ; but climbing up into a sycomore-tree, then he saw him: a good man in the presse of his week-day-imployments can get no view of Christ; yet then the Sabbath-day is as the sycomore-tree, on that he climbes and comes close to Christ; Then his heart is in the best frame, freest for God, being furthest from the world. 2. Upon the Sabbath Gods Saints are best brought together, both In Body,
And Mind. Christians being thus gathered upon the Lords Day, lie in the readiest way for these high workings of the Spirit. Act. 2.1, 2. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly, &c. Day of Pentecost:] This fiftieth day (so the word imports) it was the first day in the week,Vid. Cy∣pri. de Spir. San; , (as the best affirm (even our Lords Day. They were all;] That is,Basil. de spi. Sancto. ca. 27. Au∣gust. de temp. Ser. 251. all the eleven Apostles of Christ, as is plainly expres∣sed, Act. 1.26. In one place:] In an upper Chamber at Jerusalem, they were all [Bodily] ga∣thered together. With one accord;] Their minds were met as well as their bodies. They were all in one house, with one Heart, waiting for the promises of the Lord. And suddenly there came;] That is, with all speed the Spirit of God came down upon them, so as never before, for Manner, and Measure.
The manner,] A sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind all about the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire and sat upon each of them. The measure,] And they were all fil∣led with the Holy Ghost, and they spake with other tongues,August. Ser. 2 ad fratr. in eremo. as the Spirit gave them utterance. The Spirit spake in them, and they spake in the Spirit the wonderfull works of God; The Spirit was poured in upon them, and they poured it out in the Spirit. Gods work was wonderfull. and thus being upon the Lords Day gathered, they found such spiritual fierings and fillings. That evil spirit oft assaults the souls of Gods Saints when they are solitary, single, and severed, Matth 4.1. But the good Spirit of God descends upon the soules of his servants met in their solemn assemblies. One well observes, that the dry bones which the Prophet saw, Ezek. 37. the Spirit of God did not enliven them while they lay scatter∣ed in the field: but when the bones came together, bone to his bone then the Spirit of life came into them, and
they stood up upon their feet, vers, 7, 8, 9. Thus Gods servants, when together they are upon the Sabbath assembled, then these kindlings, and comfortable quickenings come. Yea, though their hearts and thoughts were all the week more scattered about in the world, yet they are better gathered in to the Lord upon the Sabbath-day. And the souls of Gods people put into such a Sab∣bath-posture are most prompt and best prepared for comfortable converse with God in the Spirit. And in the Spirit on the Lords day some actually are, that so they may the better, For present receive the mysteries of Faith, and For future perform the duties of obe∣dience. Faith,] That the apprehensions of this may hereby be enlarged, and man unto the Dimensions hereof may here∣by be better enabled. By being in the Spirit a Christian is made more able to reach out unto the lengths, breadths, heights, & depths of faith, and by belie∣ving to find out, and fetch in the vast Mysteries of God in the Gospel. Gos∣pel-truths vailed, are hereby clearly
revealed, and closely received. Hence St. John came to receive such close and clear revelations from God, which he could never have reached, had he not on the Lords day been in the Spirit. His whole Book that is so mysterious to others,Jerom. epist ad Paulin. things therein were perspi∣cuous to him. To him therefore se∣veral of the Ancients so apply that,Ambros lib. 3. de Spir. Sancto, cap. 21. August. de civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 17. Revel. 22.1. And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, pro∣ceedinding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Things to him issued from God, all pure and clear. This made John the Baptist a greater Prophet then Esay, or any other before him; things intricate to others, were explicate to him. Now the Apostle could not have been capable of such clear discoveries, had he not been first in the Spirit upon the Lords day. Upon the Lords day be∣ing in the Spirit a Christian rides in the Chariot of faith triumphant from earth [yea, possibly as out of Hell] into Heaven, where he sees those glori∣ous mysteries of mercie that concerns his souls comfort; yea, and what may be of singular concernment for the souls of others.
Obedience,] That the several con∣ditions of this may be the better ful∣filled, Both in service, And suffering. Gods servants by being in the Spirit are abundantly fitted, Both for Affliction, And Action. Act. 20.22, 23, 24. And now (sayes the Apostle) behold, I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesseth in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear to my self, so that I may finish my course with joy, and the Mi∣nistery which I have received of the Lord, to testifie the Gospel of the Grace of God. O what a fixed frame of heart had the holy Apostle to honour God, both By doing, And dying. He was [bound in the Spirit.] The Spirit that is compared to winde, did now upon the Apostle blow with such a full gale, that he went as a ship full saile unto the Port God had appointed.
The spirit of this good man did not hang loose, but was girt up to go tho∣row with the work whatever came. The Spirit hemm'd it about, loosened him from all that might any way hinder; but so gathered up his heart for God and the Gospel, as to further him in his way and work. One telling a Martyr that it was hard to burn. It is indeed, said he, for him that hath his soul lik∣ed to his body, as a Theefs foot in his fetters; but for him that hath his soul set above his body it is easie to burn. Kindle fire, I come, Saviour. Another having put one foot into the flame, steps back, saying, The flesh shrinks, and sayes: On earth it is better to burn. The Spirit sayes, In heaven it is sweet to shine: The flesh sayes, wilt thou shorten thy life? The Spirit sayes, It is nothing, nothing to life eter∣nal. The flesh sayes, Wilt thou leave thy friends? The Spirit sayes, Christ and his Saints society is better, &c. And so in the power of the Spirit he flings himself into the fiercest flames. And the souls of Gods Saints may ex∣pect such Spiritual supports in the dayes of their suffering, who serving God
have been in the Spirit on the Lords day. The truth of all which some have sensibly found. 2. That others of Gods Saints possi∣bly may find their souls thus in the Spi∣rit on the Lords day. This proved, By the properties of the Lords Spirit towards them, and By the properties of their spirits to∣wards the Lord. As for the Spirit of the Lord to∣wards them, 'Tis a Spirit enriching, and ruling. 'Tis a Spirit raising, and resting on them. 1. The Spirit enriches the people of God, by imparting to them, What is precious and excellent, and What is Plenteous and abundant. The riches of grace, Ephes. 1.7. which is compared to enriching gold, Revel. 3.18. This in abundance is brought in by the Spirt, 2 Cor. 3.18. An evil spirit is reported to have brought to some in league with him,Remigi. lib. de Daemo. pieces in appearance of true gold, but they were never the richer; for when they went to use them, all turned into whithered leaves; (And
so with false gold of seeming grace does Satan deceive the souls of some.) But the good Spirit of God brings into the souls of Gods Saints such gold of grace as is of real and rare use for their great enriching God-ward. Men rich in earthly gold and the ordinary wealth of the world, are able to compasse and accomplish those▪ things that others cannot. Such as the Spirit of the Lord hath largely enriched with Gospel-gold, O what great things are they enabled to do! O what fellowships with the Father, converses with the Son, com∣munion with the holy Ghost are they prepared for! And may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords day? 2. The Spirit he rules the people of God by exercising over them, Both a Negative, and A Positive power. A power whereby he holds them off from what he dislikes. They cannot with others wade into the waies of the world, the Spirit will not let them; they cannot shift their sails as the wind, change in every turn of times. And though (as Nazianzen said of Athana∣sius) they be as loadstones to draw others
in to God; yet they are as Adamants that will not warp wind, bend, or break, or shrink from God. The Spirit of the Lord will not let them; they cannot, they care not: yea, the Spirit may keep them from something which may seeme good to them, because of some greater good in the sight of God. When Saint Paul was going to preach the Word at Asia, the Holy Ghost forbade him; and being about to go to Bithynia, the Spirit suf∣fered him not, Act. 16. And a power the Spirit doth daily exercise over the People of God, to lead them on to what the Lord requires, Rom. 8.14. Gala. 5.18. Ezechiel the Prophet saw four wheeles which were sometimes carried on upon the earth, and sometimes lift∣ed up above the earth, according as the spirit of the living creature moved that was in the wheeles; Thus the Soules of Gods Saints are set a going, sometimes they rise higher, and sometimes they run swifter as the Spirit of the living God leads that is in their hearts. Good men, The Spirit leads them, they may not be at a losse: yea, And when they are at a losse, yet the Spirit leads them.
August. de cor. et gra. Cap 2. Id. de Grat. et lib. Arb. Cap. 1.God led the people of Israel through the wildernesse, not onely by a pillar of fire, but by a pillar of the cloud, Nehem. 9.19. The Spirit leads Gods people through the world as a fire that gives them light, that so they may not lose their way: sometimes there is such a cloud, they cannot see their way: yet then the Spirit leads them, and when they are at a losse, it is that voice behind them, saying, This is the way, walk in it, Esay 30.21. Now they that are thus under the daily conduct of the Spirit, may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords Day? 3. The Spirit raises the people of God, lifts up a good man being down, through amazing meditations Either of God in the Heights of his Majesty. Or of himself in the depths of his Misery, When the Prophet was fallen upon his face through affrighting thoughts at the glorious presence of God in a vision, Then the Spirit entred into him, and set him upon his feet, Ezek. 2.2. Ezek. 3.24. The usuall cause of a Christians casting down is the sad ap∣prehensions
of his severall sins: so that he seemes to himself as if his soul were sinking into the depths of hell, then the Spirit helps him up, By recalling former mercies, and By revealing further Mysteries. The Spirit recalls, or causes a Christi∣an to remember The promises of mercy the Lord hath made, and The experiences of mercy himself hath found. John 14.26. The Spirit shall bring all things to your remembrance, viz. The gracious sayings and glorious do∣ings of God in dayes past are drawn a fresh into the thoughts of dejected Saints. The Spirit reveals, or makes such mysteries of mercy manifest as were not before known, Eph. 1.17, 18. That God the Father of glory may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: That the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, ye may know what is the hope of his calling, &c Thus the Spirit pulls up poore Saints pittifully plunged:
Being down, Either in sins, Or in sor∣rowes, The Spirit raises. Saints in their sad relapses have sweet illapses, the Spirit letting in such light and heat as heaves up their hearts, dark, down and dead. They who in ordinary dayes may have such experi∣ences of Spirit-helps, may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords Day? 4. The Spirit rests upon the People of God; so the Apostle expresses it, 1 Pet 4.14. This imports The Spirits Presence Both inti∣mate, And per∣tuate With the people of God They have the friendly and familiar presence of the Spirit in close acquain∣tance, Communions and Communicati∣ons, as is not to any other men. They have the presence of the Spirit in his continued workings, Without Intermission, and Without Termination. The Spirit within them does never intermit all his actings. Though he is in the soule as the pulse in the arme,
that does not alway beat with the same sensible strength, and evennesse (Mo∣tions may to a good mans feeling be more weak and low;) yet even in such distempers he is still stirring. As when the body of a man is asleep, yet there in the soul is acting: So when the soule of a Saint is asleep, yet there in the Spirit is work∣ing. Neither can any period possibly be put to such an operative presence of the Spirit in the People of God. The graci∣ous soul is on earth as the Spirits centre, the settled presence here of is not in any other soul. The Spirit of Noah's Dove hovers over the hearts of earthly men: but a holy and humble heart is to the Spirit as Noah's Ark to the Dove; there he rests. John. 14.16. I (sayes Chrsst) will pray the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, and he shall abide with you for ever. Your bodies have had my cor∣porall presence for a time, but in your soules the presence of my Spirit shall remain for ever. Now they that have in them such a perpetuall presence of the Spirit, may not they be in the Spirit upon the Lords Day?
2. We shall consider their spirits to∣wards the Lord, For suitablenesse, And capablenesse. For the pliablenesse, and Indefatigableness of them. 1. Suitable are the spirits of Saints to the Lord Christ. Christ and the things of Christ, and the spirit of a Saint so suite, That his Spirit hath onely a sympathy with them, And they onely can satisfie his Spi∣rit. The sympathy of a good mans spirit is with the things of Christ. His heart hath a kind of Antipathy to things of an other nature, Even the things of the world his Spirit opposes, refuses, rises, if of them any tenders be to take him off from Christ. When Valence the Emperour sent to Basil the offer of great preferments, the good mans spi∣rit was up in an anger, and made this an∣swer, Let him offer these ratles to chil∣dren, and not to Christians. When some bade stop Luthers mouth with prefer∣ments, one of his Adversaries answered, It is no boot, that Germane Beast cares not
for gold. God himself (sayes Luther) shall not put me off with these things. Hooper when one offered him a pardon for life if he would recant, he cryed out, If you love my soul, away with it: For Gods sake away, away with it: But to such men the things of Christ, truths of Christ, waies of Christ, Words of Christ, Commands of Christ do ac∣cord. And herein also are the Spirits of Gods Saints satisfied. How was it with that holy man who replyed to his friend, Speak to me while you will, no words can satisfie me except you men∣tion Christ. Write to me what you please, it will not satisfie me, unlesse in your letters I may read Christ. Give me never so much I cannot be satisfied, except you help me to some∣what of Christ. Christ and the things of Christ were onely things that satisfied the spirit of this precious man. Suitable things are ready to run into one ano∣ther, to mix, and hold fast together. This made Nebuchadnezzars Image to fall asunder: because it was made up of such unsuitable matter, things of such a differing nature. This makes famous
professors to fall, and divers to desert Christ; because the things of Christ do not suite to their spirits. The spirits of sincere Saints are agreeable to gracious objects, the very frame of their hearts is fitted to the waies of truth and ho∣linesse. Among good things, with that which is best their spirits best agree. The more holy and pure any person or Ordinance is, the better there with their spirits accord. The new nature and settled temper of their spirits is most suitable to the Lord himself, and may not they be in the Spirit upon the Lords Day? 2. Capable are the spirits of Gods servants to take in of the Lord large∣ly. Their hearts are compared to Vialls, Revel. 5.8. A Viall is a vessel narrow beneath, and wide above. The hearts and spirits of good men are more closed downward, and more open up∣ward: Of enlarged capacities Christ∣ward. And though of Christs ful∣nesse they have already received grace for grace, yet there is room to receive more. In these two we may comfortably conclude, there's room, viz.
Gods glorious heaven, and Mans gracious heart. As God in his heaven hath more room for good men: So good men in their hearts have more room for God. Holy mens spirits are let out, and their hearts made wide, By Godly sorrowes for sin, and By earnest desires for God. By Godly sorrowes Christians cast out sin,Beata ani∣ma quae est instardomus Jacobi in qua nulla simulahra, nulla effigies vanitatis. Amb. de fuga secu cap. 5. and so make more room for Christ in their hearts. Hence the heart of a holy man is made as the house of Jacob, in which is no place allowed for the least representation of vanity; the very images of evil thoughts are thrown out, and the whole house is set apart for the precious things of God; and the more plenty of these appearing, the more he labours heart-enlargement. As the rich man, Luk. 12. when he saw plenty of Corn upon the ground, he pulls down his barns, and builds greater, that he may have more room to receive in such fruits: Thus a Godly man by repen∣tance pulls down his heart, he sees it is too narrow for the vast things of God, and thereupon labours to make his heart as capacious as possible. And by
every penitential breaking, builds it better. By earnest desires also after God he brings his heart into a better and bigger capacity. O whom, Lord, have I in heaven but thee, and who on earth do I desire besides thee? Psal. 73. Yea, for Sabbath-enjoyments of God, the Spi∣rit of a pious man pants, Psal. 42.1, 2. He even faints for more full fellowships and fruitions of God. As against sin he thinks his heart can never be close enough shut: So for God he thinks his heart can never be wide enough open. Of sin he would fain have lesse, when he hath least: and when he hath most of God, he yet desires more. And by such wayes the soul of a Saint is set wider for God, and thus the spirits of Christians become more capable to take in more largely the things of the Lord; and may not they then be in the Spirit on the Lords day? 3. Plyable are the spirits of Gods people for the Lord to let out them∣selves freely. Their hearts towards the Lord are waxy and willing in all wayes of well-pleasing, Judg. 5.9. Psal. 110.3. Being oyled with an holy Unction,
And wheeled with holy affections. The oyl of grace is poured upon the hidden man of the heart, which makes all the spiritual members of the new man to be agil and nimble for God. As it is said to Christ, Heb. 1.9. God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladnesse above thy fellowes: So may we say to the soul of a Saint, God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyl of grace and goodnesse above thy fellowes. The heart it is first and most sanctified, and therefore may well be most free and forward for God. In man no marvel the sensitive powers and corporal parts are lesse plyable. As the oyntment was first and most poured upon the head of Aaron, and from thence drops went down to his beard and skirts of his garments. Thus the oyl of grace is primarily and princi∣pally upon the heart of a Christian and from thence it descends into all the powers & parts of the man, so that this hath cause to come in first, and come off freest for God, as indeed it daily does. When other parts rest, the heart runs. Yea, the heart of a holy man is set upon such wheeles, as make it move quick for
Christ; Judgement cleared, affections fired, 1 Chron. 29.3. I have (sayes Da∣vid) set my affection to the house of my God, and hence he was so lively and liberal, labouring to lift up the honour of God in preparing for him a house. The dis∣positions and affections in the soul of a Saint are such, as that his heart is prompt & prepared for every precept, purpose and providence: O God, my heart is prepared, my heart is prepared (sayes David.) One observes how he doubles the expression, to imply he was willing to a differing condition.Paratum cor meum ad prospera, pa∣ratum ad adversa, paratum ad sublimia, paratum ad humilia, pa∣ratum ad universa quae precepe∣ris, &c. Bern. Ser. 2. de qua∣drages. If God would have him high or low, rich or poor, a shepherd again, or a Prince still: His heart was prepared, prepared. Thus is it with a pious man, his heart is prepared to put on after God in any condition, his Spirit is upon such wheels of love to the Lord, that he is oft carried out beyond and before he is aware. Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware my soul made me as the Chariots of Amminadib. The spirit of the Spouse did unex∣pectedly rise and run out after Christ, as a Chariot upon the wheeles. And are the spirits of Gods Saints set into such a frame for the Lord, and may not
they be in the Spirit on the Lords day? 4. Indefatigable are the spirits of Gods people in following the Lord. In Gods worship their spirits are un∣wearied, when their bodies are weaken∣ed. Their spirits may be weary in, but are never weary of any worship of God, or any work for God in his wor∣ship; their hearts and minds Being pitched down, And girt up for God. The heart of a holy man is pitched down, and firmly resolved for God, his mind does not fluctuate, hover, and waver in unsettled uncertainties, he is not upon demurs and disputes, confers not with flesh and blood.Baron. An. 261. num. 30. Cyprian that blessed Martyr, when the Governour bad him advise with himself: answered, Sir do your office; in a righteous cause I am not now to resolve. A man of a wa∣vering spirit is soon wearied out, and wrought off from God. A good man in∣deed his heart is fixed for God; though he be not fixed firmely in the wayes of God: yet for the wayes of God he is firmely fixed. Though he hath some doubtings in his way, yet he hath not
doubtings of his way, and so walks on unweariedly. His heart will not be tyred, or turned out. Yea, the heart of a holy man is girt up, and closely united to God, his mind is not divided be∣tween the Lord and the world. Frede∣rick the Elector of Saxony, who was a prisoner to Charles the fifth, being offered liberty and dignity if he would come to Masse: answered, I have but one Master, one soul, and one Saviour: I dare not serve two. A man of a double heart, that halts between God and Baal, God and Mammon, never holds out. He may seem for a while to out-run many, but he will be weary. A gracious man his spirit is not onely for God gathered in one: but it is so knit up as to be one with God, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit: and hence he holds out to the end: never weary. And they who in the wayes of the Lord are of such unwearied spirits, may not they be in the Spirit on the Lords day? There is none of Gods Servants, but possibly now may be as some of the servants of God cettainly have been, upon the Lords day in the Spirit.
I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day. The USE IS, Of Information. Of Exhortation. 1. This may clearly declare the ill case of two kinds of men, neither of which are in the Spirit on the Lords day. Some that are not, nor possibly can; Some that pssibly may, yet are not. 1. 'Tis the sad case of all unsanctified men, they neither are, nor possibly can be upon the Lords day in the Spirit. This will plainly appear, considering Both what they be, And what they do. Men remaining in a sinful estate, we may observe what they be, Both privatively, And positively. Privatively,] They cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day, because They be without the Spirit of the Lord, And towards the Lord they be without spirit. 1. As men in natures estate are with∣out God, and without Christ, Ephes. 2.12. so they are without the holy Spirit, Rom. 8.9. Jude 19. As when man was
to be created, the three Persons they all concur Let us make man, Gen. 1.26. And no sooner is man corrupted, but they all conclude with a Let us leave man. So that every sinful man is for∣saken of God the Father, Son and holy Ghost. Such men be without Gods holy and blessed Spirit, whether we con∣sider Some more prophane, Others more refined. Men that expresse nothing but vice and vanity, sons of Belial, chief servants to the Divel, such as do that for the Divel as he cannot do for himself. Sa∣tan himself, because of spiritual being, cannot commit many sins. But men that herein they may fulfil his will, they run into drunkennesse, and all kind of corporal uncleannesse; they swear and curse, steale and commit adultery, and wallow in all worldly filthinesse, and have they the Spirit of holinesse? Men whose mouthes are as that Gate of Je∣rusalem, out at which was carried forth all the filth of the City, Their throats are as open Sepulchres, their tongues are set on fire of hell, and have they the holy Spirit of God in their hearts?
Other men there are who professe better. They speak high, but live low. Their voice is Jacobs, but their hands are Esaus. Like Peters fish that had silver in the mouth, but none in the belly. Nothing of the spirit appears in their waies, yet much of the Spirit may be heard in their words. As if the Dove were in their Arks onely, and none had the Spirit of God but they. Thus Muncer the Anabaptist, while he called Luther a spiritlesse man, a sil∣ly soule, one without the Spirit of God, he pretended himself to be all full of the Spirit, &c. Men may think they have the Spirit; yet not have the Spirit which they think. And indeed, what∣ever any unregenerate man think, they all are without the good Spirit of God. They cannot have the Spirit, who are not born of the Spirit; and they who never yet all their daies were born of the spirit, they cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. On the Lords Day a man may not be in the Spirit, that yet every day dwells the Spirit in him: And can they be on the Lords Day in the Spirit of God, who to this day have not Gods in-dwelling Spirit in them?
2. Such men God-ward are without spirit. As Absalom stole away the peo∣ples hearts from David: So sin and Satan hath enticed and taken away all these mens hearts from God, Hose. 4.11. Or else the world hath so won upon them, that their hearts and spirits are gone God-ward. The Queen of Sheba when she was at King Solomons Court, and saw the house he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his Mini∣sters, and their apparell, and his cup∣bearers, and his ascent, &c. There was no more spirit in her, 1. King. 10.4, 5. Thus the honours, pleasures and profits of the world do so work upon the hearts of many, that they have no more spirit left in them. Without Spirit,] That is, Without judgement to know, and Without courage to doe the will of God. Without judgement to discern good, Hose 7.11. Ephraim is a silly Dove, without heart. Gods Saints are as Inno∣cent doves, without gall; and others are as silly doves, without heart, without any wisdom of spirit. The spirit of
man (sayes Solomon) is the candle of the Lord. Many a man is a dark Lant∣horn without a candle, having in him no knowing spirit to give him light, he gropes after God in the dark, Act. 17.23. So without courage to pursue any saving good, or withstand any destru∣ctive evill, when they should stand up in Gods cause, and soules defence, they have no spirit. Joshua. 5.1. When the Kings of the Amorites, and all the Kings of the Canaanites heard that the Lord had dryed up the waters of Jordan from before the Children of Israel; so tht they were passed over, their hearts mled, neither was there spirit in them any more. We se severall men, Who though set in a superiour sta∣tion, And though of Christ they make a visible profession: Yet if any difficultie appear, or dan∣ger approach, they have no spirit for God is or good, only their care is to se∣cure themselves. The King of Navarre, when Beza blamed him for his spirit∣lessenesse in the cause of Christ, he re∣plyed, That for Christian religion he would lanch no further to sea, then if a
storm did arise, he might be sure himself to return safe to shoare. Men who thus towards the Lord are without spi∣rit, they cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. Positively;] It is not possible such per∣sons on the Lords Day should be in the Spirit: Because [In the flesh.] They be in the flesh which is evill. And they be in an Evill Spirit, Flesh,] It is in several Texts taken for that which is lawfull and good, Psalme 79.2. Eph. 5.13. Rom. 9.3. 1. Cor. 7.18. But [Flesh] ordinarily intimates that which is evill and naught, as mans naturall corruption and sinfull conditi∣on 1. Cor. 5.5. Coloss. 2.13. Gala. 5.24. 1 Pet. 4.6, &c. In this flesh are all un∣regenerate men, Rom. 7.5. Rom. 8.8. Not onely (flesh) in them, that is the case of the best Christians, Rom. 7.18. but in the flesh, as a fish in the water. Not onely sin in them, but they in sin, as the Leviathan in the Sea; In sin they sport and take delight. They live in sin, and yet are dead in sin. Sin is as the Sepulchre in which they lie dead
and buried, they lie in sin as a swine in the slow. They are in sin as a Malefa∣ctor in his fetters, in the Gall of bit∣ternesse, and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8.23. They are so in sin, as they are nothing but sin: so in the flesh, that they are all, and only flesh. We may say of such mens persons, prayers, services, hopes and hearts, as the Prophet of the Egyptian horses, they are flesh, and not spirit, Isay. 31.3. These therefore cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. Their fixed condition is in the flesh. Yea, on the Lords Day they cannot be in this good Spirit of God. For, They have an evill spirit in them, And they are in an evill spirit. An evill spirit is in them, Eph. 2 2. The spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. The Greek hath two [in's] The Spirit does inwork in them: to signifie how exceeding inward Satan that evill spirit is at work in wicked men, Every sinfull soule is such an Ark, wherein is the Raven, though not the Dove; the Divell, though not the Spirit of God. Though in them is not the Holy Spirit, yet the unclean spirit
is in them, Matth. 12.44. The unclean spirit saith, I will return into my house. [The Divels house is every evil heart. We see there the house may be [swept and garnisht,] yet the Divels swept.] A man may be free from some grosse pollutions, horrid thoughts of Atheisme, Blasphemy, Butchery of the Lords Lambs may be thrown out of the heart. Garnished,] A man may be furnish∣ed with gifts, parts, performances a fair outward profession, some flashes of good affection; yet he may be the house wherein the Divel dwels, Jam. 4.5. Do ye think the Scripture saith in vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusteth to envy? He speaks of [us] as men, not of [us] as Saints. In all men natural∣ly the evil spirit dwells. A spirit that moves to all lusts of envy, hypocrisie, pride, infidelity, sensuality. Can they who have such an evil spirit in them, be in the Spirit on the Lords day? Yea, but this is worse, they are in an evil spirit, Mark 1.23. And there was a man with an unclean spirit. In an unclean spirit, the Greek reads it. So, Mark 5.2. When Jesus was come out of the ship,
there met him a man in an unclean spirit. Every sinful man is in Satan as in a Prison, in the Divel as in a Dungeon. In the power of the Divel, Act. 26.18. In the snare of the Divel, 2 Tim. 2.26. In the mouth of the Divel, as Jonah in the belly of the Whale. Yea, sinful men they are strongly acted, and they do strangely act in this evil spirit, and ther∣fore they cannot be in any spirit that is good, upon the LORDS DAY. 2. Such cannot be on the Lords day in the Spirit, appears by what they daily do, Both in respect of their own spirits God-ward, And in respect of the Spirit of God. They cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day, For They draw their spirits from the Lord, And against the Lord they turn their spirits. 1. From the Lord they withdraw their spirirs. Whereas Gods dear Saints, when their bodies are brought into bonds, or are bound upon their beds; yet then they in holy worships
engage their hearts to approach near to God, Jer. 30.21. But other men when in outward worships their bodies be brought in to God, yet then they re∣move their hearts far off from God, Esay 29.13. A good man watches his heart, to hold it in to God; he does not slip away his heart from God, though while he is with God his heart may give him the slip. This made a holy man in the midst of prayer cry out, O Lord,August. in 2 Sam. 7.7. my heart hath left both thee and me: But every sinful man, he takes his heart off, and turns it away from God. As the Levite, Judg. 19 divided his Concu∣bine, and sent her several parts into all the coasts of Israel: thus many a man when he should bring in his heart, and knit it up for God, he divides it, and sends it into all the parts of the world, leaving none for God. True Christi∣ans, though God makes them suffer, yet their hearts stick to God: All this is com upon us, yet our heart is not turned back, though thou hast sore broken us, &c. Psal. 44.17. yea, when Satan makes them sin, yet their hearts hold to God. 'Tis said of Peter, his heart did not for∣sake Christ, when his tongue denied
him.Corde tenuit illum quem voce nega∣vit. Greg. But these men when they do not outwardly sin, yet in heart they go away from God. They do not onely in heart fall back, but they draw back their hearts from God, Heb. 10.38. Now they that thus daily draw back their spirits from God, they cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day. 2. Against the Lord they turn their spirits. The spirits of all unconverted are turned against God, Both by Original corruption, And by actual rebellion. Rom. 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God. 'Tis more then if he had said: The carnal man is an enemy to God. The mind] the best part of cor∣rupt man; is enmity] which notes mon∣strous malevolence. The Greek word is in the plural [Enmities,] To import multiplyed perversnesse. As there are many excellencies in God for man: so there are many enmities in man against God. Enmities against all the Attri∣butes of God. Enmities against all the Ordinances of God. Enmities against all the actings of God in the world. The spirit of man from his birth is bit∣terly bent, and utterly turned against
God. But further every man does act up his spirit in rebellion against God blessed for ever. Turns his spirit against God. This Eliphas does falsly charge upon that good man Job, 15.13. But this charge may truly be drawn up against every evil man, he turns his spi∣rit, & makes his mind to swell against God. The least risings of spirit against God, a good man groans under and grieves for.Hieron. epest. 32. ad Abiga. There is nothing (once said a precious man) that I have all my life more laboured against, then a swelling mind, a stiffe neck, and a stubborn heart. A wicked man he hardens his heart, stif∣fens his neck, and turns his spirit against God. He heightens his in∣ward corruption, and becomes a hearty enemy against God by thoughts, words, and deeds, Col 1.21. Or if there be out∣ward restraints from evil works; yet his spirit is turned against God. The impenitent theefe when his body was nailed to the Crosse, yet his spirit was turned against Christ. A mans body may be bound from sin, and yet his heart bent against God. The bow of the bad heart may be bent up, though no arrowes of evil works or words be shot
out.Peter Mar∣tyr in Genes. A Learned Writer makes the Rain-bow in the heavens an admirable Embleme of peace, For though (sayes he) we see a bow, yet we see no string or ar∣row. An unregenerate mans heart is a bow that hath both strings and arrows. The strings of the bow, are the corrup∣tions and ill dispositions of the heart, and the arrows are the evil cogitations and thoughts thereof. A multitude of these arrows a man lets fly in the face of God, which argues the acted enmity of his heart against God; he is at heart∣warre with, his spirit is bent against the Lord: such cannot be in the Spirit on the Lords day. Lastly, on the Lords day these can∣not be in the Spirit; For The gifts of the Spirit they abuse, and The grace of the Spirit they oppose. 1. The Spirit of God in the gifts thereof they pervert. The Holy Ghost helps them to knowledge, remem∣brance, utterance, &c. These they take and turn them to a wrong use. As the Israleites, who took their ear-rings, jew∣ells, and bracelets of gold, and there∣with made an Idol. As the Divell he hath large knowledge, and great abili∣ties,
but of all he makes an ill use: so it is his design upon sinfull men that whatever good things God gives them for his praise, and their profit, may be imployed to their harme, and Gods dis∣honour. As Eve whom God gave to Adam for his meetest help, was made the Engine of his greatest hurt: Of this rib (sayes one) the divell made a dart, and wounded man to death with that should have sweetened his life.Basil: Divers act the Divells part: they take things given them for their chiefest good, and turn them to the greatest evil.Cōrruptio optimi pessimi. As the divells could never have been such vile and venemous spirits as they are, had they not once had ex∣cellencies above other creatures; And so there are several that could never have been so transcendently sinfull in prodigious opinions and practices as now they be, had they not had rare parts, and admirable abilities above their Brethren. And can we think that they who thus abuse the gifts of the Spirit, should be in the Spirit on the Lords Day? 2. The Spirit of God in the graces thereof they resist, Act. 7.51. Ye stif∣necked,
and uncircumcised in heart and cares, ye do alwaies resist the Hly Ghost; viz. in all his gracious workings. Men who make provision for the flesh to ful∣fil the lusts thereof, they make oppo∣sition against the Spirit, and withstand the works thereof. And though as with bellowes they blow up the Divells fire; yet as with buckets of filth they quench out the sparks of the Spirit. As when the Angells were entred into Lots house, the men of Sodom from every quarter compassed the house by force and fury to fetch them forth Genes. 19.3. Thus when any good motions enter into the hearts and minds of some men, they are up in arms, and out of quiet, till they can crush them, and cast them forth. How oft do they (in effect) say to the Spirit, as Pharaoh to Moses. Get thee from me, see my face no more, till at length the Spirit replyes to them, as Moses to Pharaoh, Be it as thou-hast said: Lo, I will see thy face no more for ever, Exodus 10.28.29. Some when they are in soule affright∣ed, they would have the peace of the Spirit to calme them: but though they are in sin polluted, they will not have
the grace of the Spirit to cleanse them. And because they regard not the grace of the Spirit, they resist the Spirit of grace. And can such be in the Spirit up∣on the Lords Day? Indeed the Lords Day is the main time they thus gainsay the Spirit of God, upon the Sabbath-day they most beat back Gods blessed Spirit, and can they this day be in the Spirit? Object. Upon the day of the Sabbath sure some sinfull men meet with Spi∣rituall movings: and therefore they may this day be in the Spirit. Answer, By way of concession, & By way of distinction. Upon the Lords day, as at other times, men may by a false spirit be for∣cibly moved, & have stronge impulses, strange raptures and revelations from a lying spirit. As the Divell can transform himself into an Angell of Light: so he can conforme him∣self to the Spirit of Light. And as Satan can in shape assume the body of man; so he can in shew assimulate the Spirit of God. 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God or no. Whence we note, 1. That there are spirits which
pretend to be of God and are not. 2. That such meere pretending spirits may much resemble the true Spirit of God. 3. That their resemblance may pro∣ceed so farre, that professing Christians may be prone to believe they are the very Spirit of God. 4. That such spi∣rits may not be believed, a discovery of them is to be made by tryall. 5. That the tryall to discover spirits to be not of God, must be exact and prudent. Try the spirits, viz. as skilfull Lapidaries do their stones, or as wise Goldsmiths do their mettalls, by touch and weight, as the word imports. Now that men may so try, as to discern whether upon the Sabbath, as at other seasons, they are moved by the Spirit of God; Be it known, that The Spirit which is, Swelling, Smiting, Roving,'Tis not he Spi∣rit of God. Renting, Ranting. Driving, 1. A swelling spirit, that puff men up with pride is not the Spirit of God. One of the chief lessons taught by Gods ho∣ly Spirit, is humility of heart. And upon this account Gods Spirit suggests to a man, His Iniquity, and His mortality.
When mans heart begins to swell, the Spirit of God puts in.Berna. August. Serm. 21. Christ was hum∣ble, yet without sin, and shall a sinner be proud? What? thou proud, dust and ash∣es? For pride God plunged Angells out of heaven, and will he spare thee a rotten creature, a worm that must die to¦morrow? Swelling in heaven Angells sunk, and shalt thou proud upon a dung∣hill passe unpunished? Ambros. lib. de vidu∣is.As Christ (sayes a good Author) cured the blindnesse of the man by putting clay upon his eyes, so the Spirit of Christ cures the swelling pride of mans heart by putting thoughts into his mind of his mor∣tall and dying condition. That while he lives he is but a piece of warme clay. That is, the Spirit of God which as it en∣larges a mans abilities, it increases the mans humility. As Nazianzene said of Athanasius. He was high in worth, and humble in heart. Of such instances the Holy Scriptures are full: But some their soules are swelled with pride, as Simon Magus, who gave out that him∣self was some great one Act. 8.9. Such a one was Muncer the Anabaptist in Germany as Sleiden reports his proud pranks, and bragging boasts; such a one
is that man of sin, who exalteth himself above all that is called God, 2 Thess. 2.4. The Spirit of God it is not that moves these men. 2. A smiting spirit, that makes men clamorous and contentious is not the Spirit of God;Chrysost. homil. ad Pop. Ant. 36. et 51. the Spirit of God it makes men peaceable, pittifull. To act pitty and shew mercy (sayes a good man) is a more glorious work then to raise the dead, or to build temples for God. Yet this lesson men learn through the help of Gods holy Spirit. A meek and a quiet spirit. Such a spirit acted in Abraham, Genes. 13.8. And Abraham said to Lot, let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, or between my herd∣men and thy herd-men, for we are Bre∣thren. Is not the whole land before thee? take either the right hand or the left, &c. Abraham said [though he were the Elder and Superiour, Let there be no strife.] His spirit did so incline to peace, that he would not have the least breach: I pray thee;] he begged agree∣ment, so greatly did his soul desire it. I scorn, (sayes Luther to the Pastors of Stratsburge) that any should be more earnest then I for peace. Brotherly
peace, and bowells of pitty are the fruits of the Spirit, Gala. 5.22 Like∣wise long-suffering, gentlenesse, meek∣nesse, temperance. It is an evill spirit, that makes men tumultuous, mutinous, contentious, apt to smite both with hand and tongue, 2. Chron. 18.23. And Zedeki∣ah smote Micaiah on the cheek, saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee? It was not the Spirit of the Lord, but a lying spirit that moved Zedekiah against Micaiah. Such a spirit wrought in them against the Prophet Jer: 18.18. Come, let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. A false spirit is so all for speaking, that it cares not to hear, 1 Joh. 4.6. Hereby we know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. He that is not of God, heareth not us. Thus a Manichee furiously contesting with Augustine, clamoured and cryed out, Hear me, hear me. To whom the good man modestly answered. Neither hear me, or I thee, but let us both hear the blessed Apostle. Some they are all upon speaking, wording of it, with a full and fierce mouth against others. As Samsons foxes that had fire on their
tailes, and set all the fields on a flame: So some have such a fire on their tonges, that they set Cities and Countreys in a blaze. Those movings such men have, are not from the Spirit of God. 3. A driving spirit, that hurries men to move about matters, wherein they do not consider, or consult Times, or Means: Grounds, Or ends. But on they go, this is not the Spirit of God. Gods Spirit moving to any great matter does not drive, but draw, and so leads men as to let them Both consider with themselves, And consult with others. Whether the time be seasonable, Viz. The means approvable, The grounds warrantable, And the ends comfortable. When Gods Spirit is the mover, a man so examines the matter about which he is moved, that 1. He considers if the time be fit he is moved in; He knowes that which is untimely is uncomely, things being beautiful in their season, Eccl. 3. 2. He considers if the means be
right he is moved by, and that which he is to make use of. For, as the least false weight is not allowed for the get∣ting of the largest gain: No more is the least evil lawful for the attaining of the greatest good. 3. He considers if the grounds be sure he is moved on: Not successe in the world, But an expresse from the Lord. A warrant from Gods revealed will in his Word: for that onely can bear him out in his obedience. 4. He considers if the ends be safe and good he is moved to: not onely in respect of his purpose and intendment of good therein, but in respect of Gods promise and engagement for good thereupon. Such a man is certain∣ly moved by the good Spirit of God. Yea, and in respect of others; Counsel He both asks And takes That both from God, And men. In holy prayer he humbly asks counsel of God. When David had lost all by a Troop of the Amalekites horse who had plundred Ziklag, his spirit sparkled to be up, and after them. But David first calls for Abiathar the Priest to bring the
Ephod, and enquired of the Lord say∣ing, Shall I pursue after this Troop? and shall I overtake them? 1 Sam. 30. Thus Jehoshaphat before he would march with Ahab to Ramoth-Gilead, he desires all the Prophets of God, and God by the Prophet Micaiah might be consulted with. Ahab transported with a false spirit presses onely, Horse and away. Let Micaiah say what he will. To Ramoth-Gilead he must, 2 Chron. 18. Whereas counsel given a good man takes, and turnes his designes. So David when he was with his men upon the march against the house of Nabal, Abigail meets him, and he stops upon her advice, blessing God that he shed no blood, 1 Sam. 25. Now an evil spi∣rit having sprung a design, at least seemingly good; yet violently provokes, and impetuously presses to prosecute men, not considering or consulting, ex∣cept with such as are on the same mind. No seeking to God, except some prayer as a colour. They first resolve their businesse, and then go to prayer, then ask counsel; but if contrary come, they cast off all. Yea, this spirit it drives and will rarely leave, or let them have
time to take advice. Satan that evil spirit in the Serpent, having upon Eves sight of the pleasant fruit begun to move, gave her no time to seek God, confer with her husband, or consider the sad events, onely eat she must. So Judas, the Divel suggesting a Booty to betray his Master, he immediately goes out, Joh. 13. rises from Supper even when the best dish was to come, as the Learn∣ed conceive, he never stayes to speak a word, but away about his work. He considers not what guilt of blood he should bring, Matth. 27.3. Then Judas which betrayed him, when he saw what was done, he repented himself, &c. It seems he thought things would never have come to that. That spirit which thus drives men in considerately, precipitate∣ly, &c. 'tis not the Spirit of God. 4. A roving spirit that wheeles and whurries men obout is not the Spirit of God. Men rove.] Psal. 78.8. Esay 19.14. Jam. 1.6, 7, 8.Observe, From what, and In what. There is a spirit that in moving makes men to rove, viz. Ordinarily from the rules of Scrip∣ture,
And often from the rules of Rea∣son. Scripture-rules men rove from. They will make Scripture go with them as far as ever they can; and being they must go further, they leave it. They wrest and rack Scripture, and stretch it as far as for their own advantage. Thus that wicked spirit did with our dear Lord, Matth. 4. Thus doe such unsta∣ble spirits in these last dayes, 2 Pet. 3.16. They make holy Scriptures, as their hired servants, who when they will no further serve their design, they turn them off. Every good man moved and managed by Gods good Spirit, sayes to Scripture as Ruth to Naomi, Where thou goest, I will go: where thou stayest, I will stay, thy God shall be my God, and thy peo∣ple my people; nothing but death shall part thee and me. Sozomen reports of Con∣stantine, that whatever was pressed, he would say, Bring me the Book of God; when things were disputed, and various wayes urged, he used still to stand up and call for Gods Book commanding all should there settle, and none from thence swerve. That spirit which in mo∣ving men makes them swerve and rove
from Gods good Word, is not the Spirit of God. Yea, beyond the rules of reason, as well as Scripture men are made to rove through an ill-moving spirit. Hence they roll and rove, Both from using reason, And from reason used. They do not use that reason which might stay themselves. From men of no reason the Apostle prays he may be delivered. That we may be delivered from unreasonable men, 2 Thess. 3.2. Nei∣ther can that reason which others use, stay them. As they have not reason to rule themselves, no more will they be ruled by reason. Grounds of reason, and strength of arguments will no more bound nor bind them then green withs could Samson. The things in which an evil spirit moving makes men to rove, are Both inward, And outward. Viz. In their opinions, And affections. In their discourses, And courses. Men of rolling spirits who hold many things, yet hold to nothing. Like those Arrians of whom Athanasius reports, now
they held one thing, and anon another, and never were at any certain stay:Socrat. Scho. lib. 1. cap. 25. wandring Stars, fixed to no Orb, Me∣teors carried about with every gust, as children tossed to and fro with every wind, Ephes. 4.14. They like and dislike, cry up, and cry down; hot and cold, ramble, and rest at no point, unstable in all their wayes: Constantly incon∣stant, men given to change,See Seneca. lib. de tranq. and that love to wander, as unsetled as the waves of the Sea. Such Christians even Hea∣thens condemn. Such motions are not from the Spirit of God. 5. A renting spirit, that moves men to make divisions and fractions, is not the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God, 'tis All is uniting. The Spirit of faith, The Spirit of love, & The Spirit of patience. By faith the Spirit unites and knits us up to God, and by love the Spirit unites and knits us one unto another, and by patience the Spirit unites and knits each one within himself. And for want of the Spirit of God in these graces, there are a multitude of sad severings. For want of faith a man breaks and
falls off from God. For want of love a man breaks and falls off from his Bre∣thren. And for want of patience a man breaks in pieces, and falls asunder with∣in himself. All evidences an evil spirit present and prevalent. Mark. 9. There is a man possessed with a spirit that did oft-times cast him into the water, and into the fire, and wheresoever it did take him, it did tear him, that he gnashed his teeth, and foamed at the mouth. O what a spirit does possesse such men, as does cast them into that water, whereby their love is quenched, and into that fire whereby their wrath is kindled, and so takes them as it tears them with impatiency, infidelity, and separation from Christian-society. Sure such have not the Spirit of God, Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. 'Tis not the Spirit of God that hath moved some to separate themselves from our publick Assemblies. Vid. Came∣ron. de Ec∣cles. tract. de Schism.They having no good cause for it, and There being many bad effects upon it. No cause good.] If we in our assem∣blies, are not separated from God, they have no cause to separate from us. Are
we separate from God? Is not the drift of our daily endeavours to draw men to God? Is not this the bent of our businesse, to bring men into obe∣dience to God? communions with God? to set up God in hearts, and houses? Is it not the enjoyments of God after which we seek? Is it not worshippings of God in Spirit & truth after which we presse? that people must not be content, except in Ordi∣nances they come up to God? And can∣not the experience of many Christians speak, that among us through mercy they meet with much of God? And are we separated from God? And what cause have they to separate from us? Yea, if with us there be sufficient means for salvation, then they have no suffici∣ent cause for their separation. For salvation have not we with us meanes sufficient? Meanes apt, and able to bring home, and build up, proper and preva∣lent through God for converting of sin∣ners, and confirming of Saints? If any shall seek a proof of Christ speaking in us, the Apostles answer is proper, Prove your own selves, examine your selves whether you be in the faith. Know ye not
your own selves? &c. 2. Cor. 13.4, 5. If their soules were ever sensible of any saving good, let them consider our As∣semblies. Through our way of wor∣shipping God lies there no path to life everlasting? What will they say to those Martyrs and precious men that are dead and gone? And what will they say to those thousands of Gods dear Saints that yet live, and with us worship God with love and delight? Must they be all shut out of heaven? If not, why do these then separate themselves on earth? Many effects bad] both to themselvet and o∣thers. Some we feel, and More we fear. Hence are our desired unions broke, and hoped reformations stopped, and monstrous deformations and divisions come instead. Pharez is born when we looked for Zarah, Genes. 38.27, &c. Tamar being in the time of her t raval, behold, twins were in her womb; And it came to passe when she travelled, then one put out his hand, and the Mid-wife bound thereon a scarlet thred, say∣ing, This came out first. And it came
to passe as he drew back his hand, be∣hold, his brother came out, and she said. How hast thou broken forth? This breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez. And after his bro∣ther came out that had the scarlet thred on his hand, and his name was called Zarah. Have not we in this Land had our time of travell; and hath not a sweet settlement, and good government sometimes been brought so neer the birth, that we have said, This will come out first: But how hath it been drawn back, and such a Monster born, of which we may say, How hast thou broken forth? This and that breach be upon thee. Breaches at home, breaches abroad, wars continued, strifes encreas∣ed, civill States disturbed, Protestant Nations perplexed, brotherly Leagues and Covenants laid violate, contrary to all civill, sacred, and religious bonds. What bloody breaches have been made? but above all sad and bad is our breach with God. This breach be upon thee. &c. Since some have forsaken our assem∣blies, O what abundance of others are broken off from all the Ordinan∣ces,
and holy worship of God, from the Sabbath and service of God! O what a Spirit of Atheisme fills mens heads, hearts, and houses! How are the ex∣ercises of religion laid by, yea, left off both in publike and private! Yea, how do men break out in waies of profane∣nesse, to the shame not onely of their persons, but of our religion and Nati∣on! This Breach be upon thee. Men ceasing that which is good, soon pursue that which is evil. Men who cast off the worship of God, will easily follow the works of the Di∣vell. This dividing and rending spirit, that moves men to make such separati∣ons and schisms, of which there are se∣quells so sad, sure is not the Sprit of God. 2. A ranting spirit that sets men upon sensuall practices and pleasures, is not the Spirit of God: Jude. 19. Sensuall, having not the Spirit. The Spirit of God and the sensuall delights of the flesh are utterly opposite, though the lusts of the flesh, and spirit of the Devil do easily accord. A man led by a loose spirit loves that
which suits his sinfull lusts, and carnall contents, Micah. 2.11. If a man walk∣ing in the spirit and falshood do lie, saying, I will prophesie unto thee of wine and strong drink: he shall even be the Prophet of this people. Not any will so forwardly & for∣cibly prophesy of wine & strong drink, as the man who walks in a spirit of falshood. With these things he thinks to content others, they being the things wherewith himself is most pleased. As Saul possessed with an evill spirit, no∣thing could quiet him, but instruments of musick; while one was by him curi∣ously playing upon the Harpe, his heart was refreshed, 1 Sam. 16.23. Thus some, their sweetest refreshment and greatest contentments are in the merriments of the world, in revelling and rioting, luxury and sensual delicacies, indul∣ging the delights of the flesh, such as stretch out their wits for to rear up their lusts, setting off their abominable vices with plausible pretences, to cover their carnall nature; they run over Scripture, and speake much of the Spirit, they may live the more in the flesh. As Rachel that sits over her fathers Idols, and sayes, It is with her after
the manner of women. Thus they brood and hide their filthy designes, and say, it is with them after the man∣ner of men moved by the Spirit. But 'tis not the Spirit of God that moves in these men. Men may be strangely acted onely by a Spirit of error. And as at other times, so also upon the Lords day, lift up by a spirit of de∣lusion. This lying and deluding spirit, As in some things he may seemingly take the way, So he may at sometimes subtilly take the day, viz. Of the usual workings of Gods holy Spirit, that he may the more undiscern∣ably deceive the souls of sinful men and women. As Satan crept into Paradise, and in that place beguiled our first Pa∣rents: So he gets into the Sahbath, and upon this day seduces divers persons, J b 1.6. Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves be∣fore the Lord, add Satan came also among them. He seemed as if on that day he had something to do as well as they. Though undoubtedly whatever this evil spirit does, is not to bring men to
a care of, and love to the Sabbath as it is the Lords holy day: But his drift in∣deed is to draw men to an idle neglect, and a low esteem of this day of the Sabbath. 2. Upon the Sabbath men may have many Spititual motions from the good Spirit of God: Movings of the Spirit in them, and Yet they no movings in the Spirit. As the Spirit of God upon the Sab∣bath moves in sanctified souls: So like∣wise may he then move in sinful and unsanctified hearts. Here observe, Wherein it may be evidenced, and Whereby it may be differenced. Good evidence may be given that Gods Spirit may move in sinful men upon the Sabbath-day, so as that in re∣spect of spiritual good things they may be brought To Observe, Discern, & Assent. To Admire, Affect, & Resolve. 1. The Spirit may so move as that men may much observe what is said up∣on the Sabbath concerning things Spi∣ritual and Eternal, not barely to hear, but to hearken; not onely to imploy the
ear, but to apply the mind, to mark things mentioned, to consider and pon∣der what is preached and pressed. When our Saviour upon the Sabbath preached the Gospel in the Synagogue of Galilee, the people were so moved, that they pressed with eagernesse to lesson and learn what he delivered, Luk. 5.1. Thus people may possibly under the preaching or the Gospel, have their thoughts so helped, and their hearts so held, as to heed what they hear. 2. Gods Spirit may upon the Sabbath so move, as that men may discern and see much into the matters of God, and according to the Word of God become very knowing. Divine things may not onely be opened to their understanding, but their understandings open to things Divine, Numb. 24.4. Heb. 6.4 Through the Spirit their minds may so be en∣lightened, and their eyes so opened, that into the good things of the Gospel they may have a great insight. Their heads may be gold, though their feet be clay. Their understandings may have light, though their affections no heat. Though the tree of life be not yet planted that may bring forth fruit unto God, yet
they may have a tree of knowledge so full of leaves, that therewith they may flourish in the World. 3. Gods Spirit may move upon the Sabbath so as men may assent to the truth of Gods revealed will, so as to believe the reports God hath made in his Word to be all infallibly true. A man may be brought to yield such an allowance, and to give that credit to whatever God speaks in Scripture, that his soul may secretly say, Truth Lord. Though that which most transcends reason, as the mysteries of the Gospel, yet to each the soul inwardly sayes, Truth Lord. Though that which con∣demns his own course, and discovers his own case to be naught, yet consci∣ence concludes, Truth Lord. That se∣cret way is sinful, sayes God, and must be broken from. Yea, sayes the man, Lord I believe it. That way is holy, just, and good, and must be walked in. Lord, I believe it. That is necessary to be sought, and that is worthy to be em∣braced. Lord, I believe it, Luk. 8.13. Act. 8.13. All which is brought on by the blessed Spirit of God. 4. Gods Spirit may so on the Sab∣bath
incite, as to set men in admiring at the greatnesse of Gods grace and mer∣cy, wondring at Gods works and words, Luk. 4.14. Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and taught in their Synagogues on the Sabbath day; there they admired him, and he was glorified of them all, After he came to Nazareth, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath-day, where preaching upon some part of the Prophet Esay, the peo∣ple before him witnessed, and wondred at the gracious words that proceed∣ed out at his mouth, Luk. 4.17, 18, 22. 5. Gods Spirit may be so inciting upon the Sabbath-day, as that men may be much moved to affect the good things of God; hereby they may be brought To desires of them, and To delights in them. Spiritual good things men may be desirous of. When our Saviour in a Sermon, Joh. 6. preached about the Bread which comes down from heaven, and giveth life to the World; some of his hearers were so stirred, that they broke out saying, Lord, ever give us this
Bread. Thus when men hear of heaven∣ly things, their hearts may spring witn desires, and their souls secretly say, O Lord, ever give us this good. Yea, with joy may their hearts dance and leap, Luk. 8.13. Thus some rejoyced in the Ministery of John the Baptist, Joh. 5.35. With gladnesse of heart did Herod hear him, Mark 6.20. 6. Gods Spirit may on the Sabbath so move, as that men may resolve upon obedience to God and his holy Com∣mands, Deut. 5.27. Go thou near (say the people to Moses) and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou to us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it. Jer. 42.4, 5, 6. I will pray (sayes the Prophet to the people) unto the Lord your God, and whatever the Lord shall an∣swer, I will declaer to you, and keep no∣thing back. Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord be a true and faithfull witnesse between us, if we do not according to all things for which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us. Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God. Thus people under the Gospel, their
hearts may be wrought to a real resol∣ving upon the right way, not onely something perswaded, but their present purposes pitched to practise and prose∣cute that which is good. These and such like good movings may the Spirit of Grace have upon the hearts of sinful men upon the day of the Sabbath, and yet are far from being like Gods Saints in the Spirit upon the Lords day. Now between these there is a discern∣able difference; Gods Saints upon the Sabbath are so in the Spirit, as no other ever are. Those Spiritual motions that are in other hearts, may be found de∣fective in a four fold respect, Viz. of Depth, Breadth, Heigth, and Length. For depth,] Those Spiritual mo∣vings that are in carnal hearts, are but superficial and shallow, they do not reach down into the inmost parts of the heart, in deep humblings, and soul-afflictings, so as at first to lay the foun∣dation deep. A man admires the mer∣cy of God in Christ: but does not ab∣hor
himself for sin in the dust, as that dear Saint of God, who when he was affected and wondred at the glory of God he saw, he also (reflecting upon his own infirmities) abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.2. Gods Saints are first moved to deep and bitter self-bemoaning sorrowes, Jer. 31.18. and after comes in sweet soul-quickning comforts, Matth. 5.4. Others are like that stony ground, Matth. 13.20. who when they heard the Word, immediately they received it with much joy, the seed sprung upward, but downward took no deep rooting, as in the good ground, Luk. 8.13, 14, 15. When the Spirit moves upon true believers, it makes them to bottom well, to dig deep, and lay the founda∣tion on a rock, and then raise their building in holy resolutions, and sweet affections, with suitable performances; but others, all the motions they feel, puts them upon some fair buildings, without any deep bottomings, Matth. 7. Luk. 6. For breadth,] Those Spiritual mo∣vings that are in carnal hearts, are but straitened and narrow; they do not spread out, either in respect
Of subject, Or object. They do not reach out into all the powers of the soul, so as to take up the whole soul for God. Thus does the Spirit move in the Saints of God, ha∣ving a wonderful work in the whole soul, so as that they are set about God and good with their whole heart, and whole desires, 2 Chron. 15.5. All their joyes and desires are in and after God. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and who on earth do I desire besides thee? Psal. 73.25. Others they desire God, but there is somewhat besides their soul is set up∣on. In their affections or resolutions God he hath not the whole heart or whole soul and spirit. Neither do those good motions they have, reach out to all the precious things of God. Something of God they would have, but not whole God. O how are they delighted to hear of the loving kind∣nesse, patience, pity, mercy of God. But the omniscience, omnipresence, pu∣rity, holinesse of God they are not so taken with, or stirred at, pleased with. The Death of Christ for their salva∣tion,
Not the life of Christ for their imi∣tation. Fain have that of Christ which justi∣fies: But care not for that of Christ which sanctifies. A Saint of God spiritually moved desires to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. And, God forbid (sayes the Apostle) I should glory in any thing save in the Crosse of our Lord Jesus Christ Gala. 5.14. Moses can prize the reproaches of Christ, Heb. 11.26. Others onely regard somewhat of Christ, the honours of Christ, the happinesse of Christ. the comforts of Christ: but to bear the Crosse of Christ, and to pos∣sesse the Grace of Christ, and to stoop to the yoak of Christ, this is grie∣vous. For height] Those spirituall movings that are in carnal hearts, cause them Heaven-ward to make some assayes: but up to heaven they do not in soule ascend, as Gods Saints who mount up, and have communion with Christ, 1 John 1.3. and have their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. sitting down in heavenly places with Christ, Eph. 2.6. Upon some movings of the Spi∣rit
others hearts and minds like Gras∣hoppers leap up, but fly not far; Or as a vapour that ascends out of the earth into the lower regions of the air, but never rises to get up into the highest region; but when the heat or force is a little over, as a heavy body, it falls back again, and that which was like to be fire, proves but water. When the minds of carnall men are most mounted, and their hearts most height∣ened, yet they do not come to that pitch of pious affections, and positive resolutions, as whereunto Gods people are raised. They do not so highly ad∣mire, nor so highly desire, nor so high∣ly esteem the holy things of God, as do the dear Saints of God in their hea∣venly converses with God, when God by his Spirit carries them as upon Ea∣gles wings. For length,] Those Spiritual movings that are in carnal hearts, are for the most part sudden and short; as sparks of fire that are soon quench∣ed out, Esay 50.11. Or as morning dewes that are soon dried up, Hose. 6.4. Through the workings of the holy Spirit, O in what a hopeful way for
heaven are the hearts of men some∣times set, but things do not abyde, all being by and by beate down. This made Chrysostom observe a sad difference be∣tween the work of the Minister in his calling, and the work of other men in their earthly trades and ordinary im∣ployments. Men commonly as they leave their work, so they find it: But the Ministers work (who is a Co-worker with God for peoples spirituall good) it is one day set forward, and another backward. Upon some Sabbath O how mighty are men moved! how sweetly are their soules disposed, how are their affections fixed, and their resolutions raised, as if the new building would pass on apace! but by that time a Minister comes again to his work all is dashed down, so broken, as not a stone is left upon a stone. The work is new to begin, yea, the case perhaps worse then it was before. As water once warmed be∣ing ward cold (some say) is afterward the more hardly heated. Those holy heatings, warmings, workings, movings, meltings, mountings, and meetings of God which good men have through the help of Gods holy Spirit; are more re∣maining,
and better abyding; such good things are stablished and nourished in them, that are vanishing and perishing in others, Luk. 8.13. John 6.67, 60. Gala. 4.15, 16. The Spirit does so act and stir in the hearts of holy men, and their soules upon the Sabbath may so act and stir in the Spirit, as is not possible for any other persons. The peculiar priviledge of pious men to be in the Spirit on the Lords Day. 2. We yet grant there be severall of Gods Saints, who though they possibly may, yet upon the Lords day in the Spi∣rit they actually are not. Because Either they go from Ordinances, Or they rest in Ordinances. Some upon the Sabbath forsake Gods publike Ordinances, and for that cause they are not in the Spirit. The wise God will so honour his own holy appoint∣ments, that such as sinfully desert them, shall not comfortably possesse him: But they shall comfortably enjoy him, who carefully attend them. O how much of Gods good Spirit have good men met, when they have been on the Sabbath assembled in the use of Ordinances!
John. 20.19. upon the first day in the week, when the Apostles were gathered together [The Greek word does sig∣nifie such a gathering as in Church-As∣sembly, it being a word of Ecclesiasti∣call use, and so applyed in severall texts, Act. 4.31.11.26.13.44.14.27.20.8. 1 Cor. 5.4. Then the Lord breathed on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. When Peter was preaching the Gospel, the holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the Word, Act. 10.44. It is in the use of Ordinances Christ hath promised his Spirituall presence, Matth. 28.19, 20. As the presence of Christ in body is not enjoyed but in the heavenly Jerusalem,Grego. Moral. lib. 18. et cap. 15. the generall Assembly, the Church of the first-born, where are gathered an in∣numerable company of Angells, and the spirits of just men made perfect, Hebr. 11.22, 23, 24. So the presence of Christ in Spirit is not to be expected, but in the holy Assemblies of Gods Mi∣litant Saints, met to honour God, ga∣thered to glorifie God in the way of his Ordinances, Word and Sacraments, &c. It is true, divers of Gods dear Saints can by experience speak that they have
met with much of Christ in Spirit, and much of the Spirit of Christ in private duties, as Meditation, and Prayer, &c. But then this comfortable experience hath been to Christians, Either while publick Ordinances also were attended, Or when Ordinances in publick could not be enjoyed. 1. Christians while they remain upon the Lords day diligent in publick duties, may in duties private meet with much of Gods Spirit. Christians may even in the week-time, have sweet incomes of Spirit in their private Closets, the better to prepare them for, encourage them to, and carry them through the publick service of the Sabbath, when the Lord with enlarged measures of re∣freshing mercies may more fully flow in upon them. 2. The souls of sincere Christians may have in the private exercises of re∣ligion, large enjoyments of God through the Spirit, being deprived of publick Ordinances, and debarred from the open liberties of the Lords day. Yea, when they are held and hindred from ordinary works of Gods wor∣ship,
God may more immediately and abundantly in the best comforts break in upon them. As the Israelites when they were in the wildernesse, and could not have comfortable crops from the earth, God gave them Manna imme∣diate from heaven; but when they were come into Canaan, if they would have a harvest, they must mind their seed-time, and plow and sowe in the sea∣son. When Gods servants are settled where the means of Grace may be had, and the work of Gods worship may be performed, they must not think to have Spiritual comforts, as Manna im∣mediate from heaven. Some upon the Sabbath they forsake the solemn wor∣ship of God, and depart from the pub∣lick Ordinances of God, and so are not in the Spirit on the Lords day. Object. In Spirit God himself is de∣parted from the publick Assemblies, and therefore mens forsaking of them hin∣ders not from rheir being on the Lords day in the Spirit. What prejudice can it be to forsake God-forsaken Ordinan∣ces, wayes, and means, wherein God is not now to be found? Answ. Thus some have suggested to
justifie their sinful separation; for how can they make good their going from us, if they grant that God is with us? With what face can they forsake those Ordinances with which God him∣self is present? Present is God in Spirit with publick Ordinances, though Not sensibly at all seasons, Nor savingly to all persons, Nor effectually for all purposes. 1. God in Spirit and the Spirit of God is in Ordinances present, when not apparant. He hath secret and un∣discerned wayes of working. This holy Spirit hath his hidden accesses unto the souls of men. The dewes of divine grace they fall in small and insensible drops. The seed of sanctifying grace is sowen by an invisible hand. Great works are done by a deep and inti∣mate energie of the Spirit of grace, whereof no present notice is taken. As Joseph by his servant put his silver cup into Benjamins sack, when neither he nor any of his Brethren knew it. Thus God by his Spirit puts sanctifying grace into the souls of men, when not themselves, much lesse others are able to perceive the same. In the conversion of Saint
Paul 'tis said, Act. 97. that they who were with him in his journey, they heard a voyce, but saw no man: In the pub∣lick preaching of the Gospel the whole Congregation hear a voyce, but do not see what secret works the Spirit of God hath in the hearts of men to pro∣mote their good. And though the Lord is not ever appearingly present with publick Ordinances, yet he hath not forsaken them. God does never forsake his precious servants, yet he is not alwayes with them sensibly present. As at the pool of Bethesda, people who desired a cure, they waited for the moving of the water, there being cer∣tain seasons when the Angel of God stirred in the same: So there be some special seasons when the Spirit of God stirs in Ordinances, and therefore thereon people must wait, that would have a cure. 2. Gods Spiritual presence it is with publick Ordinances, though upon se∣veral they have no saving work. Though divers under Gospel-dispen∣sations be blinded, hardened, ruined, Act. 19.8, 9. Exod. 14. We find a cloud that cast darknesse upon the Egyptians,
so that it blinded them, and brought them to run upon their own ruine; yet with that very cloud God was present, thereby giving light to the Israelites, and leading them in the way to Canaan, Nehem 9.12. 1 Sam. 4. The Philistines having in a set battel worsted the Army of Isral, the Elders of Israel cryd out, Let us fetch the Ark of the co∣venant ito the field, it may save us from the hands of our enemies. And accor∣dingly they caused the Ark of the covenant to be brought into the Camp. But the Phi∣listines fight, and Israel was smitten with a very great slaughter, and the Ark it self was taken, yet the Ark 'twas Gods ordi∣nance, and wi h it was Gods immovable pre∣sence, as may appear by the plagues God in∣flicted upon the Philistines who carried the Ark captive. It was a curse to them, yet Gods own blessed appointment for his peoples profit. The preaching of the Gospel, it is to several a savour of death, yet with the Gospel preached God is graciously present, for the sa∣ving good of the souls of some, 2 Cor. 2.16. Heb 4.12. The word of God it is a two edged sword, it hath a killing edge, and wounds some to death; yet through
God it hath a curing edge, some being saved by the very Word which wounds them. Christ himself who is a Corner∣stone, upon whom many a blessed build∣ing is raised: yet he is a Rock of of∣fence, and a stone at which some stum∣ble, and fall, and rise no more, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Notwithstanding God is never se∣parated from his Son, but abides with him for ever, Joh. 16.32. 3. In publick Ordinances God by his holy Spirit is present, even unto all per∣sons, for some or other good purpose. For the best & highest purpose is God Spiritually present to some persons in the use of his Ordinances, so that they are effectually wrought upon, and brought in to grace and glory. And surely where ever the net is cast out, there are some fish to be caught; and where the candle is lighted up, there are some lost groats to be found, though but few. And as for other persons, for other good purposes, though of low∣er concernment, is God in Spirit pre∣sent: so that though they are not by grace renewed, yet they are through grace restrained. Hence as Saint Paul complaines that he could not do the
good he would: So sinners they cannot do the evill they would. Might good men have their minds, they would be much better: And might wicked men have their wills, they would be far worse. Hence men are not onely brought to forbear many things evill, but drawn to do divers good things. Thus Herod heard John Baptist gladly, reformed much that was evill,Josephus lib. 15. cap. 8. et 12 &c. and performed many things good, Mark. 6.20. Jose∣phus reports of this Herod many excel∣lent things he did, as acts of Justice, acts of Fortitude, acts of Liberality: In the time of a famine how he caused all his ves∣sels of Gold and Silver to be melted, and therewith corn to be bought for the relief of the poore. People under the preaching of the Gospell that are not effectually converted, yet are ordi∣narily convinced, have some Illuminati∣ons, Inclinations, Qualifications, Com∣miserations, Operations, whereby o∣thers may have profit, though them∣selves perish. All which are the actings of Gods good Spirit, and the eviden∣ces of Gods sure presence in the use of his Ordinance. Let not any then say that God hath forsaken any of his ad∣ministrations, but let men rather reflect
and fear lest themselves should be for∣saken of God. This was commendable in King Saul, 1. Sam. 28.15. O, sayes he, The Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answer∣eth m no more, neither by Prophets, nor by dreames, &c. He does not say, God is departed from his Prophets, God is departed from his ordinary waies of answer; but, God is departed from me, &c. Persons that do not find pro∣fit by the Word, should misdoubt their own conditions, for Gods Word does good to them that walk uprightly, Mi∣cah 2.7. Such as say, God is gone from publike ordinances, it argues their hearts are gone if their bodies be with us, & they do but learn the Language of such as are gone from us both in body and Heart. But God is with us. Object. None have such comfortable discoveries of God by the the Spirit, as some that are departed from publick Assemblies. Answ. Some that have been damn∣able seducers have given out, that they through the Spirit have had glorious discoveries of God. The Spirit of God descending upon our Saviour like a
Dove, when he had heaven opened, and God speaking, This is my beloved Son, Matth. 3.16, 17. in allusion thereto, and imitation thereof, a grand Impostor having taught a white Pigeon to take pease out of his ear, reported to the people that it was the holy Ghost, im∣parting the mind of God to him in most comfortable Mysteries, for the which he was much admired of many. And our Saviour having promised the sending of the Spirit, the Comforter, that should make known all things from the Father,Alsted. Chronolo. Haeresium 38. pag. 382. Joh. 14. One impu∣dently affirmed, not onely that he had extraordinary Spiritual comforts from God: but that he was the very Spirit of God, the Comforter; and that God had sent him to make known most com∣fortable messages to the Churches of Christ; whereupon he had many fa∣vourers and followers. Luther cites several sects in his time, who though they fled from the Word, as Owles from the light, yet they pretended to high rap∣tures and ravishments through the Spirit, and tus especially the prime leaders with lyes as loadstones drew parties after them, &c. And there are in our dayes divers
whose language it loud of large dis∣coveries they have from, and comforts they have in God through the Spirit, never so as since they separated from our publick Assemblies: before they were full of fears and doubts, but now they are in the firmest settlements and fullest assurance, free from all sad thoughts, filled with the joyes and comforts of the holy Ghost, having in∣timate acquaintance with the mind of God, and understanding in the deep Mysteries of Christ. This I shall onely say, that if it be really so, let us see more of it, Both in their lives and actions, And in their deaths and afflictions. In the actings of their lives how little of the power of this appears, Either towards God above them, Or towards men about them? If they say, they now see and know so mh, taste and partake so much, trust and confide so much in God; let them evidence it by their exact actings, and strict livings, so as to out strip others in all goodnesse, kindnesse, meeknesse, mercifulnesse, &c. As the Apostle speaks to the man who boasts of his
belief, Shew me thy faith by thy works, Jam. 2. So may we say to such, Let them shew their comforts and confidence in God by their holy working, humble walking, sin-subduing, self-denying, lo∣ving those that they count their ene∣mies, and praying for those they call their persecutors, Math. 5.46, 47. That saying of our Saviour to the Pharisees, may fitly be applyed; If ye love them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? Do not even Pub∣licans so, &c? Nay, instead of doing more then others] in their conversa∣tions and actions they expresse lesse of the power of godlinesse, and practice of holinesse, keep lesse to the rules of righteousnesse, and in the paths of peaceablenesse, then other Christians do, and yet they speak of higher rap∣tures, greater discoveries, sweeter com∣forts, stronger confidence then other Christians have. I question whether these be any more then self-deceiving conceits, arising from Satans-subtil de∣signs. 2. In their deaths and daies of deep
distresse, how little likewise do they lay forth of that firm confidence and those full comforts they speak of in God? It were easy to instance from among the Anabaptists and such other Sects, how especially the prime leaders who have spoken of raptures and ravishing reve∣lations by the Spirit, yet some of them have died ragingly and in a frenzie, others stupidly, their heart sinking within them like a stone. And have not some been seen who have carried it boldly out, while the Sun hath been warm under which they have set, and while the Sea hath been calme over which they have sailed; but when the winds have been rough, and their hopes as ships have been wrackt, their va∣pourings have vanished? History re∣ports of a river that at every Mid-Sum∣mer swelleth and runneth over the bancks, but in Mid-Winter is cleane dried up; Thus some while they have had prosperous successe, their confi∣dence and comforts have risen high; but when they have been down in the depths of their distresse, all have been damped and dashed to the dust. As Pharaohs Chariots that carried him fast,
and ran swift upon the Land: but when they were in the Sea, then they went heavy, and their wheeles fell off. The Jewes said of our Saviour, Let us see him come down from the Crosse, & we will believe in him: But of such we may say, Let us see them go up to the Cross, let us see how they can look death, de∣vill, & God in the face, keeping up the heights of their comforts & confidence, and then we may the better believe them. In the mean while, let not Christians believe they may have high comforts & heavenly raptures through the Spirit; yet neglect holy Ordinan∣ces, Christian Assemblies, the Lords Day, and the duties thereof. Though some men be in Sabbath-day-duies that are out of the Spirit, yet let none think to be in the Spirit, that lie out of du∣ties upon the day of the Sabbath. As whoever would sail over Sea to a friend in another Land, must have both a ship and a wind; so whoever would in soul ascend from earth unto God in heaven, must have the help Both of Gods holy Ordinances, And of Gods holy Spirit.
The Ordinance as the Ship, and The Spirit as the wind. As the Ship of an Ordinance cannot move without the wind of the Spirit: so the wind of the Spirit will not blow without the Ship of an Ordinance. And therefore as a man must desire the wind: So he must take care that he be in the Ship, else if he goes to Sea, his soul will sink, and not ascend. Some neglect the Ordinances of God, and the duties of the Sabbath, and therefore are not in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. 2. Some others they so rest in Or∣dinances, that therefore they are not upon the Lords Day in the Spirit. This may be considered, Both in respect of the Ordinances they use, And in respect of their use of Ordi∣nances. 1. The Ordinances that some up∣on the Sabbath use, are of a lower rank, viz. Reading of Scriptures, Hearing of Sermons, and Prayer to God. In these they rest, and do not rise to
duties of a higher sort, viz. Sequestred Meditation, Sacramental participation, and Solemn congratulation. These three duties are as Davids 3. Worthies, that outwent all their fel∣lowes, 2. Sam. 23.23. In reading and hearing Gods Word, truths are more transient, but in meditation they are more stayed and established. In the Word are rare things uttered and opened; But in the Sacrament they are also sealed and settled. In pray∣er to God we seek the supplying our wants and serving our present necessi∣ties, &c. But in prayses of God, we set up Gods worth, exalting his Bounty and Beau∣ty. In the Ministery of the Word God comes as it were down into the world to us: In meditation we go as it were out of the world up to God. Of Isaac 'tis said, he went into the field to me∣ditate; but of a Christian it may be said, he goes out of the field, viz. out of the world, to meditate, dilate, and delight his thoughts upon God. Of God he cannot take in so much by
the hearing of the ear, as he doth by the thoughts of his heart. In the Word we hear discovered the Love of God by his voice: In the Sacrament we see uncovered the Love of Christ in his Crosse: herein the soul by a working faith walks into the wounds of Christ, banquets upon his bruised body, and bathes it self in his blessed blood. By prayer we receive mercy from God: By Praises we give glory to God. Now 'tis more excellent to give then to re∣ceive. Prayer is the sole work of Saints militant on earth; praises is also the work of Saints triumphant in Heaven. As in an Orchard the ripest and sweetest fruit, and that which is most pleasant to sight and taste, is to be gathered from off the upper boughs of trees; So the sweetest comforts of the Spirit, that most refresh the heart, and ravish the soules of Saints, are to be found in these upper duties upon the Day of the Sab∣bath. Now because Christians do not rise unto these higher performances, but rest in those lower services, therefore they are not in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. 2. The use that some upon the
Sabbath have of sacred Ordinances, is onely in a lower way, viz. so as that their hearts in holy duties Are heavy and sad, Or lazie and dead, And empty of God. Thus they rest, and do not rise to that higher way of using Gods holy Ordi∣nances, viz. so as in religious exer∣cises to have their hearts, Cheered, Fixed, and Filled with God First, they perform the Service of the Sabbath all with sadded hearts in a lumpish way. Their spirits bowed down with a burden of black apprehensions, so as that all the Lords day long they have no list to lift up themselves. Fish∣ermen when upon the waters of the Sea they cast out their nets, they not onely hang on lead, but they put on cork that they may the better bear them up, and bring them out; whereas when Chri∣stians upon the duties of the Sabbath draw out their hearts, having no cork of encouraging hope, but all lead of desponding thughts, and distrusting feares, they cannot bear up, their souls
sink in the service of God, Matth. 28.8. it is said of some good women that they went from Christs Sepulchre upon his Resurrection-day with fear and great joy: but some Christians they come and go from Gods Ordi∣nances upon the Lords Day with great fear, but no joy: so that when they should be in the triumphs of the Spirit, thr spirits are filled with troubles. T Sabbath it is the day whereon Christ came up from his Sepulchre, in which before he lay dead and buried: bu the Sabbath 'tis the day whereon some Christians go down into the Se∣pulchre of sorrowes, and bury their soules under sad doubts, in which graves of darknesse they rest, when from them they ought to rise. Upon the day of the Sabbath the soules of Gods Saints should send out sweet comforts, as the conduits of a City that run with wine upon the day of some triumph. Upon this day the minds of all good men should mount up into heaven, and comfortably converse with God from morning to night, drinking deep of those rivers of pleasure that are in Gods presence. Now this Chri∣stians
do not, whose hearts are upon this day down in deep fears and sor∣rows. 2. Gods Saints may sometimes trans∣act the duties of the Sabbath with dead∣nesse of heart, in a livelesse and luke∣warm way. Dead Sacrifices, and Jew∣ish Sabbaths suited: but dead services, and Christian Sabbaths do not accord. Gospell-Sabbaths require living Sacri∣fices, yea, a lively soul in every service. As the true mother in the Kings could not be content with a dead child in her bosome: no more should a true Christi∣an be satisfied with a dead heart in holy duty, especially upon the Lords Day: The day wherein deadnesse should be turn'd into life, weaknesse into strength, and earthly coldnesse into heavenly heatings. For want of this Sabbaths passe with small profit. The day may be long, yet little work done. Souldi∣ers, who meet and muster upon a train∣ing day, and dicharge their Muskets withut bullet or shot, they make a noise but no execution is done: Christians meet and gather on the Sabbath day, discharge their duties without fevour and heat: some noise is made, but little
work wrought: no rising of heart, no ascending of soul▪ no being in the Spi∣it on the Lords Day. As Christians should not rest in live∣lesse low or weak graces, but labour to enliven and still more to strengthen those divine qualities: so they should not rest in livelesse, low and flat per∣formances, but endeavour to grow to greater life, warmth, and strength in all holy duties. Not sloathful in businesse, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Rom. 12. For want of fervency of Spirit, there is so much sloathfulnesse in the businesse of Gods blessed Day. Fer∣vency or zeal is to duty as the soul to the body, without which all is but a cold carcase. Zeal is to the Soule as oyl to the wheele, whence it goes quick and is agil in all the waies of Gods worship. This is that Pillar of fire, which as it must go along with us in the night of our suffering, so in the day of our service. Service and soul and all dies, as this decayes. As upon the wasting of radi∣call heat the body growes into weak∣nesse, sicknesse and death: so in the soul of man and Service of God all
languishes and declines, as spiritual heat abates. It is said of John the Baptist, he was a burning and a shining light. When Christians are before men shining in actions, but are not towards God burn∣ing in affections, they keep dayes, and carry on duties in a spiritlesse way; And for lack of such sparklings and springings of soul, they are not in the Spirit on the Lords day. 3. Pious men may possibly passe Sab∣baths, resting in Gods Ordinance with∣out enjoying Gods presence. God ha∣ving made those heavenly creatures, Sun, Moon, and Stars, yet rested not till he had created man: so man having used holy duties, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, yet therein should not rest till he can attain God. When the Jewes were gone out of Egypt, and were in their way to Canaan, God told them, they should have his Angel to go be∣fore them, but himself would not go with them: which when they heard, they all mourned, and none would put on his Ornaments, Exod. 33.2, 3.4. Gods servants in Sabbaths should not be sa¦tisfied though they had the Ministery of Angels, except God himself be pre∣sent.
When Rebecca was in her journey to Abrahams house with his servants, she rode on the Camel, but she did not rest on the Camel, when she saw Isaac who was to be her husband; she lighted down and modestly met him, Gen. 24.63, 64. Jacob rejoyced to see the wagons his son Joseph had sent; yet was not the seeing of them, nor being in them that satisfied Jacob, but thereby to go into Egypt, and see and enjoy Joseph himself. It be∣comes Christians to rejoyce when God gives them Ordinances to use, yet is not the highest Ordinances they can have upon this holy day, wherein they should rest contented, except thereby they can come to some communion with God. It is reported of Master Bradford the Martyr, that he would never leave off in holy duties till he found therein somewhat of God; as in prayer he would not give over till he had some intimation from God of his love; in meditation till he had some manifesta∣tion of Gods presence, quickening and quieting his heart. Gods servants even upon Sabbath dayes, when duties are most solemn and settled, should not rest satisfied, except God shewes upon them
some token for good, and seals upon their souls some impression of his pre∣sence, which they may carry with them all the week. The Church, Cant. 3. being at a losse for her beloved, she goes to the watchmen and enquires of them: And 'twas but a little (said she) t at I passed from them; but I found him whom my soul loveth. We are not so far to passe Instruments and Ordinances, as not to make use of them or attend in them: but we are to passe them a little, in re∣spect of any relyance on them, or rest∣ing in them. As evil things unrepented of carry us from God: so good things rested in keep us from God. It is for Pharisees and Papists to rest in good works done, Christians should rise high∣er, and reach at a GOD in every good work, at Christ a Saviour in every ser∣vice of the Sabbath. When Samuel was to anoint one of the family of Jesse to be King over Israel, Jesse made seven of his sons to passe before the Prophet, and as they passed one after another, the Prophets word was, This is not he, Nei∣ther this he, &c. Then sayes Samuel, Is there not yet another? And Jesse said, There remains yet the youngest, and behold,
he keeps the sheep. And Samuel said, Send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come hither. And Jesse sent, and brought in David. Then sayes the Prophet, This is he, and he anointed him, 1 Sam. 16. Thus upon a Sabbath, when Instru∣ments, Ordinances, Ministers, Scrip∣tures, Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments and all passe one after another, the souls of Gods Saints should secretly say, Is there not yet another? The Lord our righteousnesse: we cannot sit down till he comes hither. And when the Lord himself appears in an Ordinance, each soul should say, This, this is he. Some, they sit down in Ordinances, though no Christ comes in, little or no∣thing of the Lord himself is seen, and so their hearts rise not. The Virgin Mary comming into the house where Elizabeth was, she being with child the babe leaped in her womb, and she was filled with the holy Ghost, and said with a loud voice, Whence is this that the mother of my Lord should come to me? Luk 1. Now it was not so much the Mother of the Lord, as the Lord in his Mother that made the child in Elizabeth leap. 'Tis not the Ministers of Christ, nor the Or∣dinances
of Christ, but Christ in his Ministers, and Christ in his Ordinances that makes the hearts of holy men to leap upon the Lords day. Thus they are filled with the holy Ghost, and fixed with the Spirit of God. Now because Christians do not rise to a high minding the presence of Christ, but rest in a low using the Ordinances of Christ, they are not in the Spirit on the Lords day. Use: Exhortion. Let this incite all Gods Saints to such a spiritual spending of the Gos∣pel-Sabbath, that upon this day they may be in the Spirit. Two things 'tis here meet to mark, Viz. The matter whereof this is comprised, and The motives whereby this is enfor∣ced. Spiritually to spend the Lords day does comprise principally these two things, viz. The influence of Gods Spirit with us, and The concurrence of our spirits with God.
1. The inflowings of Gods Spirit, so as to work in a double way, viz. Of Resistance, And Assistance. There being mighty oppositions a∣gainst us, we need the Spirit of God for their resisting, and There being many imperfections a∣bout us, we need the same Spirit for our assisting. 1. The blessed Spirit upon the Sab∣bath to resist Satan, and what he secret∣ly suggests to damp the duties of the day. Indeed the Divels design is not onely to dull us in, but if possibly to drive us from this day in all the duties thereof. And when he cannot keep off our bodies to carry away our hearts, he comes oft like a flood, a flood of wa∣ter to hinder a flame of zeal, Revel. 12.15. And the Serpent cast out of is mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. When Satan sees that upon the Sabbath we will go out to the Ordinan∣ces of God, to quench and carry away our hearts he then causes temptations to come as a flood, viz. Both in abundance, And with violence.
Against this, the best helper is Gods holy Spirit, Esay 59.19. VVhen the ene∣my shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. Thus ate the billowes beat back, and the floods dryed up, and Satans de∣signs dashed, and our souls upon the Sabbath set in a more hopeful way for Spiritual work. 2. The Spirit of God upon the Sab∣bath to assist and help our infirmities, Rom. 8.26 Our infirmities likewise the Spi∣rit helpeth; for we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanes that cannot be uttered. 'Tis not prayer, nor any o∣ther part of Gods service upon the Sab∣bath that we can spiritualy perform ex∣cept the Spirit assist. The Spirit helpeth] Or claspeth in with us together, as the Greek word notes. As when a businesse is too big, a work too weighty for one, others put to their helping hands, lifting and labouring together. The work of the Sabbath (especially to be spirituall therein) is above our abilities; except the Spirit closes in, and sets to his assisting hand, service will be sleepy, and souls will be dead. As 'tis said, that the whole
soul is in the whole body, and the whole soul in every part of the body, to animate and actuate all: Thus the holy Spirit must be wholly in the whole body of Sabbath-businesse, and whole in every particular duty, that all may be active, heavenly and lively. Upon the Lords day Gods people need the help of Gods holy Spirit, Both to transport them, And to support them. 1. The Spirit upon the Lords day to trans∣port and carry them out in holy duties, beyond ordinary formalities, and their own abilities: though in the week their wings have been wetted in the world, yet upon the Sabbath they are made fit to fly and soar up to God. Though upon this day Christ rose from the dead, yet it was fourty dayes after he as∣cended into heaven. But to a Christian through the Spirit, as it is his resurrecti∣on day, so it is his Ascension day. As on this day he comes up from the dead: So on this day he goes up unto God. 2. The Spirit upon the Lords day to support and keep them up in holy and heavenly frames of heart; That in Gods service they sink not,
Either through sinful inclinations, Or through Satans temptations. Good mens hearts are as Moses hands, when they are lifted up, they must be born up. Ever since Adams fall mans natural motion is downward. The soul that ascends, will soon descend if Gods blessed Spirit does not bear it up. This made David pray, when he saw the people for the service of the Temple with their hands liberal, and their hearts lively: O Lord God, (sayes he) keep this up for ever in the thoughts of the hearts of thy people, &c. And Satan he sets in to sink the soul down when it is highest in holy movings, and heavenly mountings. Matth. 4. we find when our Saviour was taken up into the holy City, and st upon a pinacle of the Temple, then Satan solicits him, that if he were the Son of God, he might cast himself down; Such is Satans design when he sees Gods Saints taken up in holy service, and set upon the pinacle in the practi∣cal part of holy Sabbaths, then he privi∣ly puts in presently to pull them down, but the Spirit helps, and holds them up. 2. There must be the close concur∣rings
of our spirits with God, or the Lords day cannot be spiritually spent. Not our bodies barely, but our very souls must so set in with God in Sab∣bath-service, as Freely to stirre, and Firmely to stand. 1. To stirre freely, with readinesse and willingnesse of mind moving about the businesse of Gods blessed day; Though there seems difficulty in work, and Though there is diversity of work. Although some of the service of the Sabbath may seem difficult, yet with a prompt and ready mind to move there∣to, and with all agility apt to act therein. As some of the men that Mo∣ss sent to search Canaan, they came back and their hearts sunk, O, say they, The Cities ae walled, and the people are strong, and we can never do the work. But Caleb who had another spirit, and was of a ready and resolute mind, Come (sayes he) let us go up and take it at once, Num. 13.30. Some are as awke to enter upon holy Sabbaths, as upon walled Cities, their hears shrink back, and they say, The service is too great, they cannot
do it, whereas Christians of another spirit whose minds are bent upon Sab∣bath-businesse, they say, Come let us go up through God, we shall do great things this day. Yea, to have a heart free and fit to move, although the duties of the Lords day be divers, viz. Works of piety, works of charity, Works together, works asunder. Sometimes lowly abasing our selves for sins committed: Sometimes highly advancing God for good vouch∣safed, &c. As a well-tuned instrument, the strings are ready to stir upon a light touch to divers lessons which the Musician may play as he please one after another. Thus to have a well-framed heart, apt upon the Lords day to its divers duties, prompt to pray, swift to hear, ready to distribute, pre∣pared to every good work, 1 Tim. 2.21. Tit. 3.1. Yea, to have a heart freely moving not onely about divers Ordi∣nancts, but about the same Ordi∣nance. To set in a way of work severall graces, and To set the same grace several wayes a work.
As in prayer, in hearing the Word, in receiving the Sacrament, in any one such service of the Sabbath, to act up in the soul several graces. Faith, Hope, Love, Sincerity, Humility, Fervency, &c. To have the heart in a ready exer∣cise of all these, at the use of any Ordi∣nance. Yea, such an Ordinance one of these is, wherein the soul of a Chri∣stian is to exercise the same grace se∣veral wayes. As in receiving the Sup∣per of the Lord there is a manifold use of faith: Faith here it is as an eye to see, as a hand to take, as a tongue to taste, as a mouth to feed, as the stomach to digest, retein, &c. Thus when Gods Saints upon the Sabbath do not onely use sacred Ordi∣nances, but therein also exercise seve∣ral and suitable graces: yea, and are active in their exercise, so that their spi∣rits are quick in co-working with the good Spirit of God, then indeed do they Spiritually spend this holy day. 2. To stand firmely, when the Saints of God upon the Lords day as they la∣bour to get their hearts up, so they are loath to let them down all the day long. Whereupon they strongly strive,
Rising to stand fast, they may not fall, and Falling to rise, they may the faster stand. 1. That rising their hearts may stand fast, and not fall in holy duties while the day lasts. As when General Joshua was in the heat of battel against the enemies of Israel having his spirit fixed, he looks up to the firmiament, saying, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and the Sun stood still and hasted not to go down about a whole day; So a Saint of God when he is in the heat of Sabbath-ser∣vice, his affections all on a flame, he looks in and says to his soul, O my soul, now stand thou still. Hold here, and so the heart holds up, and the soul stands still all the Lords day. 2. That falling their hearts may rise again to a more fixed affectionate per∣formance of all holy duties, Prov. 24.16. The righteous falleth seven times a y, and risth again. Seven times even upon the seventh day, the Sabbath day the hearts and souls of Gods Saints are subect to fall, from those heatings and heightenings they then have in duties holy. But then they struggle in holy
heats of heart to rise higher, and to fix faster, Psal. 108.1. O God, my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed. Fixed, and loo∣sened, and fixed again. Warmed and cooled, and kindled again; so as that the fire is greater, and flame hotter. More abounding and abyding through the businesse of Gods blessed day. Thus when Gods Spirit flowes in upon us, and our spirits fall in with God, so as with agility to act, and with stability to be set in all sweet wayes of Sabbath-works; This is Spiritually to spend the Lords day. 2. The Motives that may incite all Gods Saints to such a Spiritual spend∣ing the Gospel-Sabbath, may arise from things of two sorts observable, viz. Some more antecedential, and Some more consequential. Arguments from things antecedent which may set all the servants of God upon a Spiritual passing this present day, may be to consider [Sabbath-ward] these four things, all which we find to be spiritually, viz. The Ordainer of it, The Ordinances in it, The ends for it, and
The opposits against it. 1. The Ordainer of this day, the Lord Christ, the things Spiritual con∣cerning him we may discern, by consi∣dering of him, Both as he once was, And as he now is. 1. Christ the Lord of the Sabbath was Spiritual, In his Conception and Birth, In his Conversation and life, In his Passion and death, In his Resurrection from the dead, And in his Ascension to heaven. 1. Christ in his Conception and Birth was spiritual, he being conceived of the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin: nd the Angel said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall overshadow thee, therefore that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, Luk. 1.35, 36. 2. Christ in his Conversation and life was Spiritual, Lo the heavens were opened uto him, and the Spirit of God de∣scending like a Dove lighted upon him, Matth. 3.16. Joh. 1.32. His joyes were
Spiritual, Luk. 10 21. His words were Spiritual, Joh. 6.63. All his wayes in the world both towards God and men were Spiritual, Heb. 7.26. 3. Christ in his Passion and death was Spiritual. He through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 9.14. Even when he was con∣demned in the world, he was justified in the Spirit, 1 Tim. 3.16. 4. Christ in his Resurrection from the dead was Spiritual, Rom. 1.4. He was de∣clared to be the Son of God by the Spirit of holinesse in his resurrection from the dead, Rom. 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in you, &c. Christ put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. 5. Christ in his Ascension to heaven was Spirituall. As he went up to God by a Spiritual assistance, so upon a Spi∣ritual design, viz. to send down the holy Spirit of promie, Joh. 16.7. It is expedi∣ent for you that I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter [the Spirit of truth] will not come unto you; but if I depat, I will send him unto you: which we find fulfilled, Act. 1. Act. 2. 2. Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, he is Spiritual,
Both in his positive condition, And in his Relative transactions. Considered in himself according to his glorified estate he is all Spiritual. His blessed body is now brought be∣yond all humane infirmities, filled with beauty, clarity, agility, impassibility, immortality, through the eternal Spirit. In his humbled estate he was endowed and adorned with the Spirit, what then in his honoured estate? God gave him then the Spirit not by measure, Joh. 3.34. O what immense and immeasurable fil∣lings of the Spirit were in a crucified, much more in a glorified Christ! Such an infinite fulnesse of the Spirit is fixed in Christ, whereby he is compleately fitted to the perfect performance of all his excellent offices. Yea, and Christ in his actings is now every way Spiritu∣all, Both in what he does with God for men, And in what he does with men for God. With God for men,] Christ hath his Spiritual exercise. Christs acting as an Advocate with the Father, 1 Job 2. His appearing and pleading our cause in
the presence of God, Heb. 9.24. His making Intercession at the right hand of God, Rom. 8.33. As this is founded in the sufficiency of his Merit, So it is performed by the efficiency of his Spirit. As a meer man Christ does not ma∣nage his Mediatorship with God, but Christ in Spirit presents unto God the Father for his members, His deserts, and His desires. Both what for his people he hath pur∣chased, and what to his people God hath promised, that they may perfectly possesse, Joh. 17.21, 23, 24. And with men for God,] Christ acts all Spiritually. As Christ executes his Priestly office in heaven, So he fulfils his Prophetical and Re∣gal office on earth, in a way of Spiri∣tul working. As with Ordinances by the Spirit, does Christ teach, So by the Spirit with officers, does Christ govern. As his Kingdom is Spiritual which he governs,
So his government is spiritual of his Kingdome. It is through the Spirit that Christ does such great things in our dayes: as it was through the Spirit that Christ did so many good things in the dayes of his flesh. Being anointed with the holy Ghost, he went about ding good, Act. 10.38. He now sits on his throne in heaven, yet by the holy Ghost he transacts ma∣nifold and marvellous things on earth. By the Spirit he writes his Law in the hearts of his people, and rules his peo∣ple by the Law in their hearts. Leads his flock in the way they should walk, and Feeds his flock as they walk in the way, &c. Thus Christ the Lord of the Sabbath is Spiritual; And shall not we be Spiri∣tual in the Sabbath of the Lord? 2. The Ordinances in the Lords day are Spiritual likewise. Go through all the appointments of God, that are for this dayes exercise; Are they not Spiri∣tual? If we seriously consider things that concern The Word, Prayer,
Sacraments, Singing of Psalmes, Collections for the poor, &c. Are they nor all duties to be spiritu∣ally done? Doth not Both the precepts of God, binde us hereto? And the practise of the binde us hereto? Godly, 1. For the Word, As it is of a Spiritual nature, So it is in a Spiritual manner to be managed, Both on the Ministers, and On the peoples part. Every part of Gods precious Word is Spiritual. The Law is Spiritual, Rom. 7.14. The Gospel that is Spiritual, Rom. 1.11. Yea, because the Law in Spiritu∣ality comes short of the Gospel: the Gospel in glory out-goes the Law; As it is excellently opened, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. They that preach the glorious Gospel, that is so surpassingly Spiritual, must endeavour to do it, in the evidences, and efficacies of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. My preaching (sayes the Apostle) was not with enticing words of mans wisdome, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. When the poewr of the Spirit
is so upon the Preacher, as to put warmth into the heart, & words into the mouth, and is to his soul, as wind to the saile, so that he is carried out in clear and close discoveries of the Counsel of God, Act. 18.25. And Apollos being mighty in the Scripture, and fervent in the Spirit, he spake diligently the things of the Lord. Beza when he was a Preacher to the Protestant forces in France, he was so mighty in his Mii∣stery, that to some his Sermons were more encouraging and quickening, then the sound of Drums and Trumphts: though others Popishly disposed were offended, and said his Doctrine was made up of nothing bur fire and brim∣stone, all combustible and terrihle. To preach in the power of the Spirit nei∣ther carnal men, nor Divels can endure, but is most pleasing to God, and men spiritually good, being that which does mighty things, 2 Cor. 10 4. The wepons of our warrefare are not carnal but Spi∣ritual mighty through God. Spirituall weapons spiritually wileded, work won∣ders. The Word of God which is the sword of the Spirit, it must be spiritual∣ly handled, And as they that preach the
Gospel, must spiritually preach it: so they that hear the Gospel must hear it spiritually. This is more then barely with the bodily ear to hear the voice of man, it is therein with the ear of the soul through the assistance of the Spirit to hear the voice of Christ, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, I know them, and they follow me. Cant. 5.2. It is the voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, Open to me my sister, my love, my Dove, my unde∣filed, &c. 1 Thess. 1.5. Our Gospel came not unto you in word onely, but also in power and in the holy Ghost, 1 Thess. 2.13. For this cause we thank God for when ye heard the word, ye received it, not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God which effectually worketh in you that believe. Christians are not so to hear, as onely to take in words at the ear, but so as to take in warmth at the heart. Often (sayes Jerom) when I read the A∣postle in his Epistles, I seem not to hear words, but me thinks I hear the noise of Thunder, and as it were feel the force of lightning that sets all on a fire so that I am made to shake, to shine, to burn. Did not our hearts burn within us while he opened unto us the Scriptures? Luk 24.32.
Such Spiritual hearing God expects of his people every Lords Day. 2. For Prayer,] This must be spiritu∣ally pour'd out in the presence of God. Gods servants, As the Spirit is to be praying in them, So they are to be praying in the Spirit. Jude 20. But ye, beloved, building up your selves in your most holy saith, praying in the holy Spirit. Both in the Spirit of love and unity. And in the Spirit of life and fervency. Not clashing, but with close agree∣ments of soul, carrying out the same suit, Symphonical in prayer: Matth 18.19. If two of you shall agree on earth touching any thing they should ask, it shall be done. It notes such a symphony and agreement of the soules of Gods Saints in prayer, as Musicians who with seve∣ral Instruments play the same tune. Not cooling, but with kindled enlargements to be affectionate in prayer, fired with the Spirit. 'Tis (sayes Luther) for want of the fire of the Spirit in Preaching, that Sermons prevail so little with men: and 'tis for want of the fire of the Spirit in pray∣ing,
that petitions are no more prevailing with God. As in confessions of sin our hearts must be wounded with bitter sorrowes; So in petitions for Grace our hearts must be warmed with burn∣ing Desires. Gods people are to be to∣gether praying with their Hearts as Bells raised, and to ring such a loud peal of prayer as may be heard into hea∣ven. Such spiritual praying is expe∣cted of God, as duly as the Lords Day comes. 3. For the Sacraments,] Viz, Both Baptisme, and The Lords Supper. As they are spiritual for the Principal of them: So the Practice of them, must be spi∣ritual. The Principal of each Sacrament is the spiritual part thereof. The outward Element is but as the transient shadow. The spiritual and enduring substance is Christ himself with his Crosse, with his Grace, with his Merits, Mercies, Excel∣lencies, and Al-sufficiencies, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They (viz. our fathers of old) did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink; (for they
drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.) As when our Sa∣viour rode in Triumph to Jerusalem, Luk. 19. the company that went before, and they which followed after; All cry'd Hosanna: Thus the Sacraments of the Old Testament that went before, and the Sacraments of the New Testa∣ment that follow after, all say to Christ, Hosanna. All point at Christ, saying, Behold the Lamb of God. The Practice or transactions of the Sacraments must be spiritual, Both on Gods part, And on our part. In Baptisme all depends upon the powerful presence of the Spirit. At the Beginning, when te Spirit moved upon the waters, then were the creatures made: And so when the Spirit moveth upon the waters of Baptisme, then is Gods work done. And our work there∣in after is all to be done through the Spirit. In the first receiving of Bap∣tisme we were totally passive: but for the further improving of Baptisme we ought to be spiritually active. A spiritual Use we are bound to make of Baptisme,
Both to keep us off from evil, And to keep us on in all good. Luther reports of a pious Maid, who by her Baptisme bore up against the several assaults of Satan. If Satan sought to draw her to sin, Her reply was, I dare not do it, I have been Baptized. If to draw her from Duties, her reply was, I dare not but do it, I have been Baptized. We should observe, that to fly sin, and fol∣low God, we are Baptisme-bound: But for want of this, how does Baptisme lye like a Dead Ordinance? What multi∣tudes are there, who making no Spiri∣tual Improvements of it, they make many Carnal Arguments against it? Because they never knew how to work it up, they easily learn how to cry it down. They say the Truth and life of Baptisme lyes in their deep Dippings, and Water-Buryings. But sure a little water and much fire,Baptismus flaminis et flaminis. makes the best Baptisme. I indeed (sayes John) baptize you with water, but he that comes after me is mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Matth. 3. [Against their Water-works, we may see God angry in our want of water.]
In the Lords Supper;] All the great works which both God and we are to do, be spiritual. What God is to do, in Preparing, Declaring, Conferring, Confirming; All are spi∣ritual. Christ, the hidden Manna for the heart, and the hidden Man it self of the heart, which God makes ready, by cau∣sing hungring, humble, and holy De∣sires, by quickening Graces, calling up all Divine qualities, abilities, &c. That presenting and setting forth Christ as Shew-bread on the Table, evidencing and opening Christ, his Wounds, his Worth, &c. That giving Christ his Body to be eat, and his Blood to be drunk, that is meat indeed, and drink indeed: whole Christ given out, &c. That settling soules in the assurance of his love, so as they may proceed in the paths of Piety and Peace. Are not all these spiritual Acts? What we are to do, in Remembring, Discerning, Applying, Imploying; All are spi∣ritual.
To remember Christ cruc fid by Me∣ditation, to look back on the bitter sufferings, and bloody death of our blessed Lord, till the heart be warm'd, and wound up. To discern Christ, so as that the out∣ward Elements are as bright Glasses, and broad Lattices through which we see the Lord looking, and behold the Bounty of his Goodnesse, and Beauties of his Holinesse. To apply Christ, so as to take and eat not barely the bread of the Lord, but also the Bread which is the Lord. Potiphar's wife had the Garment, but Jo∣seph himself fled from her. The Elements are but the garments, 'tis Joseph himself, and Jesus himself that we apprehend. To imploy and make use of Christ, so as to go from the Table of the Lord, in the power of the Lord, and strength of his might, meet for all managements. In these spiritual actings, lyeth the life of the Lords Supper. 4. For singing of Psalmes;] This is a spiritual service, Ephes. 5.18, 19. Be fil∣led with the Spirit, Speaking to your selves in Psalmes, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your hearts
unto the Lord, Coloss. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will (sayes the Apostle) pray with the Spirit, and pray with the under∣standing also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. Luther was wont to make a large and lively use of the Psalmes of David.Johan. Manl. loc Com. Pag. 43. Ac∣cording as he had his several sufferings, he had his suitable Psalmes. Having been under Satans sad Assaults, Come, (sayes he to some company about him) Let us go sing the 130 Psalm in despight of the Devil. A precious Minister once in England, now with God, being upon the waters with some friends in a Boat, Come, (sayes he) let us sing the 16 Psalm. And when they had pass'd through those words, Of perfect joy are in thy face, And pleasure for evermore: His spirit so wrought, and heart so leap'd, that he affectionately broke out, What? pleasure for evermore? O let us sing that again. Nicepho. Hi. Ec∣cles. lib. 3. ca. 37.History speaks much of the zeal of the Primitive Christians, how by sing∣ing of Psalmes, they were wont to make hard work seem easie, and long jour∣neys
appear short, and bitter cups taste sweet. In all their Travels and Trou∣bles, Doubts and dark conditions, they use to ease themselves, and chear their soules by this heavenly service, which they spiritually performed, however now sinfully slighted. 6. Collections for the Poor.] This is also a Duty to be spiritually done, Both Pondering, And Pitying, Persons in Poverty. Pondering and considering such as are in a poor condition, Psal. 41.1. Blessed is he that considereth the poor and the needy: Not onely relieves them with his hand, but layes their case to heart. Considers the poor.] The ground of their poverty, whether it be good, whether that it be from Gods hand upon them, or mens hands against them for Gods sake. The degree of their poverty whether that it be great. Considers the poor and needy.] That is, such as are miserably poor, nee∣dinesse noting extream poverty.Quanta nobis pau∣pertas, imò egestas. Se∣neca, Epist. ad Lucil∣lum. A good man so considers this, as accord∣ing to the poores Necessity, he propor∣tions his Charity. To help he does not onely reach out his hand, but drawes out his heart. If thou draw out thy
soul to the Hungry, Esay 38.10. With Bowels of Pity compassionating persons in their impoverished condi∣tion. There is little of this Duty done, except with the bounty and contribu∣tions of the hand, there goes the Pity and compassions of the heart, 1 Cor. 13.4 If I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and hae not chariy, 'tis nothing. Liberal ales are nothing, without a fpirit of love; Love to Christ, and love to men as the members of Christ: herein lyes the life of liberality. This is spiri∣tual. 6. Inflicting of Censures.] This is also to be done Both with a spirit of zeal against the offending person; And with a spirit of love unto the person offending. There ought to be anger and grief against the scandal of the man; and yet compassion and love towards the man that is scandalous, 1 or 5.2, 3. Ye have not mourned, that he which hath done this deed be taken from among you. I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged concerning him that hath done this deed. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when ye are gathered together, and my spi∣rit▪ with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ: To deliver such to Satan for the destruction of the flesh; [yet with affections to the soul] That the Spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. This casting out must have a spiritual carriage, and be upon spiritual accounts. Thus all the busi∣nesse that belongs to the Lords day, is and ought to be spiritual. 3. The ends for which the Lords day was appointed, are also spiritual. Whe∣ther we consider The end primary, viz. The glory of God, or The end secondary, viz. The good of man. And these are to be our spiritual aims in Sabbath-times, that the Lords graci∣ous ends and ours may suite. 1. Sabbaths are seasons set apart for the exalting the glory of God, Both in his spiritual being And in his spiritual working. That the glorious being of God blessed for ever might the better be set out, the Sabbath was set up. Although there is no day wherein we can add any glory to God: yet on this day does God o∣pen
much of his glory to us.Apud Per∣sas persona regis sub specie Ma∣jesta tis soc∣u litur, &c. Justin. lib. 1. Historians report, that it was a great part of the pomp of the Persian Kings, that they were seldom seen: but upon some very high dayes they use to shew themselves to their people in their most Princely at∣tire, when they were so much the more admired and adored. The Sabbath is that high and holy day, whereon God so shewes himself to his servants in his garments of glory, that they are made much to admire and adore him, who at other seasons is more conceal'd. Our Saviour after his resurrection and be∣gun glorification, still took this day to discover himself unto his Disciples, Joh. 20.19.20. Upon this first day of the week, when they were assembled, he shewed them His hands, and His side. Then were they glad. Thus upon the Sabbath the Lord shewes to his servants Both his hands And his side. His hands,] That is, the great things he hath wrought in them and for them, acts of his glorious Attributes. His side,] That is, the good thoughts he hath further towards them, intend∣ments
of eternal good will. All which makes for the manifestation of Gods great glory. And although we can ne∣ver mention that glory which God did nor before possesse: yet we may mani∣fest that glory of God which our souls did not before perceive. We never see the Sun of Gods glory to shine so bright, as upon this blessed day. It be∣ing the very end why this day was bles∣sed, that thereon the brightnesse of Gods glory might be the better seen. 2. The Sabbath is set up to promote mans good, In his spiritual part, and In his spiritual estate. To wit, his soul in the concerments of grace, thar he may be cast into a spiri∣tual mould, and become a spiritual man. The appointments of Sabbath-time is to set and keep souls in a spiritual frame, Both by the first infusions of grace, And by the further additions of grace. Mans heart is hardly put into a spiritual temper: and as hardly kept in a spiritul order. It would never rise from cor∣ruption or soon fall into confusion were it not for Sabbath-assistances. Should we have onely week-time, and be all
for worldly things, and have no time of Sabbath for soul-concernments, into what an ill case would our souls soon sink? As Abraham accounted all his earthly comforts nothing while he went childlesse, sonlesse: so should we esteem all our worldly enjoyments nothing, if we went Sabbathlesse. Indeed did we go Sabbathlesse, we should be in dan∣ger to go Saviourlesse, Christlesse, heavenlesse, to lose God and all that is spiritually good. But that we may not lose, but gain God and all spiritual good, this day is drawn out from the common lump of time, and set apart to advance, as Gods spiritual praise: so mans spiritual profit. Thus the ends of the Lords day are spiritual. 4. The opposites are spiritual against the day, As Satan, and Seducing men. 1. Satan against the Sabbath-day, as he is a spiritual, he is a spiteful foe: he knowes if he can make this fall, other things will fly. As the Assyrian General said to his forces, Fight neither against great, nor small, but against the King of Israel: So sayes Satan to all his instru∣ments,
Contend neither with great nor small, but with the day of the Sabbath, down with it, down with it. Satan a∣gainst the Sabbath seeks, Either to beat it out from men, Or to beat men off from it. Here may I make a mournful mention of a good woman, who by reason of her soul safflicted condition, I have had with her the occasion of many a sad conference; and though her usuall estate was full of extreame strange as∣saults, yet I have frequently observed, and the same her self hath oft freely confessed, that still as the Lords day grew nearer▪ her temptation grew stronger. Never such sad bouts, and sore buffets as upon some Saturday-nights. Whereby she hath been ordi∣narily unfitted for the following Sab∣bath, and oft times violently hindred, especially from the publick Ordinances for divers Lords dayes together, unto her after great grief. Wherein I cannot but conclude the wiles and subtil works of Satan, as the Sabbaths great enemy. Yea, Satans design is, Either that men may not at all mind it, Or that they may not spiritually spend
Either to draw them from the day in its duties, Or to dull them in the duties of the day. A zealous sanctification of the Sab∣bath Satan to his utmost power op∣poses. He cannot abide the spirit of burning should be upon us in the busi∣nesse of Gods blessed day. As the holy Spirit puts us into the fire, the unclean spirit oft casts us into the water; so that our hearts heavenly kindled, are com∣monly cooled. The Divels, Ephes. 6.12. are called [spiritual wickednesses,] or the spirituals of wickednesse, as tis in the Greek. As they are wicked Spirits, So they are the spirits of wicked∣nesse. And as they are so spiritually bad: so they cannot abide what is spiritually good. As spiritual sinning against God they most seek to provoke: so spiri∣tuall serving of God they most seek to prevent. The divel can be content men should forbear bodily acts of filthinesse, if they will but pursue spiritual sinful∣nesse: so can he be content men should perform outward acts of Religion, if they
will but cease from spiritual service; they may be at all th Ordinances of God upon the Lords day, so they be not spiritual in any; not misse a Sabbath, so they passe not any spiritually. 3. Seducing persons are Sabbath-opposers. These are called [spirits] 1 Tim. 4.1. Because there be spirits that act them, And becas they act like spirits. They be men whom spirits act, viz. the spirit which i of the world, the spi∣rit of the Divel, the spirit of pride and falsehood, e spirit of error and Antichrist, &c. They be men who act as spirits with subtilty, sedulity, agility, restlesse and un∣wearied, creeping up and down, com∣passing places to and fro, abusing Scrip∣ture to propagate error, &c. These op∣pose Gods precious Sabbath, seeking Either directly to overturn it, Or remotely to undermine it. Directly,] By Atheistical arguing against all Gods holy times and things, professedly and profanely despising of, and disputing against, as the doctrine of Sanctification, so the day which God hath sanctified.
Remotely,] By setting against such as are Sabbath supports, viz. Against Ordinances used in publick, And against instruments of publick use. Ordinances they clamour down, espe∣cially some, as singing of Psalmes, ad∣ministring of Sacraments, &c. endea∣vouring (if possible) to pull away one Ordinance after another, till they leave the day destitute of all. As Rachel weepig for her children. Hence there is such a sad ceasing of several Ordinances in some Congregations, that the Lords day may speak like Jacob Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and will ye take Benjamin away also? all tis is against me, Gen. 43. Instruments the thrust sore at, that are for Sabbath-Use: Ministers by their law must be laid in the dust. Their en∣deavours are to deal worse with the Servants of Christ, then Hanun with the servants of David, 2 Sam. 10.4. He shaved off the one half of their Beards, and cut off their Garments in the middle, &c. But these seek to shave, and cut off all, both countenance, and maintenance, and to leave Ministers under poverty, and perpetual reproach. And are not
these Enemies to Sabbaths, and publick Assemblies? And are all these [Sab∣bath-ward] spiritual? The Ordainer of it spiritual. The Ordinances in it spiritual. The ends for it spiritul. The opposites against it spiritual. And shall not we be spiritual, so as that we may be in the spirit on the Lords day? Thus are the antecedent arguments, arguments from things subsequent: let us see, viz. what desirable effects will follow upon spiritual spending of the Lords day. Hereby we shall raise Our souls advantage, The Sabbaths excellency, The Lords acceptance, and The Lands concernments. 1. To be spirituall in the Sabbath, will be exceedingly for our souls advan∣tage. It will be operative for our present good on earth, and It will be preparative for our future good in heaven. This will work us much spiritual good on earth. For hereby Grace shall be encreas'd into Com∣forts, and Comforts shall be encreas'd through Grace.
1. Hereby comes a comfortable en∣crease of Graces: for if we be spiritual upon the Lords Day in duties, Then Grace is acting in Us, and We are then acting in Grace. The which actings, makes for the aug∣mentings of it. Grace it acts in Us.] When we are spiritual on the Sabbath, then grace is not in the Spark, but in the Flame, and so rises and runs on. Grace is then not barely in the root, but in the branch; so that it springs and spreads out. We act in Grace.] This addes to its further degrees. The way to enjoy that Grace we have not, is to imploy that Grace we have. While we are spiritu∣ally spending the Sabbath, we are in the Imployments, and so in the Improve∣ments of grace. Grace is greatned in us, and we do great things through Grace. Elisha when he had not onely the Mantle, but the Spirit of his Lord Elijah, he went and wrought wonderful works. When upon the Sabbath we have not barely the Mantle, viz. the Ordinance of Christ, but also the Spirit of Christ; yea, wrapp'd in the Spirit as a Mantle, then are we meet to leap
Mountains, and look Devils in the fac: To Triumph in the Lord, and tread Death in the dust, 1 Cor. 15.54. 2. Hereby comes in a gracious en∣crease of Comforts. Comforts spiritual are springing, While the Lords Day is spiritually spending. Being in the Spirit which is the Com∣forter, we cannot but be in the Com∣forts of the Spirit. 'Tis a true Rule. That most cheeres the heart, which best clears the estate. But spiritually to spend the Lords Day, it clears a Christians good estate God∣ward. An external observing of the Sabbah does distinguish us fom Pa∣gans; But a spiritual spending the Sab∣bath does difference us from Hypo∣crites. An Hypocrite in the Sabbaths outward observation may seem very precise, Luk. 13.14, 15. But he never rises to be spiritual in the Sabbaths of God, and service of God. A spiritual-spent Sabbath is a sure sign of a sincere heart, and saving estate. This therefore may well be a cause of the Incomes of Comfort. Would we have the profit, peace, and comfort of the Lords Day,
let us be spiritual then in our Duty. They who spend the Sabbath spiritlesse; they passe the Sabbath profitlesse, comfort∣lesse. The more we have of the Spirit on the Sabbath, the more we shall have of profit by the Sabbath, and comfort in the Sabbath. This will secure us from the worst of Judgments; And the best of Mercies this will as∣sure us of. The worst of Judgments, to wit, such as are spiritual, hereby we escape; and the best of Mercies, that is, such as are spiritual, through this we partake. Divers that come out on the Sabbath, and do the outward service, yet they fall short of spiritual Mercies; and they fall under spiritual Miseries, because they rise not to spiritual Duties. By being spiritual in the service of the Sab∣bath, O the sweet Soul-advantage that is unto the Saints of God! Yea, this it fits us for all spiritual good in Heaven, puts into us Heart-capacities for Hea∣ven-felicities. In Heaven all is spiri∣tual, enjoyments spiritual, imployments spiritual, company, comforts spiritual. To be spiritual in the holy Sabbath,
As it best declares the Heavenly estate, So it best prepares for the state of Heaven. That Sabbath which Saints shall for ever have with God, will all be spiri∣tual. That this Sabbath may be as a resemblance of that, and an Introducti∣on to that, we ought to be spiritual. 2. To be spiritual, will much advance the Sabbaths excellency: O how much is the Beauty and Glory of Gods-Day gone! the honour and lustre of the Lords-Day lost! Undoubtedly our Duty is, as together To condole the Dignity of it down: So to endeavour to raise up the Dig∣nity. 'Tis matter of bitter sorrow to see the Sabbath so Eclipsed. One writes of the Barbarians in the East-Indies, that seeing the Sun Eclipsed in the year 1600. they fasted, wept and cry'd all the day long, O we miserable people! the Dragon hath devour'd the Sun; alas, alas, we have lost the Sun, &c. O how much may we la∣ment in England to see the Brightnesse of Gods blessed Day dimm'd, the light and life of the Lords Day lost. How
hath the Devil with his doctrines, and the doctrines of Devils almost devoured the Sabbath! We have the Body of the Day, but the soul of the Day, the Spirit of the Day is gone, with the greatest part even of professing Christians, who though they retain the Truth, they have let go the life of Religion, and may well weep over dead Dayes and Duties. To recover amongst us true Sabbath-life, 'tis requisite, That God enliven the Day to us, and That we towards God be lively in the Day. 1. We must labour with the Lord, who quickens the Dead, to enliven this Day. When the Ruler of the Syna∣gogues Daughter was dead, no sooner did our Saviour say, Damsl arise, but her spirit came into her again, and she arose straightway, Luk. 8.54, 55. Let but our Lord say over his Dead Sabbath, Day arise, and the Spirit will come into it again, and straightway all will be well. O what quickenings & kindlings, when the Spirit of life, and the Spirit of burning from above shall abide upon Sabbaths, the service and servants of God setting all on a fire! When Elijah & Elisha were
going together, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and a whilwind came which caught up Elijah, and he was carried into heaven, 2 King. 2.11. Thus upon the Sabbath, when Gods servants are together, and there appear Instru∣ments and Ordinances all on a fire, Ministers on fire, and Sermons on fire, and the Spirit as a whirlewind comes, O what carryings then up of hearts into heaven! This is the Honour of the Day. 2. We must labour with our selves in all the Lords Dayes-Duties to be lively, and with the Spirit of the Lord to act high for God, and to be heart-warm at work. All the Sacrifices of the Sab∣bath must be Burnt-offerings: Every service fir'd with zeal. Indeed, for Christians while they are on the Week-dayes in worldly company to be cool'd, is common; [Peter never gat such a cold as at the High Priests fire among those servants, he warm'd himself till he lost his heat:] but for Christians when they are together on the Sabbath in holy Assemblies, to have hearts cold, and affectiont flat, as 'tis a dishonour to the Lord of the Sabbath; so 'tis a
dishonour to the Sabbath of the Lord. Christians should be like Angels who are called [Seraphims] for their fiery zeal in the service of God. And so to be zealous in Sabbath-Duty, will raise the Dignity of the Sabbath. This will admirably evidence, As Gods Interest in the Day, So the excellency of this Day of God. The more we have herein of Heat and fervour, life and vigour, the better we demonstrate the Day is Gods. As the true Mother in the Kings cry'd, The living son is mine: so sayes God, The living Sabbath is mine. As when Christ was raised from the Dead, then he was declared to be the Son of God, Rom. 1.4. So let the Sabbath rise from the dead to its due life and lustre, and then 'twill appear to be the Day of God. Yea, the more Vigorous and Spiritual we be in the Day, the more glorious and excellent will the day be. O what ad∣vantage is to the bodies of men, when after death they are rais'd again? Read 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. It is sowen in corrup∣tion, it is raised in incorruption; it is sowen in dishonour, it is raised in honour; it is sowen
in weaknesse, it is raised in power; it is sowen a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. Thus will it be with the Lords Day, when it shall be raised from the dead, as it will be more spiritual in its Nature; so it will be more transplen∣dent in its Lustre; greater in power, higher in honour, all redounding to the dignity of it. This will bring the Sab∣bath as the Sun to break forth from un∣der those black clouds with which it is now darkened. 3. The Lords acceptance will be certain if we spiritually sanctifie the Sabbath. This with the Lord will be acceptable, because it is suitable, As to the precepts which God gives, So to God which gives the precepts. 1. The precept or command given of God requires a spiritual care in Sab∣bath-keeping. Remember the Sabbath-day to keep i holy;] This implies a re∣membrance of the Sabbath day to keep it spiritually, let the spirituality of the day be raised, and the sanctitie of the day will not sink, but be better seen. This will hold out the dayes-hidden holinesse, and meet Gods command that calls to keep it holy. And such
Sabbath-keeoing, is to God well-plea∣sing, Esay 56.4. It being that which complies with Gods prescribed Will, Esay 58.13. 2. God himself from whom such pre∣cepts proceed, is hereby resembled. God is a Spirit and a spiritual being, so that spiritual-spent Sabbaths, and spiritual-performed duties, do best suite a Spiri∣tual God, and so are accepted. A good God being spiritual, spiritual good is most acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2.5. To offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God Acceptable, because spiritual: With such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. That best likes God, Which is most like to God, To be spiritual on the Sabbath, the Lord likes it, and loves it; it is so plea∣sing to God, that he does highly prize it and praise it. As it is a thing for the praise of God, So it is a thing with God of praise. To be in the spirit of the Sabbath, and to be on the Sabbath in the spirit, As it will make for Gods praise from us, So it will prove our praise with God.
The Apostle declaring who are now to be accounted Jewes, and what is cir∣cumcision under the Gospel, sayes, Rom. 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision that is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God: So may we say, He is not a Sab∣bath-keeper, that keeps it onely out∣wardly: but he is a keeper of the Sab∣bath, that keeps it inwardly; and that is observation of the Lords day, that is in the heart and in the spirit, whose praise though it may be not of men, it will be of God. God at the great day will give him praise in the presence of men and Angels. Yea, present praise will God by his Spicit speak to such as spi∣ritually spend his holy day. And O how sweet will it be for God in a Sab∣bath to say to our souls, Well done, well prayed, well preached, well heard to day my dear servants. Now that which the Lord thus praiseth, we may be sure much pleaseth the Lord. Yea, to sanctifie the Sabbath in a spi∣ritual way, the Lord is so pleased with
it, that he takes pleasure in it: then the Lords day is the Lords delight. The Sabbath so kept on earth, causes joy in heaven. It is meet, sayes the Father in the fifteenth of Luke, to his friends about him. It is meet we should rejoyce, for this my son was dead and is alive; was lost, and is found. So sayes God, Blessed for ever, to all in blisse about him, Tis meet we should rejoyce, for this my Sabbath was dead, and is alive; the glory of it was lost and gone, but is now return∣ed again. 4. The Lands general concernments will through the Sabbaths spiritual ob∣servance be much promoted, Both in the Ecclesiastick, And in the Civil State. Let the spirit of the Lords day be well up in the Land, Then will Gods Ordinances remaine that are present, And God will remaine present with his Ordinances. 1. Gods Ordinances with us will abide. What makes God remove pre∣cious means from among a people, but their dulnesse in his Sabbaths and ser∣vice, their falling from their fervent
affections, their leaving their first love and life? as we see in the case of that languishing Church, Revel. 2.4, 5. I have somewhat, (sayes Christ) against thee, thou hast left thy first love: Remember from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, or I will come and remove the Candlestick out of his place. Let Christi∣ans be carried out with a spirit of love and life in the Sabbaths and service of the Lord, and though the Lord may lay some sad afflictions upon them, yet he will continue the means of Grace a∣mong them. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner, but thine eyes shall see thy teaches, And thine ears shal hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way walk in it, Esay 30.20. 2. God himself will also abide with his Ordinances. Let the Sabbath be so spiritually sanctified, Then as God will be with the Ordi∣nances his people use, So God will be with his people in use of Ordinances. Then may Ordinances say to Gods
Saints, and Saints may say to Ordinan∣ces, [Emmanuel, God with us:] God with us in service and suffering makes all sweet. That is a precious promise, Esay 43.1. When thou art in the water I will be with thee; and when thou art in the fire, I will be with thee. Water and fire both may referre to afflictions, be they various and violent, God will be with: Yea, in the waters of suffering, and in the fire of service God is with us. Or though we cannot say, God is with us when we are in the water, to wit, when we be cold or lukewarme in his work; Yet we may be sure God is with us, when we are in the fire, to wit, fervent and zealous in the works of his wor∣ship. Is God with us in the fire of heavy afflictions? And is not God with us in the fire of holy devotions? And let the Lord thus abroad in the Land, be with his service and servants, and with his servants in service, O what great and good things will follow! As the cleansing out of pollutions, And the closing up of divisions. Pollutions cleansed,] Were the holy
Spirit thus up in the Nation, the un∣clean spirit would be soon forced to passe out of the Land, Zach. 13.2. This would not onely keep informing Ordi∣nances that are, but reforming Ordinan∣ces that are not would be also brought in. In our English-house we might hope to have the Besome as well as the Candle, Luk. 15.8. As the Candle of good Doctrine, So the Besome of good Discipline. The Besome of Discipline to sweepe out dust, As well as the Candle of Doctrine to drive out darknesse. 'Tis lamentable to see how the Lepro∣sie hath taken our house, Levit. 14. And O what an infection hath broke out even in the new building. Infliction of due censures, would be a good means to remove the plague-stones out of the wall, and so to heal the house, and help its standing. Could we but encrease our Sabbath-zeal, sure Church-Keyes would not lie so rusty, yea, the civil sword would have a sharper edge. When God came down upon Sinai in thunder and lightning, fire and much
smoak, God commanded Moses to set bounds about the Mount, that the peo∣ple might not presumptuously break in: Thus were there for the Sabbath that fire of zeal that is fits, the Civil Power would set bounds that persons might not so profanely break out. Those in∣tolerable tolerations we now see, would soon cease. Those Anti-Con∣gregations that are now, Assembly against Assembly in the same place, at the same time; It is the cause of many sad evils. Hence is it that if there be any that will not afford their pre∣sence at the publick preaching of the Word: or if there be any that cannot abide the power of the Word publickly preached, there be those by, that will invite them from us, and abet them against us. Hence is it, that the com∣mon sort account Sabbath dayes, and duties but as indifferent things, matters they may use, or omit if they please. Hence is it, that the vilest of men have learned to vilifie and blaspheme the wayes which God hath blessed, to speak evil of the Instruments, and Ordinances God hath sanctified, and by which God is glorified, and which of God shall one
day be justified, &c. Did but the spirit of the Lords day rule in the Land, those that are opposite we should either re∣duce or restrain. Those grosse abuses and great prophanenesse that is grown amongst us, would be either redressed or suppressed. Divisions closed,] If Christians on the Sabbath were higher raised by a spirit of fervency, they would at other times be better ruled by a spirit of uni∣ty. Were there in men more of the spi∣rit of life upon the Lords day, there would be more among men of the spirit of love all the week long. Men are not spiritual, but carnal which is the cause divisions are common. There is a∣mong you envying and strife and divi∣sions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? For while one saith, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. To heal the Land of divisions will be, Both the beauty, and The safetie of it. Beauty,] Rents and divisions are to a Land as fits of convulsions to a child which draws the mouth awry, and pulls parts out of their place, and cau∣ses
all to be uncomely; cure the Con∣vulsions, and the beauty of the Babe returns. Safety,] Rents and divisions are to a Nation as cracks and clifts in a build∣ing, which yet Art may stop, and the house may be strong, and the dwellings therein may be safe and sweet. Now that which will most power∣fully repair our breaches is the Spirit of the Lord, which is a Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Tim. 1.7. As it is a spirit of love it unites af∣fections, and As it is the spirit of a sound mind it unites opinions. And so brings all into one: Nothing can so cause union of spirits, as the spi∣rit of union. Were we more carried out by a spirit of power, we should be more carried on with a spirit of peace. This spirit would be in us out of Sabbath-service, were we in the spirit upon the service of the Sabbath; yea, O the abun∣dant benefits that would abide our Na∣tion upon this spiritual being, and being in the Spirit! Then would the works of the Divel be dissolved, the darknesse of ignorance dispelled, Errors outed,
blasphemies banished, the Gospel che∣rished, truth established, iniquity would be lesse, & the love of many would wax warme, formalities would fall, and the power of Godlinesse rise: Ministers would be vigorous, and Magistrates va∣lorous, and Christians in Gods cause Couragious, Inferiours well governed, and Families well ordered, so that Old England would become New, and we should find New England in Old: O happy day, O let me beseech all that my weak words may reach, for our souls sakes, for the Sabbaths sake, for the Lords sake, and the Lands sake let us be spiritual; spiritual in Sabbath-service. O let us be like St. John in the text upon the Lords day in the Spi∣rit. I was in the Spirit on the Lods day. Now that the Lords day may be thus spiritually spent, there be duties of three sorts to be observed, Anteceden t Concomitant, Consequent. Antecedent duties.] Before the Sabbath comes Christians that would well keep the day, are required to be,
Both valiant in resisting temptations against it, And diligent in making peparations for it. Temptations that may turn soul aside from this observing the Sabbath, may proceed From some more remote, or From some more immediate. There be some remote that may sug∣gest what may draw off from the Lords day, and its spiritual duties. There be evil spirits now abroad whose bent is, to beat down the day of God, and to beat off from the soul-benefitting duties thereof. As the spirit of Atheisme, And the spirit of Sectarisme; The spirit of prophanenesse, and The spirit of separation. The former fight against the Sabbath day, and its due observers in open field, by professed battels. The latter labour to cut off the Lords day, and all its lovers, by secret and subtill Stratagems. Men that se∣parate from our settled Congregations, and run wilde in their opinions. Grant some of them meet on Sabbath-dayes
in their religious duties: yet them∣selves say, they do it not out of obedi∣ence to any divine Command, or upon the acknowledgement of any Gospel-Canon, binding the conscience more to this then to other dayes. As for many, they pretend to have things so immediate from God, that they are utterly against the use of any holy means or times. As Ehud told Eglon he had a message from God, and in the mean while thrust him through the belly with a Dagger, Judg. 3. Some they say, they have a message from God, and that they alone have the mind of Christ, & in the mean time they strike through Gods holy day, and stab into the very heart of Christian Religion. Dear Christians, do not hearken to any of these, but stoutly withstand them, as being strongly resolved for the Lords day, and the lively duties thereof. 2. Some immediate that may seek to hinder the holy observation of the Sabbath. As sinful relations,] Deut. 13.6, 7. If thy brother, the son of thy Mo∣ther, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosome, &c. shall intice thee secretly, saying, Let us seek another
God [let us set our selves Sabbath-free] thou shalt not consent to him nor hearken to him, thou shalt not conceal him, &c. Yea, perhaps ancient inti∣mate acquaintance, such of whom thou mayest say, as David, Psal. 55.14. We took sweet counsel together, and walk∣ed unto the house of God in company, spent many a sweet Sabbath together, travelled together many a mile to hear the good Word of God, went home with hearts warmed full of comfortable con∣ference by the way, &c. Now course and counsel is quite contrary, all to carry off from Ordinances, and to dis∣courage care about the Lods day and duties. All such must be stifly with∣stood, and you strongly resolved, not to lose the Lords-day priviledge. When Ahab sought to perswade Na∣boths vineyard from him, 1 King. 21. Naboth answers Ahab, saying, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give away the inheritance of my fathers unto thee: Thus if you meet any man that would be∣reave you of your Sabbath-right: say, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give away the sacred time of God my Father. If Divel or World, profit or
pleasure seek to pull aside: say, The Lord forbid that I should so give away the day of my dear Redeemer, &c. Thus must you with courage crush temptations. 2. Care must be to make for the day due preparations: In order to the Sab∣bath day a double preparation is due, More general and remote, More special and immediate. Matters must be so ordered every day as to prepare for this day. As our whole life should be a preparing for death: so the whole week should be a preparing for the Sabbath. But as this precious day does more approach: so preparative work must more increase. For that more solemn preparation when the Sabbath day draws nigh, ob∣serve, Wherefore it is required, and Wherein it is performed. Things that do require, and that may encourage Christians to a right prepa∣ration for the Sabbath day are, The necessities of it, The equities for it, and The commodities by it. 1 Things necessary that for this day
we do prepare are, Because This preparation is a duty of the Lords commanding, And the Sabbath is the day of the Lords comming. 1. Hath not the Lord commanded every man to prepare for the Sabbath, before it comes? Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. Remembring pro∣perly is of things absent, not present. And words of Remembrance or know∣ledge do import both affection and action. To remember the Sabbath,] 'Tis aforehand to mind and manage matters that concern the Sabbaths sanctification; or that when it comes, it may be holily kept. Yea, for every Duty of the Lords day must be a due preparance. Yea, take up any holy task at any other time, and for it we ought to prepare. Before we pray we must prepare for prayer; and before we hear, prepare for hearing. Prepare for a Sermon, and prepare for a Sacrament. Now if God would have us prepare for single Duties, when they lye more asunder, sure we should prepare for the Sabbath when such duties are laid more together, or as Jacob and Esau,
one hold the heel of the other. Yea this Day, when we are not onely to be in the Duty, but in the Spirit, in the prompt, and powerful, and precise trans∣action of every service, we had need to prepare. 2. Doth not the Lord upon this Day come in comfortable visits to the soules of his Saints, and must not they prepare for his presence? When Christ was to come in the flesh preparation was made: And must not we make preparation when Christ is to come in the Spirit? 'Twas the Opinion of some of the An∣cients,Lactant. lib. 7. ca. 1. Augu t. De Temp. Serm. 154. that Christs personal coming to Judgment will be on the Sabbath Day. Christs Spiritual coming in Mercy is to be sure on the Day of the Sabbath. We see when the Bridegroom was to come, Matth. 25. the Virgins (especially the wise) trimm'd their lamps, and prepared oyl in their vessels. The Sabbath 'tis the Day when our Bridegroom comes, how ought we to trim our Lamps, and get ready oyl in our vessels? When a Great Man is to come to our houses, how are all the rooms dress'd up? When a Great God is to come to our hearts, 'tis ne∣cessary we be well prepared.
2. 'Tis Equal and Meet for us to prepare upon the Sabbaths approach, as may appear, if we observe the practice of several: Some past, and Some present. In time past the people of the Jews their practice was to prepare for their Sab∣bath, Luk. 23.54. And that day was the preparation, for the Sabbath drew on. That day they call'd their [Sabbatulum] or their little Sabbath, on which they made ready against the great Day of their Sabbath came. Yea, the Jews in honor of their Sabbath, and that they might the more mind it, and be in the better pre∣parednesse for it, they use [as some Learned observe] to call the whole week a Sabbath;P. Mart. in Gen. 1. Tremel. in Syriac Pa∣raphr. Mat. 28.1. Theophyl. Matth. 28.1. The first day of the Sabbath, and the second day of the Sabbath, and so on. And thus much is clear according to the Greek in several Texts in the New Testament, Luk. 18.12. & 24.1. And is it not meet then for Christians, whose Sabbath exceeds that of the Jews, to prepare themselves thereunto? We are eased of the busi∣nesse of Sacrifices, have no Sheep and Oxen to prepare; we have the more
time to make ready hearts and soules for spiritual service. Secondly, The practice of severall present makes such Sabbath-preparation meet, as may appear, if we ponder Both the good actings of some, And the evil of others. For good actings in order to the Sab∣bath, Observe, Both the good that God doth in his People, And the good that others do for the People of God. 1. God puts into his people for their good, gracious Habits, Principles of holinesse, disposing them to all parts of his worship: yea, the Spirit of holiness to act up those principles, that so his peo∣ple may be ready pressed and prepared alway to every good work, much more for the Sabbath in the service thereof. 2. Others [as Ministers] they pre∣pare for the Sabbath-good of Gods people. 'Tis fit people should pre∣pare to hear, as they prepare to preach. Gods faithful Ministers be∣fore the Sabbath do not onely prepare matter to speak, but they prepare their hearts to speak the matter. As Cocks
when they are about to Crow, they lift up themselves, and clap thair wings, they may be well awake: Thus good Ministers when they are to teach, they rouse up themselves, and strive to raise up their own hearts, and that Gods Word it may be as a fire in their bones. Bernard in a Sermon breaks out thus to the people:Bern. in festo omni∣um sanct. Serm. 1. To prepare you meat, my heart all this night hath been seething within me, and in my meditations I have been enflamed as with fire. Is it not meet that people be prepared when pre∣chers thus prepare for the people? And as for the evil actings of some, they are sad. There are such who on the Sab∣bath prepare for their worldly work in the week. Calvin complaines of some Christians in his time: Let us consider (sayes he) whether they which call them∣selves Christians do any otherwise regard the Sabath then thereon to attend their worldly affairs;Calvin. in Deut. 8. Serm. 34. they reserve to themselves this day as if they had no other to deliberate for the whole week to come, &c. Upon the Lords day men cut out their work, and cast their businesse, how to have this and that done upon this and that day. Shall men on the Sabbath prepare for
the week, and shall not we in the week prepare for the Sabbath? Is Mammon more to be minded then God? 3. The profit that will be to our souls by such Sabbath preparance, is precious. By such a serious preparation our hearts will be well fitted, Both with abilities to performe Sab∣bath-duties, And with capacities to receive Sab∣bath-mercies. 1. The duties of the Sabbath will the better and freer come off. We shall then with more dexterity, agility, faci∣lity transact the several parts of Gods service. A cause why we are so oft upon the Lords day lame in duty, drive heavy, because we did not aforehand oyl our wheeles, inure our selves. When David had put on Sauls Armour, his helmet, sword, and coat of Male, he assayed therein to go and fight with Go∣liah, but he is at a stand; saying, I cannot go in these, for I have not proved them, 1 Sam. 17.39. Thus a Christian when he is to go out in the service of the Sab∣bath, he is so straitened, stiffe and bound up, he knowes not how to go on in such duties, because he hath not proved
them, or prepared for them. We should aforehand put our selves into Sabbath-Armour, and see how we can go, how we can pray, preach, hear, &c. this would much help. 2. The mercies of the Sabbath will the larger and fuller come in. Accor∣ding to our preparations, are our after-participations. According to the number and measure of sacks the sons of Jacob prepared and carried with them out of Canaan, so were they filled with Corn when they came to Joseph in Egypt, Gen. 44.1. According as we prepare our hearts at home in the week-time, so our comfortable fillings be when we come before the Lord on his own day. He that would have from his field a large crop in harvest-time, must afore∣hand take pains in plowing and well preparing the ground. We do not aforehand take preparative pains, which is the reason we reap so little in Sab∣bath-time. 2. We are to consider wherein this preparation of our selves for the Sab∣bath consists. Now this work does com∣prize acts of two sorts, viz.
Reflect acts on our selves from others, and Direct acts towatds others beyond our selves. 1. Each man amongst us must act in∣ward upon himself, In self-examination, And self-humiliation. We must diligently examine our selves, What sin hath been before the Sab∣bath, And what need we have of the Sab∣bath. Sin before must be found out, lest we come to Sabbath-day-work, under week-day-guilt. If for week day sinnes God be against us when in Sabbath day service we seek to be with God, no wonder then if things work crosse. The Mariners in Jonah they rowed hard, but the Sea wrought and was tempestuous against them, and they could not get the ship to shoare till Jonah was found and flung out. Thus in the service of the Sabbath we may row hard, yet not get ship to shoare, heart into heaven by reason of some sin before committed that hath set God against us. Yea, we
must so set into our selves as to discern the necessities that we have of Sabbath-helps, Because of the prevalencies of sin, And the imbecillities of grace. We must also deeply humble our selves, and be low in self-abasements. Those herbs rise high in the summer-time, that in the winter shrink low into the ground: Those hearts that in the week-time are laid lowest, they rise highest upon the Sabbath day. Yea, there must be such soul-humblings for sin, as there may be sin-removings from the soul; else the day of Gods service comes, but we cannot serve God in the day, Joshua 24.19. Thus before the Sab∣bath we must bethink our selves, com∣mune with our heart, and make diligent search, with penitent sorrowes. 2. We must act onward towards o∣thers, to wit, God-ward, and World-ward. 1. Towards God, we must prepare for the day, By consideration of him, and By supplication to him. 1. God must be seriously thought
upon. Out of desires to the God of the Day, we should long for the Day of God, Psal. 42.1, 2. My soul thirsteth for the living God, O when shall I come and appear before God? As she said, Judg. 5. Why is the chariot so long in coming? and why tarrie the wheles of the chariot? So let each soul say, Why is the Sabbath so long in coming, &c? Amos 8. some say, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may sell corn? Let us say, O when will the Sabbath be come, that we may sell all, and buy that Pearl? When will the Sabbath be come? Not that we may sell, but onely that we may buy of God wine and milk without money, Esay 55.1. That we may buy of Christ eye-salve, white rayment, and tryed gold, Rev. 3.18. O when will the Day come that we may have communion with God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost! As that Martyr with a leap said when he was going to the stake, There is but one stile more, and I am at my Fathers House. A good man on Saturday-evening going to bed, leaps, saying, 'Tis but one Night more, and I shall be in the House of God upon his Holy Day: Meet God himself in the use of Holy Things.
2. God must be seriously sought unto. Prayer in this preparative work hath a Principal Task. Our Prayer should precede the Sabbath, In Sunder, If not Together. It hath been the manner of some, the day before the Sabbath, to meet and spend some time in seeking God by Prayer; and quickening one another. This fervently perform'd, would lay a great Ground of a GOOD DAY in∣deed to follow. Melancthon who lived with Luther in lamentable times, though his heart was ordinarily oppressed with fears, yet finding on a time a company of good Christians together praying: Now (sayes he) there be some good dayes coming. Say dayes be evil, yet how would this raise hopes in hearts that there be many good dayes coming, if the Lords Day, this good Day were by a holy prayer duly prepar'd for! Indeed for want of prayer-preparation Gods good Day may be as to us an evil Day. But upon due preparing Prayer we may safely say of an approaching Sab∣bath, Behold, even as to us there is a Good Day coming! O pray, pray,
pray before-hand, pray that Ordinances may be accompanied, Instruments en∣couraged; pray that there may be dis∣chargings of sins, enlarging of soules: Seek to set our hearts well upon the wheeles. Pray that we may be upon the wing in the work. Pray (sayes our Saviour) that your Flight be nt on the Sabbath day, Matth. 24. But thus pray that your Flight may be on the Sabbath day, to wit, from earth to Heaven, hold∣ing a holy converse with God. 2. Towards the world; what we are to do in this due preparing for the Lords Day, is Sequestration from the Matters of the World, And Reconciliation with Men, in the World. 1. We must make off from worldly Hinderances. As Mariners that intend a Voyage to Sea, they put the Ship off from the Land; so if we mean to serve God on the Sabbath, our hearts and minds must be put off from the world. Put off thy shoes, (sayes God to Moses) for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground, Exod. 3.5. We must put off earthly affections, for the Sabbath we
are to observe is a Holy Day. The af∣faires and cares of the world we must cast off, for 'tis not fit with them to come before the Lord in the Day of the Sabbath. Joh. 5.10. the Jewes said un∣to the man whom Christ had cured, It is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed, be∣cause it is the Sabbath day. Upon the day of the Sabbath it is not lawfull for to carry about us our worldly minds and matters. Therefore from these we must get free before. A bird (sayes a learned Writer) that she may fly,Musculus, loc. comm. praecept. 4. she flutters with her wings, and frees her self all she can from what may hinder her flight. And shall not we when we are to come to Gods service on the Sab∣bath, labour aforehand to deliver our selves from all earthly lets, who are in our spirits upon the Lords day to be lif∣ted much higher (sayes he) then birds can fly? It was Nehemiahs care when the Sabbath came on, to have the Gates of the City shut up, that not any might enter in with their burdens. It ought to be our course to shut up the Gates of our souls, when the Sabbath is at hand, that no burdensome cares may come in. That Christ might make us a Sabbath to
keep, in body he first rose from the earth: In heart we must rise from the earth before ever we can well keep the Sabbath Christ hath made. 2. We must make up earthly differ∣ences before the Lords day comes. While we are at a sinful distance with men, we shall hardly make any good Sabbath approach to God. Some they come to Sabbath-day-service, in week∣day-malice: So that on the Sabbath thougb their bodies be together, their hearts are asunder. When you come to∣gether in one place, (sayes the Apostle) I hear there be divisions among you. This is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1 Go. 11. Though on the Sabbath we meet in one publick place, yet if we have our pri∣vate grudges amongst us, and unrecon∣ciled dissensions betwixt us, this is not to keep the Lords Sabbath. If thou bring thy gift▪ to the Altar, and remember thy brother hath ought against thee, leave thy gift, and go first, and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy sacri∣fice, Matth. 5.23. If men unreconciled were unmeet for a legal sacrifice, how unmeet then are unreconciled Christians for a Gospel-Sabbath? It sets us off
from God, and gives way to the Divel to end a day in strife and wrath, but in an angry case to end a week is worse; then to let the Sun go down upon our wrath, gives place to the Divel against the next day, Ephes 4.27. There is no Sabbath-duty, but strife and wrath renders us unfit for; unfit to hear, un∣fit to pray. I will (sayes the Apostle) that men pray, lifting up pure hands without wrath, 1 Tim. 2.8. They that will be swist to hear, must be slow to wrath, Jam. 1.19. O then especially when the Lords day approaches, we should put away all bitternesse, wrath, and anger, and evil speaking, and kindly close one with another. Did we thus at the end of every week make up breaches, di∣stances would not grow so great, and Lords dayes would be better spent. Thus much for Antecedaneous duties to the day of the Sabbath. Let us now consider the dayes Concomitant duties, These referre, To the entrance, The progresse, and To the end of the day. 1. For the right entring of the Lords day, our duty is,
That our bodies be early up, and That our hearts be largely ope. Bodies up early.] A great ground of our Christian Sabbath is Christ his Re∣surrection upon this day. Now Christ he rose early in the morning. Before the rising of the Sun our Saviour was risen, Matth. 28.1. Mark 16.1. It is the judg∣ment of Orthodox Authors that our Sabbath day begins in the morning, when Christ rose Shall a Christ be quick to get out of his grave? and shall a Christian be slow to get out of his bed? Shall the Lord make haste to begin the day? [even soon after mid∣night say some] And shall we make no haste when the day is begun? When our Saviour saw Zaccheus in the Syco∣more-tree, he said to him, Make haste, and come down, fot this day I must abide at thy house; & O the haste that he then made to get down, &c. Luk. 19.5, 6. A Chri∣stian in the morning as he lies in his bed, should think as if the Lord looked down from heaven, saying, Make haste and get up; for this day I must abide in thine heart, and this day thou must meet me in mine house. When Abraham was to offer his son in sacrifice to God: He
rose early in the morning, and sadled his Asse, and took two of his servants, and Isaac his son, with wood cleaved for a burnt-offering, and went to the place of which the Lord had told him, Gen. 22.5, 6. And shall not we on the Sabbath morning be early up our selves, and our famlies, to go to the place the Lord hath ap∣pointed, and to offer our bodies and souls in service to God? The Israelites who lay in siege against Jericho, upon the seventh day they being to compasse the City seven times, the text sayes, And it came to passe on the seventh day, that they rose up early, about the dawning of the day, and they compassed the City after the same manner seven times, Joshua 6.15. Upon the Sabbath day we are to compasse the City of God seven times, to encompasse heaven with multiplied prayers: and thetefore we stould be ear∣ly up. To helps hereunto, let us take, to wit, A timely going to rest the night be∣fore, and An entire love to the work of the day that followes. 'Tis too common a fault even with some professing Christians, they clog
the night before the Sabbath with a multitude of worldly businesses, which brings them to sit up late. [A Sabbath let;] And a certain fault.] Hence in the morning when they should be up with God, they lie sleep-bound in their bed. And (alas!) we have too little love to the Lords-day-work, and so but little list to be at the work of the day. Were there love to it, we should long to be at it. Our minds would be upon it in the night, and we should catch the first hour of the day. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my spirit within me will I seek thee early, sayes the Prophet to God, Esay 26.9. Hearts open largely.] The door of the heart upon the entrance of the Sab∣bath must be set wide, shut to the world, but open to God. Ezek. 46.1. Thus saith the Lord God, The gate of the inner Court that looketh toward the East, though shut all the six working dayes, yet shall be opened as soon as the Sabbath comes: Thus the gate of the heart, that is, the inward Court, however kept shut all the week, yet as soon as the Lords day is come, it ought to be opened: to wit,
In delights at the day of the Lord, and In desires to the Lord of the day. Delights at the day should enlarge the heart: joy to see a Sabbath ap∣pear. A learned Author reports, that near the Pole where the nights endure divers Moneths, the inhabitants in the end of such a night, when the Sun begins to be seen, they deck themselves in their best apparel, and get up to the highest mountains, with joy, saying. Behold, the Sun, the Sun appear∣eth: The day, the day is come. Were we for several moneths kept without a Sabbath; how would our spirits spring at such a dayes appearance! Why should the commonnesse of the Suns shining, and the Sabbaths comming diminish the mercie? How should we every Lords-day-morning have our minds mounting, and say, Behold, the Sabbath of the Lord: It is come, it is come: Desires to the Lord our hearts should be enlarged in. The day being begun, we should begin to pour out our hearts and breath out our requests to God in prayer, that he would prosper us with his presence; O how well will it be, if God shall say, Go and prosper pray and
prosper, preach and prosper, hear this day and prosper: Fear not, for I am with thee, I will help thee, I will up∣hold thee, I will strehgthen thee. Thus in the morning we shall have encoura∣ging mercies, if we take care to perform our morning duties. Moses, Exod. 34.4. rose up early in the morning, and pre∣sented himself before God in the top of mount Sinai, with two tables of stone ready hewed in his hand, for the finger of God to write what he would: Thus a Christian on the Lords-day-morning should present him∣self before God upon the mount of me∣ditation and prayer with a heart ready for what God will that day write there∣upon; waxy and willing to take what∣ever impression God please to stamp therein: Not any of us are then to be content to have a heart stiffe and straight, hard and dead. The true Mo∣ther, 1 King. 3. was filled with trouble, when in the morning she found a dead child by her: 'Tis the trouble of a true Chri∣stian, when on a Sabbath day-morning he finds a dead heart in him, a heart that's hard, cold and closed up. His la∣bour is to begin with a heart lowly and lively, to feel those quickenings, and
kindlings of heart, as may encourage to the day, in all the duties thereof. 2. For the progresse and principal part of the Lords day our duties are considerable, In their varieties for matter, And in our properties for manner. For matter, the varieties of duties on the Lords day required, have been al∣ready declared. For manner, in performing the Lords day-duties, we in our properties must be Knowing, Willing, Unite, Fervent, Cheerfull, Watchfull. Knowing.] Knowledge it must be the Guide, Usher, Pilote and promp∣tor of practice. In mysteries of faith we may as a blind man [sometimes] not see our way: But in matters to obedi∣ence we must not go blind-fold, but the eye of understanding must see how we ought to go, and what we ought to do. So in Sabbath-work we must know how to manage the matter of God, and
actions of Godlinesse. We must know how to order and time our duties, that each act may go out in its place. Igno∣rant people in the publick Congregati∣on will be reading, when they should be praying; and praying, when they should be hearing, &c. Every work (sayes Solomon) is beautiful in its season. We must know how to season and proportion our duties: not greaten one to straiten another. Like one that Artificially drawes out the picture of a man, as he sets every part in its place, so he gives every part its due propor∣tion which is the beauty of the body: So it is the beauty of the whole body of Sabbath-day-duty, when every mem∣ber hath its measure, every act is in order, and the whole businesse of Reli∣gion hath its due proportion. We must also know whereat to aime, and how to eye God; whence to fetch strength, and how to go straight; wherein lies our wants, and where our supplies, &c. Willing.] Psal. 100.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power: [or a people of willingnesses in the plural;] To shew how exceeding willing-hearted the Lords people should
be in the day of the Lords power. The day wherein the Lord powerfully con∣verts men, and that day wherein men by a spirit of power are converted to the Lord: a day of Grace: a Gospel-day. Indeed the day of the Sabbath is a day of the Lords power, wherein all the Lords people should be most wil∣ling in the work of the Lord. In what we can do we are willing, and What we cannot do we are willing to. On the Lords day we would do more good, and more for God if we could. 'Tis a complaint that on the Sabbath a gracious soul sighs up into heaven: Lord, I would better break out, but my sins beset me: I would faster run on, but my own heart hampers me: Lord, I would otherwise serve thee, but my thoughs hinder me: fears and cares encompasse me: help, Lord. Unite.] Not onely the will, but the whole soul; y, the whole man, and the whole might is knit and bound up for God in every good work, body and soul must not lie severed, nor any heart in it self scattered. 'Twas a sad sin in
him, who upon the Sabbath-day gather∣ed up sticks that lay scattered on the ground, Num. 15.32. But it is our du∣ty on the day of the Sabbath to gather up together our hearts and thoughts that are scattered upon the earth, and wandring about in the world. We should say, as the Prophet, Blesse the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me. O my soul, and all that is within me, pray: O my soul and all that is within me hearken, &c. Ʋnite my heart, (sayes David) that I may fear thy Name. So let each soul say, Lord, unite my heart, that I may hear thy Word. Unite my heart, that I may hold fast thy truth, keep ho∣ly thy day. Fervent.] The zeal of Gods house, and zeal of the Lords day should even eat us up. Our hearts should burn with∣in us like fire. See what God by Moses sayes to the Jewes, Exod. 35.3. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your houses upon the Sabbath-day. But upon the day of the Sabbath our duty is to kindle a fire throughout all our hearts. The fire of zeal fits the service of God. On the Sabbath we should go up to God in a Chariot of this fire. The force of this
fire would carry us into the highest heaven from the lowest earth. And from earth to heaven is a good Sabbath-dayes-journey. Yea, such a burning fire of zeal on the Sabbath would bring heaven (as it were) down to the earth, God into our hearts. Exod. 3. we read how the presence of God appear∣ed in a burning Bush In burning hearts, in burning prayers appears much of the presence of God. 'Twas the praise of holy Hezekiah, he appointed burnt-of∣ferings for the Sabbath dayes, 2 Chron. 31.3. Burning sacrifices for blessed Sabbaths. Cheerfull.] Several of the Ancients much insist upon that care and course which becomes Christians in carrying on the Sabbath more strictly then the Jewes were wont.August. Enar. in Psal. 32. Tom. 8. part. Pag. 242. Aug. Tract. 3. in Joan. 1. Tom. 9. Ignat. E∣pist. ad Magnes. Pag. 57. Hilar. pro∣log. in Psal. oper. p. 335. Whereas they kept the Sabbath carnally in feasting, dan∣cing, and sensual delights. We Christi∣ans must Sabbatize or keep the Sabbath spiritually, in holy joyes, heavenly con∣tents, and religious delights; we must feast and dance too: but our feasting must be conversing with God: our meat and drink to do the will of God: Our dancing must be, the leaping of soul to
see the face of the Lord in the glasse of the Gospel. And though on the Lords day we be not drunk with wine wherein is excesse, yet we must be filled with the Spirit. The comforts of the Spirit are sweeter and better then all the wine in the world, and of this we should take our Lords day draughts, Cant. 5.3. On this day we should drink wine with our milk, eat our hony-comb with our hony, be in the Garden and gather Myrrhe with our Spice. This is the day that the Lord hath made, we will rejoyce▪ and be glad therein, Psal. 118.24. Psal. 42. sayes David, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? Him∣self gives the cause: His banishment, that he could not now go with the mul∣titude to the house of God, with the voyce of joy and praise among them that keep holy day. Such as can come to God's house upon his holy day, should not come with dejected souls, but with the voyce of joy and praise, triumphing in God, Watchful.] For our Sabbath day watch, observe What we are to watch against, and What we are to watch for.
1. Against the incursions of the Divel we are to watch all the Lords day long. That God, who will, Revel. 20. bind up Satan for a thousand years, can easily bind him for Sabbath-dayes. But yet even upon such dayes Satan is much let loose, Job. 1.6. There was a day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them. The Sons of God on that day came before God for good, but Satan had ill designs to hinder them that would honour God. VVhen Joshua the high Priest stood before the An∣gel of the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3.2. 'Twas the policy of Pompey, Vespasian, Titus and other enemies of the Jewes soreliest to assault the City Jerusalem on the Sab∣bath dayes, when they refused to defend themselves. Upon Sabbath dayes are the Divels most desperate designs. He is ever bad, but worst upon the best dayes. O watch, watch: A harming Divel on a helping day. 2. For the incommings of the Spirit of Christ, let us watch upon the Lords day. As when the Dove sate upon the
Ark, Noah put forth his hand & took her in: When the Spirit of the Lord begins to light upon our hearts, we should present∣ly hand it in. Embrace his first motions, open and give him entrance: other∣wise Ordinances will do us little good. Gen. 1. We find a dark lump of earth and water, but if the Spirit of the Lord had not moved upon the face of the water the world had never been made, nor living creatures brought forth: 'Tis the Spirit upon the Word that causes a new creation, living Chri∣stians. O then when we are under the Word, and in the midst of the waters of Ordinances, waite and watch for the good Spirit of God. Other birds drive away, but bid the Dove wel∣come. 3. At the end of the Lords day let us see to our duty: lest we begin in the Spitit, and end in the flesh. Nebuchad∣nezzars Image, the head and upper part was gold, but the feet and lower part Iron and Clay: In the morning and beginning of the Lords day our hearts have heavenly heat, and at evening, the end of the Sabbath, all is Iron and
Clay. Hearts hard and cold: 'tis ill when a Christians affections are as the grasse the Prophet speaks of, Psal. 90.6. In the morning it flourisheth, and in the evening it is cut down, dryed up and wither∣ed. Plutarch reports of a River that run∣neth sweet in the morning, but bitter in the evening. 'Tis the property of some sinful men if they have done somewhat on the Sabbath in the service of God, they are the more bold to sin even before the day is gone; like the Har∣lot, Prov. 7.14, 18. I have peace-offerings with me, this day I have payed my vowes, come let us take our fill of love till the morning. That very day she had been at sactifice, she presumes sordidly to sin. But 'tis the property of persons truly pious, whatever good they have done upon the Lords day, they labout to compleat the service, will not neg∣lect their evening-sacrifice, in private prayer, meditation, conference, care of their families, keeping up their kindled affections, least in the cool of the even∣ing, they lose the heat of the day. Or lest by neglect of the evening they lose any part of the day. Gods sin∣cere
servants they keep the Sabbath as Souldiers keep a City, they look with care to every Gate and part thereof. And such care becomes Christians Sab∣bath-ward, not to watch one Gate, and leave another open: to work one part, and be the other idle. To be quick and lively at first, and to stagger and grow sluggish at last. Yea, some experienced Christians can say, that upon their continued care throughout the Sabbath, though their hearts in the former part of the day have been down, dull and dead, yet to∣wards the latter end the Lord hath come with large enlivenings of soul. As the poor Israelites weary in travel, and fainting for food, ready all day long to perish with hunger: At even there went forth a wind from the Lord that brught so many Quailes from the Sea, as came and covered the Camp. O the quickening comforts that God in great abundance hath brought in upon the evening of a Sabbath to the souls of his Saints, who before in the day were ready to sink with sadnesse and deadnesse. Of this day to some we may say as the Prophet
of another day, Zech. 14.6, 7. It shall come to passe in that day, that the light shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall come to passe that at evening-time it shall be light, and living waters shall go out. Christians should never be satisfied to end the Sabbath-day in the dark, and in a drought without some sweet refeshings from God. Lastly, for subsequent duties when the day is done and gone; they come forth upon a double case, In case it hath not been well with us, In case with us it hath been well. If we have been dull in our dutie, and met with little of mercy, then our en∣deavours should be To enquire the cause, and To lament the losse. 1. We should reflect to find out the cause of our heartlesse, and fruitlesse, passing Gods precious day; What way layd our work, what kept God and our souls asunder all the day long, When the Egyptians were pursuing the Israelites, God set a cloud betwixt them, that darkned the camp of the Egyptians
so that they and the camp of Israel came not near one another all the night, Exod. 14.20. What hath caused a dark cloud betwixt us and God, so that we have not come near one another all the day, Enquire this. 2. We must sadly bewaile the losse of a Sabbath. 'Twas the rxpression once of a great man, when a day was gone, and he had not done that good he was wont, he brake out to some about him: O my friends, I have lost a day: The losse of any day is matter of mourning; but to lose the Lords day, and the Lord in the day, may cause a loud cry. When Elisha was going with Elijah, and a Chariot of fire came and parted them asunder, carrying Ei∣jah to heaven, and leaving Elisha on the earth, he looked up and cryed, My Father, my Father, 2 King. 2. Hath God and thee O Christian, been parted asunder upon the Sabbath, and hath the Lord left thy heart upon the earth, and gone himself up into heaven: O think so upon this, as to cry, My Father, my Father. Repent for the losse of the Lords day, and lament after the Lord
that on his day thou hast lost. If on the Lords day we have been fired in duty, and filled with mercy, and found much of God both in mercy, and duty; In that case the things of us re∣quired are, To be thankfull, To be carefull, To be faithfull, To be fruitful. 1. For to be thankful all have much cause: Yet some have more cause to be thankful. For the space of the Sabbath, and the use of Ordinances, all ought to be thankful to God. Had not our good God prevented evil designs we had had no Sabbaths. And had not God preserved us a Sabbath, we had been like the places of Papists and Pagans. Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a Sahhath, we had been as Sodome, and had been like unto Gomorrah, Rom. 9.29. The Lord hath shewed himself loath to leave us, yea, expressed his love to our Land in the lengthened liberties of Sabbaths. The Sabbath in the first ap∣pointment was a pledge of large love:
but in the perpetuall preserving the Sabbath, the pledge of Gods love is larger. He is worthy (say the Jewes of the Centurion to Christ) for whom thou should do this; for he hath loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue, Luk. 7.5. The Lord is worthy of this praise for he hath loved our Nation, and kept us a Sabbath. The Prophet reproves the sin of some, who say not in their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God that giveth both the former and the latter rain in his season, and reserveth the ap∣pointed weeks of the harvest, Jer. 5.24. O the sin of such who say not in their hearts, Let us fear, love, laud the Lord who reserveth to us the appointed dayes of the Sabbath, which is a greater mercy then to reserve for us the appointed weeks of the harvest. But how much more thankfull ought some of us to be to our good God, who giveth us not onely the space, but the grace of the Sabbath; not onely the use, but the juyce of Ordinances? when Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, are to several, but saplesse things. When the the Lord giveth us with his holy Sab∣bath,
his holy Spirit. Nehem. 9.14, 20. Thou, O Lord, commandedst thy people pre∣cepts, and statutes by the hand of Moses thy servant, and madest known unto them thy holy Sabbath: And thou gavest them also thy good Spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not Manna from their mouths, but gavest them water for their thirst. What cause had they? Such cause have we to be thankfull, to whom the Lord with a Sabbath of mercy, gives the mer∣cies of the Sabbath. A comfortable day, and the comforts of the day. O let the Lord have the high and heated praises of our hearts in heavenly Hallelu∣jahs. 2. Let us be very careful to keep off from sin and Satan. Satan after the best spent Sabbaths hath oft the worst assaults. 'Twas the expression of an experienced precious man: I look for the Divel every munday-morning; I am sure then he will come to rob my soul of Sabbath-good, if possible. I read of a great Captain, who being very sad the day after a mighty victory, one enquired the cause, who answered, Yesterday my heart was too much lift∣ed
up, I had need lye low to day. Have any of our hearts been raised and ra∣vished, enlivened and enlarged upon the Lords day; we had need look to it on the following day, and keep our selves lowly, lest that mind which hath been one day heavenly, be the next day haughty. Pride is a worme apt to breed within the best wood. Be∣ware, beware. 3. Let us be faithful to keep up the good we have got: we are apt to catch cold after the greatest heats: And after some close attendance in Gods service to grow more loose and remisse in du∣ty. Let us look to our selves we do not lose the things we have wrought, we do not break the bounds we have set, or slack the holy bonds wherewith we have been begirt. To be unloosened on the Sabbath from week-day bonds is comfortable: but in the week-time to unloose the Lords-day bonds is abomi∣nable. 4. Let us be fruitful to bring forth more good for God, both in our gene∣ral and particular callings. That our week day carriage may be the springing
up of Sabbath-day seed: yea, our whole lives must be a walking in Sabbath-day strength.Tertul. C. Jud. 4. Origen. in Numb. Hom. 23. cont. Cels. lib. 8. Pag. 522. &c. Chrysot. in Matth. tract. 29. Aug. de ci∣vit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30. Idem. Epist. 119. cap. 12. Et de cons. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 77. And thus ought we to keep a holy Sabbath throughout the whole course of our dayes. Divers of the An∣cients dwell much upon this, perswa∣ding Christians so to practise piety, and pursue sanctity, as to perpetuate a Sab∣bath. As upon the Lords day we should be full of spirits, so after the Lords day we should be spiritual still. As on that day we should live in the Spirit, so after∣ward we should walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. If all the week we be carnal, how can it appear we are spiritual on the Sab∣bath? A good Author speaks well in this case, Have we well served the Lord upon his day?Bucer. in Matth. 12.11. let our manners shew it, let our works prove it, let the holinesse of our lives decleare it. Who will believe that he hath been present in publick Assemblies, and with a sincere heart hath heard Gods ho∣ly Word, who passes the following part of his life more loosely, vainly, carnally, coveteously, &c? 'Tis this will evidence that on the Sabbath we have been with
Jesus, when afterward our faces and gra∣ces shine, our lips and lives hold out the praises of Christ, and the power of his Gospel. When the Lords day comes we should be as lively, firy, and full, as if we were then to begin and end Gods work. We should be found in such a frme every Lords day, as if that were the first Sabbath that ever we spent, and as if it were the last day that we should live on this earth; or as if the weight of all our work lay upon that single Sabbath for which we were sent into the World: or as if our eternal be∣ing were to be determined hereby. And yet after the day is over we must endeavour still to be doing, as if no work were done. For as we must be all abundant and fervent on the Sabbath day in the service of God, as if after were no holy duties: So we must be as full and forward to all following duties, as if there had been no Sabbath before. Before the Sabbath day, and after we must do all the good we can even as if there were no Christ to be re∣lyed upon, and yet our relyance, both in life and death, must be on our dear
Lorld, as if there never had been the least good done. We must be precise for the Sabbath-day, and duty. And yet, yet, Duty shall not be our Redeemer, Nor the Sabbath our Saviour. Whether Sabbath-day or week-day we will do as much good as ever we are able: but begin and end all in Christ. The end with us, shall be the glory of the Lord; And with the Lord in glory, shall be our end. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table directing to some Principal things in this Treatise. A ADam in Innocency to keep the Sab∣bath. pag. 7, 175 Advocate how Christ is, and for whom. p. 402 Angels they have a twofold knowledge, p. 216 Angels all Ministring spirits. pag. 227 Angels helpers in all holy Duties. p. 228 Angels delight in Sabbath-service, p. 217. Atheists of two sorts. p. 32
Antichrists ruine how wrought. p. 198 Augustine's answer to a Manichees p. 328 Assent to Divine truths what. p. 121 B BAbylons fall two-fold. p. 203 Baptisme of Infants why many against it. p. 401 Baptisme of Infants its great use. pag. 340 Book of Psalmes how excellnt. p. 129 Blood of Christ what it purchased. p. 92 Blessing of God how desireable. p. 197 Breaches abundance how they come. p. 339 C CHange of the Sabbath upon a double cause. p. 34 Christian liberty wherein it consists. p. 36, 37 Charitable Duties how fit for the Sabbath. p. 66, 132 Church-Discipline exercised on the Lords Day. p. 131
Censures in the Church how to be inflicted. p. 407 Chearfulnesse in Gods service required. p. 462 Collections for the poor how to be managed. p. 340 Conscience good what it is. p. 253 Conscience troubled how sad. p. 222 Contentions of Brethren how bad. p. 328 Communion with Christ how sweet. pag. 102 Christ spiritual in all his Estates. p. 390 Covetousnesse the root of evil. p. 50 D DAyes all how they are the Lords. p. 4. Difference of Dayes how under the Gospel. p. 38 Doctrine of the Lords Day strongly to be held. p. 122 Day of Judgment drawes near. p. 116 Delights in the Lords Day required. pa. 456 Desires after God discovered. p. 350 Discipline requisite in the Church. p. 429 Divel a bitter enemy to tht Sabbath. pag. 410
Divel large in knowledge. p. 321 Divels called spiritual wickednesses, why, p. 412 Divisions the evil of them. p. 431 Divisions how closed. p 432 E ENgland one of the ten horns. p. 241 England old how made new. p. 433 Enmities in man against God. p. 319 Errours against the Sabbath how sad. p 83 F FAthers of three sorts. p. 208 Faith beyond feeling. p. 335 Faith hath its Dimensions. p 289 Faith its various Ʋse. p. 387 Faith in the state, and in the Acts diffe∣renced. p 235 Faith the best beloed Grace. p. 248 Fervency in prayer how fit. p. 398 Forgetfulnesse of God how sinfull. pag. 87 Fourth Commandment most excellent. pa. 9
G GOd what he best liketh. p 424 Gospel whereunto it guideth. p. 122 Gospel vailed in the Law. p. 177 Gospel it excels the Law. p. 190 Government of Christ how ordered. p. 394 Grace in its actings most excellent. p. 416 Ground why to be till'd by Adam. p. 7 H HAnds given for a threefold work. p. 75 Hearts of Gods Saints like Vials. p 302 Heart is the best part in a Saint. p. 305 Heart of a wicked man as a bow. p. 321 Hearing Gods Word a Duty. p. 128 Hereticks not endure Scripture. p. 364 Honour to Christ due as to God. p. 305 Humble how necessary. p 325 Humility how wrought. p. 326 Hypocrite how far observing the Sabbath. p. 417 I IDlenesse on the Sabbath a great sin. pag. 52
Judgments of God upon Sabbath-breakers. p. 103 Jewish Sabbath ceased. p. 31 Judgment Day now approaching, p. 116 Jewes had divers Sabbaths, p. 176 Israel a more excellent Name then Jacob. p. 189 Isle Patmos where it was. p. 2 John the Apostle compared to the Eagle, p. 1. Intercession of Christ how performed. pa. 393 Judgments of God on Sabbath-breakers. p. 105 K KNowledge of God by his Judgments. p. 118 Knowledge necessary to practice. p 458 Knowledge, to sin against it sad. p. 144 L LAst dayes many Antichrists. p. 14 Law given by Christ, p. 141 Law and Gospel differing. p. 38 Libety under the Gospel what it is. p. 36 Light of Nature to what it leads. p. 122
Love the spring of all Gods Mercies. p. 470 Love the spring of all our obedience. p. 125 Lords Day how excellent a Name. p. 189 Lords Prayer how excellent. p. 190 Lords Supper how excellent. p. 191 Lord of the Sabbath why Christ so called. p. 24 Lord of Hosts why God so stiled. p. 112 M MAgistrates who honour them most. p. 208 Magistrate his duty on the Lords day, p. 134 Minister on the Lords Day his duty. p. 135 Masters of Families their duties thereon. p. 136 Ministers Office most excellent wherein. p. 184 Mission of the Holy Ghost when it was. p. 19 Meditation how excellent. p. 370 Man a compound creature. p. 257 Ministers work differing from others. p. 353
Ministers must preach though none profit. p. 229 Motions spiritual how discovered. p. 348 N NAzienzen's saying of Athanasius. p. 326 Necessary what works are for the Sabbath. p. 74 Necessary the Sabbath for all sorts of men. p. 144 O OBedience to God is a debt upon all, p. 141 Obedience double due to God. p. 148 Ordinances their great Ʋse. p. 369 Ordinances the best not above them. p. 147 Ordinances of God are all spirituall. pa. 395 Order in Gods service requisite. p. 459 P PAtience its necessary Ʋse. p. 335 Pleasures of sin, and sinful pleasures differ. p. 43
Places of publick Worship to be frequented. p. 63 Publick preaching above private reading. p. 64 Punished here some sinners are and not other so, why. p. 118 Psalmes of David fit to be sung. pag. 129 People of God more excellent then oher men. p. 190 Power given to the Apostles threefold. p. 18 Prayer the admirable force thereof. p. 204 Praising of God more excellent then prayer. p. 371 Preparation to the Sabbath opened. pag. 444 Presence of God how with his Ordinances. p. 358 R RAnting condemned. p. 341 Rainbow sign of peace. p. 321 Reading the Scriptures in publick necessary. p. 367 Reason cannot rule many men. p. 334 Redemption surpasses the work of Creation. p. 11 Robbery worse then theft. p. 88
Resurrection of Christ how excellent. p. 16 Remembrance of Good what it implyes. p. 438 Reliance must be on Christ alone. p. 476 Relapsers of three sorts. p. 146 Resting in Ordinances how bad. p. 369 Ruine of Rome drawes nigh. p. 241 S SAbbath how it ought to be continuall. p. 39 Sabbath the whole Day to be kept, p. 56, 71 Sabbath-breaking how great a sin. p. 86 Sabbath not sanctified is polluted. p. 95 Sacrifices dead suited Jewish Sabbaths. p. 374 Sacriledge how great a sin. p. 89 Sin worse then punishment. p. 109 Sin against Ordinances how great. p. 90 Singing of Psalmes a sweet Duty. p. 128 Soul of man how excellent. p. 154 Sacraments to be administred on the Sab∣bath day. p. 130 Segullah what it signifies. p. 26 Sacrament of the Supper how excellent. p. 191
Separation, the evils thereof. p. 337 Seducers why called spirits. p. 413 Seraphims, why Angels so called. p. 422 Soul of man hath a double Mansion. p 260 Spirie how variously taken. p. 257 Spirit of God moves freely. p. 329 T THankfulnesse for Sabbath liberties. p. 470 Tree of life more excelllent then the Tree of knowledge. p. 345 Trinity of persons their proper works. p. 20 U UNity among Christians, the good fruits thereof. p. 433 Ʋnity in Religion how obtained. p. 432 Ʋnthankfulnesse a great sin. p. 86 W VVAldenses whence their Rise. p. 120 Watchfulnesse in Gods servants needfull. p. 463 Withering branch and root how sad. p. 166
Week-day Lectures their good. p. 174 Wek-day plasures their danger. p 221 Works not to be done on the Sabbath, two sorts. p. 42 Works on the Sabbath to be done of two sorts. p. 51 Works Christ did, the same God did. p. 10 Willingnesse required in Gods service, pag. 459 Word preached better then Word read. pa. 64 Wrath unfits men for good Duties. p. 452. Z ZEal in Gods service good. p. 375 Zion deprived of Sabbaths, sad. pa. 152
Some Scriptures occasionally explained. Genesis. ch. ver. pag. 2. 3. 197 13. 8. 327 Exodus. ch. v. pag. 32. 19. 161 Leviticus. ch. ver. pag. 26. 33. 153 1 Sam. ch. v. pa. 28. 15. 363 Job. ch. ver. pag. 1. 6. 228 Proverbs. ch. ver. pag. 24. 27. 183 25. 11. 183 Psalm. 41. 1. 306 51. 12. 283 108 1. 306 Esay. ch. ver. pag. 43. 1. 413 Jeremiah. ch. ver. pag. 17. 27. 104 Lamenta. ch. ver. pag. 2. 6. 103 Amos. 4. 7. 111 Matthew. Ch. Ve. Pag. 5. 3. 266 12. 44 316 24. 20. 24 Mark. ch. ver. pag. 1. 23. 316 2. 28. 26 Luke. ch. v. pag. 2. 37. 73 5. 6. 237
15. 8. 267 John. ch. ver. pag. 20. 24. 17 Romans. ch. ver. pag. 8. 7. 319 8. 9. 262 8. 26. 382 9. 16. 230 12. 2. 258 Galatians. ch. ver. pag. 3. 9. 141 5. 25. 261 2 Timothy. ch. v. pag. 4. 2. 183 2 Thessalonians. ch. v. pag. 2. 8. 204 Hebrews. ch. ver. pag. 4. 12. 360 1 Peter. ch. v. pag. 2. 2. 64 Jam. ch. ver. pag. 4. 5. 316 1 John. ch. v. pag. 4. 1. 325 Revelations. ch. ver. pag. 4. 8. 265 5. 8. 302 12. 15. 381 14. 6. 203 21. 22. 147 22. 1. 290 FINIS.
