H3083 E464_7 99872836 162233
THE INSTRVMENTS OF A KING: OR, A SHORT DISCOVRSE OF The SVVORD. The SCEPTER. The CROWNE. Satis habet Rex ad poenam, Quod Deum expectet Ultorem. 'Tis punishment enough for th' King, That God will Him to judgment bring. LONDON. Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
The Author's Apology. I Am no Lawyer otherwise then what nature hath made me, so every man, as he is born the child of Reason, is a Lawyer, and a Logitian also who was the first kind of Lawyer: This discoursive faculty of Reason comes with us into the world accompanied with certaine generall notions and principles to distin∣guish Right from Wrong, and Falshood from Truth: But touching this following Discourse, because it relates something to Law, the Authour would not have adven∣tured to have exposed it to the world, if, be∣sides those common innate notions of Rea∣son, and some private Notes of his owne,
he had not inform'd & ascertain'd his judg∣ment by conference with some professed Lawyers, and those the Eminentest in the Land, touching the truth of what it Treats of; therefore he dares humbly aver that it containes nothing but what is consonant to the fundamentall and fixed Constitutions, to the knowne clear Lawes of this King∣dome. J. .
THE INSTRUMENTS OF A KING. IN a Successive hereditary King∣dome, as ENGLAND is known and acknowledged to be by all Parties now in opposition, There are 3 things which are inalienable from the Person of the KING: they are, 1. The Crowne. 2. The Scepter. 3. The Sword. The one, He is to carry on His Head, the other in His Hand, and the third at His Side; and they may be tear∣med all three the ensignes or peculiar instruments of a KING: by the first, He Reignes, by the second He makes Lawes, by the third He maintaines them: and the two first are but bables without the last.
1. Touching the Crowne or royall Diadem of Eng∣land, there is none, whether Presbyterian, Independent, Protestant, or others now in action, but confesse that it descends by a right hereditary Line, (though through divers Races, and some of them Conquerours) upon the Head of CHARLES the first now Regnant: 'tis His owne by inherent birthright and nature, by Gods law, and the Law of the Land, and these Parliament∣men at their first sitting did agnize subjection unto Him accordingly, and recognize Him for their Soveraigne liege Lord: Nay, the Roman Catholick denies not this, for though there were Bulls sent to dispense with the English Subjects for their allegiance to Queen Eliza∣beth, yet the Pope did this against Her as he took Her for a Heretique, not an Usurpresse, though he knew well enough that She had been declared Illegitimate by the Act of an English Parliament. This Imperiall Crowne of England is adorned and deck'd with many faire Flowers, which are called, royall Prerogatives; and they are of such a transcendent na∣ture, that they are unforfeitable, individuall, and un∣transferable to any other: The KING can only sum∣mon and dissolve Parliaments: The KING can onely Pardon (for when He is Crowned, He is sworn to rule in mercy as well as in justice:) The KING can onely Coyn Money, and enhance or decry the value of it: The power of electing Officers of State, of Justices of Peace, and Assise is in the KING; He can only grant soveraign Commissions: The KING can only wage War, and make Out-landish Leagues: The KING may make all the Courts of justice ambulatory with His Person, as they were used of old; 'tis true, the Court of Common Pleas must be sedentary in some certain place for such a time; but that expired, 'tis removeable at His pleasure:
The KING can only employ Ambassadours and Treat with forain States, &c. These, with other royal Preroga∣tives which I shall touch hereafter, are those rare and wholsome flowers wherewith the Crowne of England is embellished, nor can they stick any where else but in the Crowne, and all confesse the Crowne is as much the KING's, as any private man's Cap is his own. The second regall Instrument is the Scepter, which may be called an inseparable companion, or a necessary ap∣pendix to the Crowne; this invests the KING with the sole Authority of making Lawes, for before His confir∣mation all results and determinations of Parliament are but Bills or , they are but abortive things, and meer Embryos; nay, they have no life at all in them till the KING puts breath and vigour into them: and the antient custome was for the KING to touch them with His Scepter, then they are Lawes, and have a virtue in them to impose an obligation of universall obedience upon all sorts of people, It being an undeniable maxime, That nothing can be generally binding without the King's royall assent, nor doth the Law of England take notice of any thing without it: This being done, they are ever after stil'd the King's Lawes, and the Judges are said to deliver the King's judgments, which agrees with the holy Text, The King by judgment shall stablish the Land: nay, the Law presumes the King to be alwaies the sole Judge Paramount, and Lord chief Justice of England, for he whom He pleaseth to depute for His chiefest Ju∣stice, is but stil'd Lord chief Justice of the King's Bench, not Lord chief Justice of England, which title is peculiar to the KING Himself, and observable it is, that where∣as He grants Commissions and Parents to the Lord Chancellour (who is no other then Keeper of His Con∣science)
and to all other Judges, He names the Chief Ju∣stice of His own Bench by a short Writ only containing two or three lines: Now, though the King be liable to the Law, and is contented to be within their verge, be∣cause they are chiefly His owne productions, yet He is still their Protector, Moderator, and Soveraigne, which attributes are incommunicable to any other conjunctly or separately. Thus the KING with His Scepter, and by the mature advice of His two Houses of Parl. which are His highest Councel & Court, hath the sole power of making Laws; other Courts of judicature doe but expound them and distribute them by His appointment, they have but Juris dati dictionem or declarationem, and herein, I meane for the Exposition of the Lawes the twelve Judges are to be believed before the whole Kingdom besides. They are as the Areopagites in Athens, the chief Presidents in France and Spaine in an extraordinary Junta, as the Cape-Syn∣diques in the Rota's of Rome, and the Republique of Ve∣nice whose judgments in point of interpreting Lawes are incontroulable, and preferred before the opinion of the whole Senate whence they received their being; and who hath still power to repeal them, though not to ex∣pound them. In France they have a Law-maxime, Arrest donné en Robbe rouge est irrevocable, which is, a Scarlet Sentence is irrevocable, meaning when all the Judges are met in their Robes, and the Client against whom the Cause goes, may chafe and chomp upon the bit, and say what he will for the space of 24 howers a∣gainst his Judges, but if ever after he traduces them, he is punishable: It is no otherwise here where every igno∣rant peevish Client, every puny Barister, specially if he become a Member of the House will be ready to arraign and vie knowledge with all the reverend Judges in the
Land, whose judgement in points of Law shold be only tripodicall and sterling: so that he may be truly call'd a just King, and to rule according to Law, who rules ac∣cording to the opinion of his Judges; therfore, under fa∣vor, I do not see how his Majestie for his part could be call'd injust when he leavied the Ship-money, conside∣ing he had the judges for it. I now take the Sword in hand, which is the third Instru∣ment of a King, (and which this short discours chiefly points at) it is aswell as the two first, incommunicable and inalienable from his Person; nothing concernes his honor more both at home and abroad; the Crown and the Scepter are but unweildy and impotent naked indefen∣sible things without it. There's none so simple as to think there's meant hereby an ordinary single sword, such as ev'ry one carrieth by his side, or som imaginary thing or chymera of a sword; No, 'tis the polemical publique sword of the whole Kingdom, 'tis an aggregative com∣pound sword, and 'tis moulded of bell-metall; for 'tis made up of all the ammunition and armes small and great, of all the military strengths both by Land and Sea, of all the Forts, Castles and tenable places within and round a∣bout the whole Ile: The Kings of England have had this sword by vertue of their royall signory from all times, the Laws have girded it to their sides, they have employ∣ed it for repelling all forren force, for revenging all for∣ren wrongs or affronts, for quelling all intestine tu∣mults, and for protecting the weal of the whole body po∣litike at home: The peeple were never capable of this sword, the fundamentall constitutions of this Kingdom deny it them; 'tis all one to put the sword in a mad mans hand, as in the peeples; or for them to have a disposing
power in whose hands it shall be. Such was the case once of the French sword, in that notorious insurrection call'd to this day La Jaqueris de Beauvoisin, when the Pesants and Mechanics had a design to wrest it out of the Kings hand, and to depresse all the Peers & Gentry of the Kingdom; & the busines had gone very far, had not the Prelats stuck close to the Nobility; But afterwards poor hare-brain'd things they desire the King upon bended knees to take it againe; Such popular puffs have blowen often in Po∣land, Naples and other places, where while they sought and fought for liberty by retrenching the regall power, they fool'd themselfs into a slavery unawares, and found the rule right, that excess of freedom turns to thral∣dom, and ushers in all confusions. If one shold go back to the nonage of the world, when Governers and Rulers began first, one will find the peeple desir'd to live under Kings for their own advantage, that they might be re∣strain'd from wild exorbitant liberty, and kept in unity; Now unity is as requisit for the welbeing of all naturall things, as entity is for their being, and 'tis a receiv'd max∣im in policy, that nothing preserves Unity more exactly then Royall Government: besides 'tis known to be the noblest sort of sway; In so much that by the Law of Nations, if Subjects of equall degrees, and under differing Princes shold meet, the Subjects of a King shold take pre∣dency of those under any Republique, and those of a suc∣cessif Kingdom, of those that are under an Electif. But to take up the Sword again. I say that the Sword of public power & authoritie is fit only to hang at the Kings side, & so indeed shold the great Seal hang only at his gir∣dle, because 'tis the Key of the Kingdom: which makes me think of what I read of Charlemain, how he had the impe∣riall Seal emboss'd alwaies upon the pommell of his
sword, and his reason was, that he was ready to maintain whatsoever he signed, and sealed. The Civilians, who are not in all points so great friends to Monarchy as the Common Law of England is, say, there are six lura Regalia, six Regall Rights, viz. 1. Po∣testas Iudicatoria, 2. Potestas vitae & necis, 3. Arma∣menta, 4. Bona adespota, 5. Census, 6. Monetarum va∣lor:to wit, Power of Judicature, power of life and death, all kind of arming, masterlesse goods, Sessements, and the va∣lue of money. Among these Regalias, we find that Arming, which in effect is nought else but the Kings Sword, is among the chiefest; and 'tis as proper and peculiar to his person, as either Crown or Scepter. By these two he drawes a loose voluntary love and opinion onely from his Subjects, but by the Sword he drawes reverence and awe, which are the chiefest ingredients of allegiance, it being a maxime, That the best mixture of government is made of feare and love. With this sword he conferrs honor, he dubbs Knights, he creates magistrats, the Lord Deputy of Ire∣land, the Lord Mayor of London with all other Corpo∣rations have their swords from him, and when he en∣treth any place corporat, we know the first thing that is presented him is the Sword: With this Sword he shields and preserves all his peeple that ev'ry one may sit quietly under his own Vine, sleep securely in his own House, and enjoy sweetly the fruits of his labours. Nor doth the point of this sword reach only to ev'ry corner of his own dominions, but it extends beyond the seas to gard his Subjects from oppression, and denial of justice, as well as to vindicate the publike wrongs, make good the interests of his Crown, and to assist his con∣federates; This is the sword that Edward the third tied the
Flower deluces unto (which stick still unto it,) when ha∣ving sent to France to demand that Crown by maternall right, the Counsell there sent him word that the Crown of France was not tied to a dstaff, to which scoffing answer he replied that then he wold tie it to his sword, and he was as good as his word. Nor is this publike sword concredited or intrusted by the peeple in a fiduciary conditionall way to the King, but it is properly and peculiarly belonging unto him, as an inseparable concomitant, perpetuall Usher and attendant to his Crowne. The King, we know, u∣seth to maintain all garrisons upon his own charge, not the peeples; he fortifies upon his own charge, not the pee∣ples: And though I will not averr, that the King may im∣presse any of his Subjects, unlesse it be upon an actuall in∣vasion by Sea, or a sudden irruption into his Kingdom by Land, as the Scots have often don, yet at any time the King may raise Volunteers, and those who have received his money, the Law makes it felony, if they forsake his service. Thus we see there's nothing that conduceth more to the glory, and indeed the very essence of a King then the Sword, which is the Armes and military strength of his Kingdome; wherfore under favor, there cannot be a grea∣ter point of dishonor to a King then to be disarmed, then to have his Sword taken from him, or dispos'd of and intrusted to any but those whom he shall appoint; for as à minori ad majus the Argument often holds, if a privat Gentleman chance to be disarm'd upon a quarrell, 'tis held the utmost of disgraces, much greater and more public is the dishonor that falls upon a King, if after some traverses of difference 'twixt him and his Subjects, they shold offer to disarme him, or demand his sword of him: when the Eagle parted with his talons, and the Lion with his teeth and ongles, the Apolog tells us how
contemptible afterwards the one grew to be among Birds, the other among Beasts. For a King to part with the Sword politic is to render himself such a ridiculous King, as that logg of wood was which Jupiter let down among the froggs for their King at the importunity of their croaking; 'tis to make him a King of clouts, or as the Spaniard hath it, Rey de Havas, a Bean-King, such as we use to choose in sport at Twelf-night. But my hopes are, that the two present Houses of Par∣lement (for now they may be call'd so, because they begin to parley with their King,) wilbe more tender of the honor of their Soverain Liege Lord, which, together with all his Rights and Dignities, by severall solemn Oaths, and by their own binding instruments of Protestation and Co∣venant, (not yet revok'd) they are sworn to maintain, and that they will demand nothing of him which may savour of Aspertè or force, but what may hold water hereafter: But now, touching the Militia or Sword of the Kingdom, I think, under favor, the King cannot transfer it to any other; for that were to desert the protection of his peo∣ple, which is point-blank against his Coronation Oath and his Office: What forren Prince or State will send either Ambassador, Resident or Agent to him, when they understand his Sword is taken from him? What reformed forren Church wil acknowledg Him Defender of the Faith, when they hear of this? Nay, they who wish England no good will, will go neer to paint him out, as not long since another King was, with a fair velvet Scabbard, a spe∣cious golden hilt and chape, but the blade within was of wood. I hope that they who sway now, will make bet∣ter use of their successes: Many of them know 'tis as dif∣ficult a thing to use a victory well, as to get one; there is as much prudence requir'd in the one, as prowesse in the o∣ther;
they wilbe wiser sure then turn it to the dishonor of their King: it being a certaine rule, that the glory of a Nation all the world over depends upon the glory of their King, and if he be any way obscur'd, the whole Kingdom is under an eclipse. I have observed, that among other characters of gal∣lantry, which forren Writers appropriat to the English Nation, one is, that they use to be most zealous to pre∣serve the Honor of their King; I trust that they who are now upp will return to the steps of their Progenitors, both in this particular and divers other; that their successes may serve to sweeten and moderat things, and suppresse the popular Sword which still rages; And it had been hearti∣ly wished that a suspension of Arms had preceded this Treaty, which useth to be the ordinary fore-runner, and a necessarie antecedent to all Treaties; for while acts of hostility continue, som ill favour'd newes may intervene which may imbitter and disturb all: nor can it be expected that the proceedings will goe on with that candor and confidence, while the old rancor is still in action; 'tis im∣possible a sore shold heale till the inflamation be taken a∣way; To cast water into a wound instead of oyle is not the way to cure it: or to cast oyle upon a fire instead of wa∣ter is not the way to quench it; poor England hath had a consuming fire within her bowells many yeeres, she is also mortally wounded in all her members, that she is still in a high Fever, which hath made her rave and speak idle a long time; and 'tis like to turn to a Hectic if not timely prevented. I pay God she may have no occasion to make use of the same complaint as Alexander the great made when he was expiring his last, Perii turba Me∣dicorum: too many Physitians have undon me. To conclude in a word, there is but one only way, under
favor, to put a period to all these fearfull confusions; it is, to put the great Master-wheele in order, and in its due place again, and then all the inferior wheels will move regularly; let the King be restor'd, and ev'ry one will com to his own, all interests will be satisfied, all things quick∣ly rectified; till this be done, 'tis as absurd to attempt the setling of peace, as if one shold go about to set a Watch by the gnomon of an horizontall Diall when the Sun is in a cloud. Dolor Capitis est Caput Doloris. Jam. Howell. 16. Septemb. 1648.
