H63 669.f.25[50] 99871073 163855
ENGLANDS JOY, Expressed in an ἘΠΙΝΊΚΙΟΝ, To the most Renowned Man of Honor, and Temporal Redeemer of the PRINCE, PEERS, and PEOPLE of this Land, HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General Monck. SO then Victorious General George, go on, To perfect thyA Ryal Present. . Thus that greatNevil Earl of Warwick Make-King Warwick, thou'lt out-do, And all the Worthies of past Ages too: As He's Proclaim'd, so Crown, and set Charls right, Then letThe De∣vil and old Oliver. old Nick and Nol do their worst spight. So Kings may reign, byJus Postli∣minii in the Civil Law. Postliminial Rights, And Suns come out o'th Sea, make newThose Knights usually made at Coronati∣ons. Bath Knights, Which must dispel all Mists; all Mischiefs yield To Royal Vertue, Patience wins the Field: Field without Sweat or Blood; the Cause so just, It need not stir one Graine of English dust. Which were the Beasts thou conquer'dst, tame, would be Thought but an easie humane Victory. But they were savage, hungry, fierce, and fell As Lybian Lyons, or those Beasts that dwell In Indian Dens, my Men worse than Divels, What Hand but Sacred could er'e cure suchThe Kings Evil cured by his touch. Evils? And only with a touch, by which we see, Thou canst outdoeVeni, vi∣di vici. Cesarean Chevalry. Indeed we were afraid, Good people all Expected more a Royal Funeral, Than such a Coronation,Rather his head to be cut off then an∣nointed. and to feel The dismal dint of Parricidal steel, Rather than Unction on his Sacred Head: But He's deliver'd, and w'are brought to Bed. So now He's ours again, Great George, and who But thee, shall we sing Jo. Paeans to? To thee Great Soul of Honor, who wer't borne To be Restorer of thy Prince forlorne. The Great Redeemer of thy Countreys Laws, And brave Assertor of the true Old Cause.Kings are the true Suns, and all Usur∣pers but Meteors or falling Stars. Thou'st given our Sun to England, without Wars, O'rthrown Phanatick Meteors falling Stars. Those proud usurping Phaetons, that durst Sit in the Chair of Fire, till it burst, And sing'd all Earth and Sea it touch'd upon. Leaving us dark,The Pro∣tectorians. in conflagration. Prodigious things were done, but all in vain, They mounted Cromwels Cart, thou Charls his Wain. But yet th' Herculean Labors found no end, New work was cut out for thee,The Fagg end of the late Long Parliament by the Fiend. More Monsters still arise, a Rebel Rump, So often stript and whipt, and dock't toth' Stump, Must needs start up again, O cursedFlemish for Tayle. Stert, How could'st thou still hold up so malapert? After so many Regicidal Acts, O'rwhelming all, with bloodyThe over∣flowing of Nile. Cataracts, To play Rex yet upon our heads, and be Our Commonwealth, nay common Misery? Others have oft attempted to defeat, This many headed Hydra,So Hercu∣les was cal∣led for his destroying of noxious Monsters. but the cheat O'th' Good old Cause, reviv'd it's heads, and we Could hope no *  but thee. So Dragon like, it dealth about it's blows, None could withstand its Fury, no not those That were immur'd, and fenc'd with Iron chaines, Posts,The City Gates, Posts, Portculli∣ces, were beat down by the Rumps or∣der. and Portcullices: The City Veines Were bloodless grown, to see their Ports beat down, And Tayles with many Heads usurp a Crown. But th'hast delivered them and us, who'rt borne To be Redeemer of thy Country torne, By such inhumane Miscreants; Thy hand Hs from that creeping vermin cleer'd the Land. Thou canst as easily kill such Snakes asHercules. He, That in his Cradle, strangled two or three. None but ourSt. George in Story killed the Dragon. George, could kill this Dragon dead, And make Romance for History be read. Against thy mighty Arm, what force prevails, Who kill'st all monstrous Heads, as well as Tayls? Proceed and Prosper so great George, and where Thou pleasest for to make thy Hemisphere, Thou'rt still our Constellation, leade us forth, And th'inspired Needle's not more true to th'North, Nor Rivers to the Sea, than we will be, To our Dread Soveraign Lord, King Charls, and thee. Nor shall we fear success in Peace, or War, Whilst He is thine, and thou, our Northern Star. J. H. LONDON, Printed for M. B. 1660.
