L523 E304_4 99861112 113240
The last VVill and Testament of P. RVPERT, VVherein hee disposeth of all his estate here in England, and ma∣keth Sir Thomas Fairfax Executor, and Lievetenant Generall Crumwell, Major Generall Browne, and Colonell Massey Overseers of the same will. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1645. October. 7.
The last VVill and Testa∣ment of Prince Rupert. Jn Martis Nomine, Amen. I Rupert, Plundermaster Gene∣nerall, being most dangerous sick, yet of perfect memory, and calling to minde the im∣patiality of the times, am ve∣ry well assured by cōmon computation, the time of my continuance cānot be long; And whereas I have beene prodigall, both of the innocents lives & estates, and being desirous so neere as I can (now I can doe no more mischiefe) peaceably to depart, & give every man his due: Doe constitute and ordaine, depute and make this my last Will and Te∣stament
in manner and forme following. Inprimis, My Will and pleasure is, and my most harty suit and request to my Execu∣tors hereafter named, that they will bee pleased to see my Body decently carried be∣yond Sea. Item. All my Cities, Townes, Castles, Forts, and every of my Garrisons by what name or title soever they bee knowne or called, together with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances, (Bristow onely excepted) my Will and pleasure is, shall bee disposed of as the Two Houses of Parliament in their discrestion shall thinke fit and appoint. Item. Whereas His Majesty was gratious∣ly pleased heretofore, aswell in considerati∣on of my good service then done, as for in∣couragement for the future, to confer, upon mee Ex more moti, not onely the Domi∣nion of Wales, but other great and vast, Re∣venue to be by me peaceably enjoyed when I had utterly destroyed Round-headisme
both root and branch; and now in regard I find that worke infinite, my will and plea∣sure is, that the same be peaceably enjoyed by the true owners, and that all the monies and plunder I have here, with a great deale of industery gotten, bee restored to the true owners, except what I have hertofore trans∣ported beyond the seas. Item. Whereas my whole estate being disposed of as aforesaid to my poore friends, I meane all my friends, I can will & bequeath nothing; onely this, to my confounding Damee Lords, my proud papistick and A∣thistick Prelates and all other of my high qualited friends, which were more rich then honest, more leaned then religious, I will and bequeath unto them, contrition and repentance, and wonderous submissive Peti∣tions: and for my second sort of friends that were excellent swearers, gallant drun∣kards, and most notable plunderers, that killed poore contrymen with mouth gunns, I will and bequeath them new Ropes to hang themselves, for it is much suspected the
old trade of Pimping will never come in fa∣shion againe. And for the third sort of Ver∣mine, if Sir Thomas should be mercifull unto them, I know not what service they can doe him, onely they will serve to keepe bullets from better men. Item. My last Legasie is, my admonition to Aulicus my Secretary, which is, with speede to repaire to Britanicus, and desire his assistance in drawing a Petition for him to the Baregarden, for the man is very in∣geneous, and in time may come to be Clerke of the Challenges. Item. I doe by these presents constitute, and ordaine Sir Thomas Fairfax sole Execu∣tor of this my last Will and Testament, and for his trouble and charge in Execution hereof, I will and bequeath him all my Hor∣ses, Ammunition and Armes whatsoever, whether they be Cannons, Demecannons, Culverines, Sacres, Morterpeeces, Murthe∣rers, Petars, Muskets, Pikes, Swords, Drums, Trumpets, &c.
And last, I doe hereby ordaine Overseers of this my Last Will and Testament; Lieve∣tenant Generall Crumwell, Sergent Major Generall Browne, and leave each of them a Legasie, which shall be at the discretion of my Executor. In witnesse whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seale, the 29. of Sep∣tember. 1645. FINIS.
