m2072 e107_5 99862755 114931
THE DESIRES AND PROPOSITIONS PROPOSED To Sir John Hotham, by the Prince his High∣nesse, concerning the Town of Hull. With Sir John Hothams Answer and Resolution nothing derogating from his former Constancie. Likewise a most Remarkable Passage concer∣ning the PALSGRAVE. Together with the Occasion of his Majesties going from Yorke to 2 Newarke upon Trent. Iohn Brown Cler Parliamtorum July 19. LONDON, Printed for Edward Iohnson.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
THE DEIREE OF THE Prince His Highnesse, to Sir John Ho∣tham. Worthy Sir, WHen the Prince with his for∣ces drew neer the Town of ull, He sent forth a Herauld to Command the Gates to be opened, and to have the town surrendred up; But He found the same Entertainment which his Majesty had formerly. This Answer being returned to His Highnesse, you cannot conceive but at so great a Repulle and denyall, he must bee
very much moved. Wherupon immediat∣ly a second Messenger was sent to the town, at which Summons Sir John Ho∣tham did presently attend his Highnesse from the Walls, to whom his Excellencie did deliver himself in this manner. That it was strange that he against his Oath of Allegeance, and muth contrary to the trust and confidence which his Maje∣sty had formerly reposed in him, should thus obstinately both against Equity and Justice oppose his Majesty, and constrain him to use such violent means to obtain that, which he thought he might by His Power and Right Command. And withall enformed him, that now it was no time for dispute, but walled him to surrender up the Town, which he so long had detained from his Majesty, which if he would do, and submit himself unto his Royall Clemency, happily His Maje∣sty, out of his tender Aflection which He alwayes bore to the informities of His Subjects, which he is sensible may be som∣times
misled, might indulge these his yet Contumelious Errours, and in hope of his future amendment forget, and forgive his former Errours, and restore him to all those Liberties and Fortunes he formerly enjoyed. After His Highnesse had thus delivered himself, Sir John Hotham after some small pause, but serious Consideration, in all humble manner thus exprest himself un∣to his Highnesse. Let your Excellence be pleased to send a patient Ear unto your most faithgull servants defence, whose Loyall intentions have alwayes beene, and ever shall be most zealous to serve your most Royall Father, and next ofter him your Excellence. And I could wish both my Life and For∣tunes certiople, that by the free Expense of them I might testifie the Gratitude and Ob∣servance of Duty, which I owe unto your most Royall Father, and my most Gracious Sove∣reign,
You cannot taxe me of such fowle and hainous Crimes, as the Malignant Party do object against me, when you shall rightly consider that all my endeavours have la∣boured for the priviledge of the Subject, and the security of the Kingdom, no wais impugning the Prerogatives which belong to the Crown. And certain it is, that both your Roy∣all Self, and also all the world may justly condemn me of Infidelity, if I should tre∣cherously deceive that trust, which the Supream and Highest Court of this King∣dom hath entrusted me withall, and in the Breach wherof may insue the generall Ruine of this Nation. A trust of so great weight and high Consequence cannot be deceived, but a heavie discredit must of necessity brand him, who shall give the occasion of that breach. So far is from me the very thought of disloyalty, that if it shall please that po∣wer, who did first commit that trust to me, to consent with my self, I shall
all freedom of mind, and Loyalty of hart give up both the Town, and my self, and all that I may properly call mine unto his Majesty, and humbly prostrate both them and my self at His Majesties feet, not doubting, but upon His just and ma∣ture consideration, he may not only for∣give my Errours, if any in this case have bin committed, but also command my fi∣delity, and out of his clemency and good∣nesse thinke mee fit to serve His Maje∣sty. Thus Sir John Hotham having delivered himself, but keeping the town, the Prince left him for the present, and we do expect that His Highnesse should levie a Batte∣ry against the town. The Palsgrave is gone from Yorkshire, into Lancashire, to take up forces, and to repair to Hull with all speed he can. The King himself is gone from us, and with the next Tuesday night be at Newark upon Trent, and from thence he will goe to Liecester: Thus I rest, John Mills.
The Kings Majesty hath also Declared to all the Northern parts of England, that whosoever shall give him their cheerfull help at this time, either with Men, Horse, Arms, or Money, to be brought, sent, or con∣veyed unto him. He will look upon it as a service never to be forgotten, which De∣claration He commanded should be sent to all his loving Subjects in Yorkshire, which they most cheerfully assented to, promising to aid and assist him with Men, Horse, Arms, and Money, for the peace and safety of the Kingdome. Both Houses Voted, that it is illegall and against the Laws of the Land, for any to appear in such a warlike manner. Ordered that this be printed and published John Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. C
