M2591 E579_5 99865336 117576
A Brief DISCOURSE ABOUT BAPTISME. By THOMAS MOORE, For his Friends. LONDON, Printed by Gar: Dawson, for Tho: Brewster and G: Moule at the Signe of the three Bibles under Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1649.
TO THE READER. CHristian Reader, whoever thou art, that takest so much pains, as to peruse these ensuing lines; I pray thee take not any thing in it, as leading to contention, it being writ to avoid it, and with a desire to move all to union in minding that one Baptisme, which is Baptisme indeed, and so to a right understanding, estimate, and use of all the mediums, or meanes of it, by which it is effected; and whereas three of them are of con∣tinuall, and frequent exercise, in the acting, receit, and usefulnesse, and one of them but once done, or acted, and the use after in minding of it; And that being it, about which so much difference is fallen out among Brethren; I having before writ a Treatise something large about it, which hath been in the hands of many friends. In which also I discoursed of the New Testament, whose in-comming made the first old, and decayed; The unacquainted∣nesse wherewith, as also of the extent, and vertue, of the Death, and Ransome of Christ, I conceive to be the cheif cause of manies miscarriage in conception of the right use of the Ordinance of baptizing with water, and there also I gave ground of answer for all the Objections I had met with in books, and for that cause, and because divers have learnedly answered their Arguments, I have forborn in this all such reasoning, and have only applyed
my self to the Scripture, the Tennor of the Gospel, and Com∣mission given by Jesus Christ, and touched upon the answer, or faulting of nothing, but what mine eares have heard from divers, and in divers places, yea, even from such as I love and reverence, or else of that I have in manuscripts sent to my self by some others of the same outward practice; And in this I have avoided to go in a contentious way; and as in love, and with desire to pre∣vent evill I have writ, so I leave it to be tryed by the Scripture; Consider it so, and the Lord give us understanding in all things. So prayeth thy Well willer in Jesus Christ, THO. MOORE. Wisbich Sept. 5. Anno 1649. Octob. 15. 1649. Imprimatur, IOHN DOWNAME.
Of Baptisme commended since the Resurre∣ction of Iesus Christ, in the Evangelical and Apostolical Writings, as that which hath great priviledges in it; and promises to it. TWo things are meet to be considered 1. What this Baptisme is? 2. What the medium, or by which effected? 1. What this Baptisme is? It is a Baptizing into Jesus Christ, and so into his Death, that one patrake of his resurrection, through the faith of the operation of God, Rom. 6.3, 4. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. And for the clearing of this to be Baptisme indeed, and that it may more fully appeare what it is, to be baptized into Jesus Christ: foure things are con∣siderable, viz. 1. What Baptizing into Jesus Christ signifieth in Scripture language? 2. What this Baptisme comprehendeth in it according to Scripture? 3. Why, or upon what occasion this name Baptisme is put upon this work of God, and how long it hath been so called? 4. That this gracious work of God, in, and upon a man, is the Baptisme indeed, and that which hath the special priviledges in, and promises of life to it. 1. For the first, It apeareth by the Scripture, that Baptizing into Jesus Christ signifieth; A bringing into the knowledge, belief, and acknowledgement of Jesus Christ, according to that great name of him set forth in the Gospel; That one may in that belief, and acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Christ, and of that great name of his be humbled in himself, and comforted in, and renew'd by Christ, and so washed, or cleansed, and sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; and so made one in Christ, and conformed to him, and when this is done, a man is baptized indeed; and though God in sending Gospel, and Spirit enlightning, convincing, and bring∣ing to an acknowledgment of Jesus to be the Christ, and make profession of him; may be truely said to have baptized men unto Christ; yet if they have not yeilded to the operations of his grace, so as that it come for, be not effe∣cted; They may also be truly said not to be baptized into Jesus Christ; as of
old, when God gave his Word, Oracle and statutes, with such presence of his Spirit, as he made the scum to come aloft; he is said to have purged them, yet they not yeelding up to his will and operations, so as to have the scum cast off, they are said not to be purged, Ezek. 24.13. And this the Apostle would not have us ignorant of, but gives us to learn thus much from our types that were, and are recorded for our instruction: namely, That 1 Cor. 10.1.2. All our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea; and were all bap∣tized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea. Moses was the man that God had appointed to be their Deliverer, Leader, Ruler, Prophet, And he by whom he would deliver the Law, or first Testament to them, and he al∣so to be the Mediator of that Testament. But the people did not at first under∣stand and acknowledge Moses to be such a one; When God first put it in Moses heart to visit his Brethren, and that he slew the Aegyptian that wrong∣ed an Israelite; Moses supposed, They would have understood this, but they did not understand, but refused him; yet God did afterward send him to them to be a Ruler and Deliverer, Acts 7.23. 25-35. And when he did come with the Lords Message to them, and shewed some signe among them; They be∣leeved, and bowed their heads, and worshipped, Exod. 3. & 4.31. But when they came under some triall by sore affliction, they altered their minds, and chod Moses and Aaron, as having done them great wrong, Exod 5.20.21. And though by the mighty works of God, they were overcome to keep the Passeover, and follow Moses out of Aegypt, and had the cloud going before them; yet it appeares they were not brought to a right understanding and ac∣knowledgment of Moses; and that appears not onely by their fears, when Pharaoh and the Aegyptians pursued them, but by their words, faulting Moses, and declaring what had been their own saying to him in Aegypt, Exo. 14.10.11.12. But when Moses from God quieted them, and that God di∣vided the Sea for them, and put his cloud betwixt them and the Egyptians, and had his people safely through the Sea to the shore, and gave them to see the Egyptians drowned in the same sea; Then they feared the Lord, and beleeved the Lord, and his servant Moses, Exod. 14.31. And so from that time forward Moses was acknowledged a man of God, though only such as yeel∣ded up to the minde of God made known by him, were the Israel of God indeed, Exod. 19.4, 8. And this work is since baptising, in use called a bap∣tising unto Moses; and so gives us to understand; That baptising into Christ signifieth; A bringing into such an acknowledgement of him, as at first said. Namely, 1. To bring in to the understanding, and acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, the Gift of God, the man, the Mediator, That having once dyed for our sins, and risen for our justification, and offered him∣self
a sacrifice to God; hath obtained redemption, and received spirit to send forth and so is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world; the Saviour of the world; the Prophet and Mediator of the new Testament, Joh. 4.10, 42. and 6.62, 69. 1 Joh. 5.1, 19, 20. 2. In that understanding and acknowledgement of Jesus Christ to cleave to him, in faith and love, and so to depend on him, and yeeld to him, for teaching, guidance, comfort, preservation, &c. Joh. 6.68, 69. 1 Pet. 1. ver. 21. 3. In that understanding of, and adhering to Christ, to be wrought on to more onenesse with, and conformity to him, and imitation of him, 2 Cor. 3.3.18. Ephes. 5.1, 2. And so is this baptising, a washing with, or plunging, or putting into Christ, and so into union, and fellowship with Christ, yea, and with the Members of Christ, Rom. 6.3, 4 Gal. 3.27. Col 2.12. with 1 Cor. 12.13. So that in this baptising into Christ, it's plain by Scripture: There is, First, An ingrafting, or putting into Christ by spirituall evidence, and power, effecting faith in, and love to Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21. 1 Corinth. 1. verse 30. Secondly. A washing with his blood, or in his love commended through the blood of Christ, in which he washeth, and cleanseth from their sins Rev. 1.5. Zach. 13.1. Rom 5.8, 10. Tit. 3.4, 5 And that both in respect of the guilt of sin in conscience, Act. 10 43. Rom. 5.1. 1 Cor. 6.11. as also in re∣spect of the corrupt disposition in nature, Ephes. 5.26 Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Thirdly, A sprinkling with the vertue of his blood, 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb 12 24. and that both in respect of speaking peace, and freeing from the law of sin, and death, Heb. 12 24. Rom. 7.4, 5. and 8.2. as also of sealing to the day of redemption, Ephes. 4.30. And all this is contained in being baptized into Christ. Compare 1 Cor, 10.1, 2. with Rom 6.3. 2 For the second thing. What this Baptisme comprehendeth in it; and it appeares by that already said: That it containes in it, An ingrafting into Christ, and Ʋnion with him, and Conformity to him: And so a Be∣ing cloathed with him, and under his Government and protection, Rom. 6.3. Gal. 3.27. And so it is evident that it comprehends in it 1 All that Circumcision did formerly, for testifying the faith, or righteous∣nesse of God; for admission into the family of Christ, for instructing to spi∣rituall Circumcision, and spirituall Circumcision it selfe, with all Son-like pri∣viledges appertaining thereto: And hence the Apostles affirming, beleivers compleat in Christ, takes away all that might be objected for want of Circum∣cision, saying; In whom yee are also circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sinnes of the flesh by the circumci∣sion
of Christ, buryed with him in Baptisme, wherein also you are rison, &c. Col. 2.10, 11, 12. with Phil. 3.3.10. 2. The whole scope of the Comission given by Jesus Christ to the Apo∣stles for discipling with word and water; for admission into the family of Christ in the name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost; instru∣cting in the wayes of God, and his presence with them therein, as appeares by comparing Mat. 28.19, 20. with Mark 16.15.16. & Luk. 24.45, 46, 47, & Act. 26, 17, 18 22, 23. 3. The new Birth it selfe, that is from above of water and the spirit, it be∣ing the same mentioned in Baptisme, Rom. 6.3, 4. Gal. 3.27. & Col. 2.12, 13, 14. That is set forth, Iohn 3.3.5. Rom. 5.8.10. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. 4. It containes in it all that was typed out in the washings, cleansings, and purifyings in the Law, by which men were fitted to come to, and partake of the holy things, as Temple, Altar, Sacrifices, &c. Levit. 15.31. & 22.6. 2 Cor. 30.17.18. So in this baptizing or washing, are men made meet to enter the Kingdome, &c. Ioh. 3.3.5. Col. 3.12.13. & 2.12.14. 1 Cor. 6.10.11. 5. It containes in it the Sealing, or marking to the day of Redemption. which was typed in that sprinkling, Exod. 12.7.13. Ezek 9.4. Ephes. 4.30. 6. It containes in it that very work in discovery of emptinesse and vanity, reproving vaine confidences, leading to selfe-deniall, and dying to earthly and fleshly desires, conteuts &c. all by displaying the excellencies of Christ; So that in yielding up thereto, men are preserved, raised and quickned: And in offence taking thereat, and rebelling ther-against, men perish; and in passing through this work, men come into Christ, and are baptized into him, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. And such as stumble and rebell, are overthrowne, as the Egyptians in the Sea, Pro. 1.22, 23, 24. Ezek. 24.9.13 Joh 3.19, 20, 21. Phil. 3.3.9.10. Rom 6.3 4. 7. It hath in it that hope that will (as Noahs Ark) carry above all waters in temptations and troubles, 1 Pet. 3.22. Mar. 16.16. In a word, to be baptized into Christ, is to be made in him, and partaker of the benefit of his death and resurrection, and conformed to him, so as one be indeed dead to sinne, selfe, world, and alive to God through Jesus Christ; And so Baptisme, is indeed that fore-mentioned work of Grace in a Beleiver, comprehending all that aforesaid. 3 For the third thing. Why, or upon what occasion, this name Baptisme is put upon this work of God, and how long it hath been so called. And this appeares in Scripture to be from an outward ordinance given by God for baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, as a te∣stimony
of the truth of the Gospell preached, and an instruction to submissi∣on to Christ, confessing of him, and waiting for spirituall baptizing into Christ from him: And since that ordinance given, the worke of grace in the heart hath been so called. In the beginning, the work of God in the heart was cal∣led Faith, or a seeing the promises afar off, & being perswaded, and embracing them, and confessing thmselves strangers, Heb. 11.1, 2.6.13. And these withall under their tuition, and joyned with them in profession, were called sonnes of God, Gen. 6 2.4 And those that were upright, or through amongst them, were called righteous, or just, Heb. 11.2 4. 2 Pet. 2.7. but not Isra∣el. But after Jacob had with weeping, and supplication prevailed with God, and was by him called Israel, and a people come forth of him, or by proseli∣ting brought in to him, Hos. 12.4. Gen 32.28. Then all of that Family were called Israel, Israelites, and the house of Israel; Though they were also still called the sonnes of God, them and theirs; yet then, those, and onely those that were borne of the promise, were the Israel of God, and Israelites indeed. Rom. 9.6.8. Joh. 1.47. And yet these also called just, and righteous still al∣so; So also, the work of God in the heart, was never called Circumcision till after God had given an ordinance of Circumcision to Abraham, and that it was administred on that Family, to testifie the truth of the faith Abraham taught, to admit them into his Family, and to instruct them to attend on God, to circumcise their hearts, to love him, Gen. 17. Deut. 10.16. & 30.2 6. Yet then the people of Israel, they and all theirs, were also called circum∣cision, Rom. 15.8. Though the work of grace in the heart, to which the or∣dinance instructed was Circumcision indeed, and from thence so called, Rom. 2.28, 29. So since Jesus Christ hath suffered in the flesh, and overcome death, and carried our nature into heaven, remaining there, the Christ, the great High Priest, Prophet, and King, who will one day come againe, and take his great Power and Reigne, now making those that beleive on him spirituall Priests, &c. Those that believe on him have been called Christians, Acts 11.26. & 26.28. 1 Pet. 4.16. Not but they are also called the Sonnes of God, and Israel, and Gods people still; but now also Christians: And all outwardly baptized in, and professing the name of Christ, are so called; But those that are borne a new of water and the spirit, that beleive with the heart unto righteousnesse, these are the Christians indeed, the children of the promise, the seed of Abra∣ham, the Israel of God indeed, Joh. 3.3.5. Rom. 9.8. Gal. 3.26.29. & 6.16. Even so since the ordinance of baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus was in use, the work of Grace in the heart is called Baptisme, Rom. 6.3, 4, 5. Col 2.12, 13, 14. Gal. 3.26, 27. Not but that its still also called Faith, new Birth, Circumcision, &c. but its also called Baptisme.
4 For the fourth thing. That this gracious work of God in the heart, this inward and spirituall Baptisme, though it hath had its denomination from the use of the outwand Baptizing; yet is this inward and spirituall work the Baptisme indeed, that which profiteth, which hath the privi∣ledges in it, and promises to it, as appeareth plainly and plentifully in the Scriptures, 1 By the Apostles Testimony of Circumcision, which was an ordinance gi∣ven of God to Abraham when he made the ever lasting Covenant with him, and gave him the Gospell to preach, as Baptisme given of Christ to the A∣postles, when he commanded them to preach the Gospell to all the world: And the Apostle speaking of such Jewes as were circumcised when Circumci∣sion was in force, and profitable to the keepers of the Law, yet he saith, Rom. 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew that is one outwardly; neither is that Circumcisi∣on which is outward in the flesh; But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. And the same may be said of Baptisme. For, 2. Whereas Baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus, putteth away the filth of the flesh, or outward slain of Gentilisme, as outward Cir∣cumcision did put away the reproach of Egypt, Josh. 5.8 9 The Apostle saith plainly of it, 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptisme doth also now save us (not the putting a∣way the filth of the flesh, but) the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Agreeing with that mentioned, Col. 2.12. which is wrought by the faith of the operation of God. 3. It appears also, That this spirituall baptisme was the end of the Apostles preaching Gospell, and calling on their hearers to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; both in that they counsel to it for the remission of sins, and that they might in beleeving on Christ receive remission of sins, and also the gift of the Holy Ghost. As likewise in that, saying at one time, Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. He saith the same at another time in these words, Acts 3.19 Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out, &c. 4. It yet further appears in that the Apostle writing to the Churches, of whom there is no doubt, or question made, but they were all baptized with water in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and none blamed for want of that; yet the Apostle speaks to them with a caution and distinction, Rom. 6.3. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were bap∣tized into his death, &c. And again, Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Which as it leaves a jealousie of some, so it evidenceth; All that by faith are not become the sons of God,
and be not baptized into the death of Jesus Christ, and risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, and have so put on Christ, They have not yet been baptized into Christ, and so have not the baptisme, which is the Bap∣tisme indeed, and so set out by the Apostle, Rom. 6.3, 4, 5. Gal. 3.26, 27, 29. Col. 2.10.11, 12, 13, 14. 5. It yet further appeares in that as the Apostles have set forth this baptisme to be into Christ, and that into the Death of Christ, for participation of the vertue of his Resurrection, and this by the faith of the operation of God, so as a man is become dead with Christ to the world, &c. and risen with Christ, dead to sin, and alive to God; and so one with Christ, and in him, that he is one with the Members of Christ, baptized by one spirit into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. Even so hath the Apostle plainly affirmed; That as there is one Body, and one Spirit, as we are called in one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme; He makes no more kinds of Baptisme, then of Faith, yea then of God, and Christ: And thus we see what Baptisme is, and that there is but one Baptisme, though the things, or mediums, are waies by which it is effect∣ed, are many, and in that sense may be called Baptismes, of which I will treat a little now; to shew, 2. What the Mediums, Means, or things used in this Baptisme, and by which it is effected: are, These appear to be four, 1. The Word. 2, Water. 3. The Holy Spirit. 4. Afflictions. 1. The word or Gospell, which sets forth Jesus Christ, and him crucified, Gal 3.1. In opening of which, Jesus Christ is lift up, and set forth as the Son of God, and the Son of man that hath dyed for our sins, and is risen for our justification, and hath received Spirit to send forth, and is the propitiation for our sins, the Saviour of the world, That Whosoever beleeveth in him may not perish, but have everlasting lise, Joh. 3 14 15, 16 17. In this also is the Name of God, even of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost displayed, Psal. 138.2. Deut 32.2.3. And this is the prime, or chief Ministerial way of bapti∣zing into Christ. As appeares plainly in these things, First, That the Commission given, Matth. 28.19, 20, where Baptizing is given as the medium of Discipling, and there onely put in that name; in all o∣ther places it is given in these tearms, of preaching the Gosp l, Mark. 16.15. and declaring his Name to such an end (as the effecting of that which is Bap∣tisme indeed,) Acts 9.15. & 18 17, 18, 22, 23. Secondly, When Jesus Christ opened the understanding of his Disciples, to understand the things in the Scripture that concerned himself, Luk 24.27.44.45. which they were to declare Act. 26.27.18, 22, 23. Was not then this, That which they were helped to understand, that Thus it is written, and Thus
it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and so to enter into his glory, Luk. 24, 45, 46.25.26 And that repentance, and re∣mission of sins should be preached in his name among all Nations; and this expressely said to be, that which Christ and his Apostles were witnesses of, Luk. 24.47, 48. And to which witnessing the promise of the Spirit is given, Luke 24.49. and so the same that is in that Commission, Mathew 28. verse 19, 20. Thirdly, The Apostles did performe the Commission given them, in so preaching Christ, and repentance, and remission of sins in his name, Acts 2. and 3. and 8. and 10. and 13.38, 46. yea, not only when they baptized with water, but also when they did not that themselves, 1 Cor. 1.14, 17. Fourthly, As Jesus Christ set forth in the Gospell, is the Fountain set forth to wash in for sin and uncleannesse, Zach. 13.1. And the love of God extended in the gift of him, and through his bleed is pure water, John 3.5.16. Rev. 5. with Ezek. 36.25, 26. And the streams of spirit and grace, pro∣ceeding from him is as a river and streams of pure water, Psal. 46 4, 5. Rev. 22.1, 2. even so the Word and Doctrine of the Gospell is compared to wa∣ter, Deut. 32 1, 2, 3. Isa. 48.1, 2. and 55.1. and by that, men prest to wash, and cleanse their hearts, and wayes, Isa. 1.16, 17. Jer. 4.14. Yea, it being put to the question, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? Its an∣swered, Psal. 119.9, By taking heed thereto, according to thy word; so that the Word, or Gospell, to be one mean of baptising, is clearly held forth in the Scripture, and Commission given by Christ. If any object and say, But this hath not been called baptising. I answer, It was the same thing for washing and cleansing first, but not so called, till the ordinance of baptising with water was given from Heaven, and so God is nurtering the people to the acknowledgement of Moses, Exod. 14. was never called Baptising them unto Moses; but being the same businesse in effect, and for such an end, since the ordinance of baptising with water was given, even that work is called baptising, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. But yet to be plainer. Fifthly, The Doctrine of the Gospell, with the teaching thereof is enclu∣ded in that word Baptisme, and also called. Baptisme in the writings of the Evangelists; so Mark 1.3. John did baptise in the wildernesse, and preach the Baptisme of repentance for the remission of sins; And Luke 3.2, 3. The Word of God came unto John the Son of Zacharias in the wildernesse, and he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptisme of repentance for the remission of sins. It is plain to such as shut not their eyes of purpose to cavill, That the word of the Lord which came to John; that he received and that he preached, and what that was is laid open both in the prophesie of
him, Isa. 49.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 &c. and both Prophesie and explication of that for∣mer Prophesie by his father, Luke 1.76, 79. and also in the affirming of his own performance, Math. 3.1, 2. In those dayes came John the baptist preaching in the wildernesse of Judea, and saying, repent yee for the Kingdome of Heaven is at hand. Search the places, and all the Scriptures speaking of this businesse, and is it not plain, that he declared Christ to be come in the flesh, to be the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world; and so that the Kingdome of God was nigh; and he (that is John) was not the Christ; but that he the Christ was to come after him in ministration, and on that ground exhorted them to repentance, and to believe on him that should come after him, in whom they should receive forgivenesse, &c. And then baptising with water, as a testimony of the truth of his Doctrine, he did after preach, and call for amendment, and fruits meet for repentance, promising; That he that came after him, should baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire, and purge his floor, &c. Though the Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Mediation of Christ, he did not so fully set forth, as it is since set forth, nor set forth the person of Christ, who, and which man he was, till Jesus was baptized, and Johns own Ministration towards an end, Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke 3. John 1. and 3. Acts 13.24.25. And this his preaching the Gospell, and baptising with water was called his baptisme, and his preaching the baptism of repen∣tance for the remission of sins: And so when our Saviour Christ did question the cheif Preists, and Elders of the Jewes, whence the baptisme of John was? They reasoned with themselues, saying, If we shall say from Heaven, he will say unto us, why did you not then beleeve him? Mat. 21.25. which belee∣ving must needs have reference to his Doctrine: And thus Paul affirming John verily to have baptized with the baptisme of repentance, he describes it in both the parts; The Doctrine thus, saying unto the people, that they should beleeve on him that should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus, and his baptising with water thus, and when they (that is the people) heard this; they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 19.4, 5. And so it is said of Apollos that was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.25. This man was in∣structed in the way of the Lord, & being fervent in Spirit, he spake, and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism of John; and sure∣ly that he spake and taught, was that which he knew, even the Baptisme of John; and Aquilla and Prescilla, expounding to him the way of God more perfectly, doth evince, that they shewed him the way of the Lord, as it is more fully revealed since the ascenscion of Christ by his Spirit, in the Doctrin of the Gospel, then it was in the baptisme, or preaching-Gospel before by John; so that it al the way appeareth, that since the ordinance of baptising with water was given from heaven, the name of baptisme was put on the preaching the
Doctrine of the Gospell. Yea surely however the word baptizing, is oft used for baptizing with elementary water in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, yet its hard for any to shew, and prove, that the word Baptisme in any place doth not enclude also baptizing or instructing with the word, which is like∣wise a spirituall water; Was not their comming to his Baptisme, a comming to hear, and be instructed by him, as well as to be baptized with elementary water? Math. 3.7. And was not their being baptized with the Baptisme of John, a being instructed by him, as well as being baptized with elementary water, how else came that fruit of it, that in hearing Christ they justified God? Luke 7.29. But to proceed a little farther; Sixthly, One end and efficacy of Baptisme, yea the end is affirmed to be wrought by the Word, or Doctrine of the Gospell, (as the instrument, and medium) displaying the name of the Lord; and so our Saviour said to his Disciples, John 15.3. Ye are clean through the word that I have spoken to you; And so the Apostle saith to beleevers, 1 Cor. 6.11. Yee are washed, yee are sanctified, yee are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. And is not the setting forth Christ in Gospell preaching affirmed to be for such ends, Acts 3.26. and 14.15. and 17.30, 31. and 26.17, 18, 22, 23. So that its clear; That the Word or Gospell is one medium of bap∣tizing, and by which Baptisme into Christ is effected, and encluded in the name of Baptisme, and so called as other mediums, or means are; yea to say no more, but as the truth is the plain and full preaching the Gospell, setting forth Christ and him crucified, is the chief, the most necessary, profitable, and constantly usefull of all outward means for baptizing into Christ, and so into his death &c. as appears by the plain evidence of Scriptures: By this faith, Rom. 10 14.17. By this the Spirit received, Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 5. In this the power of God extended, Rom. 1.16. and through this, the Baptisme is by Spirit effected, 1 Cor. 6.11. Acts 26.18. And the receit of this testi∣mony hath present blessing, and future hope, 1 Thess. 2.13. 2 Thess 1.10. Yea Paul, that blessed God, and counted it great grace that he preached Gos∣pell to many, yet thanks God that he baptized few with water, 1 Cor. 1.14. But I shall for bear to say farther of this medium. 2. Water (elementary water) to be applyed, by being dipped, or plun∣ged in, or washed with, as a testimony of the truth of the Gospell, taught in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, which also is, the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost; That it is to be in, or rather into that name is evident by the Commission given by Christ, Mat. 28.19. and the pra∣ctise of John Baptist the fore-runner, Acts 19.4, 5. and the Apostles, and followers of Christ, Acts 3.38. and 10.48. and the end which is for bapti∣zing into Christ, Rom. 6.3. That it was with elementary water is evident,
Mat. 3.11, 16. Mar. 1.8. Luke 3.16. Joh. 1.31, 3. and 3.22, 23. Act. 8 36.39. and 10.47, 48. That it be by dipping in, or washing with, is evident by the Word, and all the places cited. But how often to be dipped, or washed, whether the whole body, or what part, and how much, or in what manner? there is no plain and expresse type, either by command or example, and the word bap∣tize signifies washing, as well as dipping, and is so used in evangelicall wri∣tings, though also there be another word rantizing used for rensing; besides, that at which it aimeth, and to which it instructeth, even the main businesse is called washing, Rev. 1.5. and sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. A baptizing into Christ, into his death, so as one be risen with him, and have put him on through the faith of the operation of God, Rom. 6.3, 4 5. Coll. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Gall. 3.26, 27. Now precisely to limit an outwaard bu∣sinesse to a certain measure, where the spirit hath left freedome to necessity, safety, and conveniency is to streighten the wayes of the Lord, more then himself hath done, which is much to be reproved with that in Job 4.17. But this, that one be baptized with water, by being put in, or under wa∣ter by dipping in it, or washing with it, as a Testimony of the truth of the Gospell report, and so in the name of the Father, Sonne, and Ho∣ly Ghost: This is an ordinance of the Gospell; A Medium of baptizing in∣to Christ. And being professedly done in the name of the Lord, it is verily outward Baptisme, and an ordinance of the Lord, whether it were done by a Minister of the Gospell, or any attendant of such; Yea, and though it be very evill and sinfull in him that administreth it unholily, and mixeth mens Traditions with it; and evill also in such as accept and approve thereof; Yet if the baptizing be as is said, the Baptisme is Baptisme still, and the evils of men, and not the Lords Baptisme to be repented of: As may also be seen in that former and first outward Ordinance given for testifying the truth of the Gospell, and admitting into the Family of Abraham even Circumcision, that did precede Baptisme. I suppose it will be confessed by all, to be a wrong, and an exceeding evill end, that Jacobs Sons had in perswading the Shechemites to Circumcision, &c. Gen. 34.13.17, &c. Yet when good old Jacob cursed their cruelty, and murder, in killing them, he faulted not the Circumcision of them, but inti∣mately acknowledged it, in that he saith, They digged downe a wall, or houghed the Oxe; Which implyes, that had they not been slain, they had been one People with them, and a defence, and help, Gen. 49.5, 6. And if there could have been an errour in respect of the persons acting; then sure∣ly it might have been in the Shechemites circumcising themselves, Gen. 34.24. Or in Zipporah circumcising her child in her Husbands presence, Exod.
4.25. Yet was that true Circumcision. And for distemper of mind, dissembling in word, and blasphemy, while one is exhorting to, acting, or using any Ordinance of God, it is grossely evill, I am sure, and to be reproved and repented; Yet the dissembling of Jacobs Sonnes Gen. 34.13. &c. nor the blasphemy of Zipporah, did not make null Circumci∣sion then used, Exod. 4.25, 26. And for time; whereas Circumcision of the home-born should have been on the eight day after birth; yet by occasion being neglected by some, neere thirty eight years; Yet was their Circumcision then approved of God him∣selfe, Josh. 5.5.9. And indeed if any corruption of manners in Administrators could make null such an Ordinance of God, done outwardly, or professedly for, or accor∣ding to his command; Then Circumcision, used by them that worshipped Baal, had been nullified: When the House of Israel was so gone a whoring in that Idolatry, that it was death for a man to be knowne that hee would not bow the knee to Baal; Yet the Circumcision of men in that time is nei∣ther faulted, nor they prohibited, but invited to come to the Passeover, and for their Purification according to the Law, care was taken, and want in that be∣wayled, and healing sought; But for their Circumcision fore-passed, it is not faulted at all, 2 Chron. 30.6.20. And surely had errour in such things made a nullity of the Ordinance of Baptisme, that when professedly done in his name, yet such errours, of men baptizing, should make it no Baptisme; Then would our Soviour have set his choise Ministers to that work, but he set his Disciples to it, and so did the A∣postles their Attendants: Nor is there any prescriptions what manner of per∣sons, for Gifts, Office, Grace, or Demeanour they must be that baptize others in the name of the Lord Jesus with water. Nor although we read in the wri∣tings of the Apostles of divers false Teachers, and divers evill Livers, and have there reproved both false Doctrine and evill life; Yet is not the outward Baptisme of any of them any where faulted, much less affirmed to be null: And could the Testimony of Scripture, or the Ordinance of Baptisme be made null in it selfe by being in the hands of Idolaters, or by the addition of their inventions therewith (as they are made voyd and ineffectuall to such I∣dolaters, Mat. 15.1.9. Rom. 2.) Then could not the outward Court of the Temple be left in the hands of the Gentiles, nor the man of sinne sit in the Temple of God, as is affirmed, Rev. 11.2. 2 Thes. 2.4. Nor could such as are in Babylon, and have fellowship therewith, be called Gods people, if they had not fore-had his Baptisme: If the Baptisme had beene Antichrists, and the Whores, then it might have been said, Yee Antichristians and Babyloni∣ans, separate from your fellowes, and become my People; But the Baptisme
being the Lords, it is said, Come out of her my People, Rev. 18.4. So that in professing Jesus to be the Christ, as a witness of the truth of that professi∣on: to baptize any that refuse it not with water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is outward Baptisme indeed, and a medium of bapti∣zing into Christ: And such as have beene so baptized with water in that name, are outwardly baptized indeed, and so engaged unto Christ, that they might be baptized into Christ, by being farther baptized with the word, the Holy Spirit and affliction. 3. The Holy Spirit, in, and with his light and operation comming from the Father and the Sonne, in, and with the meanes used, is the principall medium of baptizing into Christ; And so John taught, that Iesus Christ should Bap∣tize with the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Joh. 1.33. And Jesus Christ promised the same, Acts 1.5. And in that Acts 1.4.5. Our Saviour gives us to understand what baptizing with the Holy Ghost is. In the fourth verse he bids them wait for the promise of the Father, which they had heard of him, which is express in the same councell, Luke 24.49. And the encouragement and ground of hope he gave them is vers. 5. in these two. First, that Iohn truly baptized with water, he had his Com∣mission from Heaven; preached truth, which he testified by baptizing with water, and then told them that Iesus Christ should baptize with the Holy Ghost. And secondly, Christ himselfe had promised to send forth spirit to them, and endue them with Power from on high; and this he assures them they shall receive, saying, Yee shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. In which two verses compared with Luke 24.45. to 49 & John 7.38, 39. appeareth, First, that there is a Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, that is the work, and belongs to the Office of Jesus Christ, glorified with Gods right hand, Mark 1.7, 8. Secondly, that Jesus Christ his sending forth Spirit into the hearts of Be∣leivers, enduing them with power from on High, operating in, and teach∣ing, and leading them, is Baptizing them with the Holy Ghost, John 7.38, 39. Acts 1.4, 5. Thirdly, that though this promise of the Spirit, in performance whereof is baptizing with the Holy Ghost, was first and primely to the Apostles, and first witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ; Yet it was also made to all that through Grace beleeve on him, and to their Ministration, yea, not onely in, and through the promise made to them, but expressely to all Beleevers to be fulfilled after the Ascension of Christ: So that baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and communication of the Holy Spirit, to Enlighten, Teach, Comfort, &c. is still abiding in the Church of God, as appeares in Prophesie, Isa. 44.4.8. Joel 2.28. &c. Covenant, Isa, 59.20, 21. Promise, John 7.38, 39.
And in the Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. And the ground rendred of exhor∣tation to be baptized, Acts 2.38, 39. Fourthly, that this Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, containes in it two things. 1. Jesus Christ his sending of the Holy Ghost into the heart of Beleevers. 2. His baptizing Beleevers with, in, or by the holy Ghost, Acts 1.4, 5. Luke 24.49. 1. Jesus Christ his sending the Holy Ghost into the hearts of Beleevers, to dwell, and keep a residence therein, Isa. 59.20, 21. Ezek. 36.27, 28. John 7.37, 38, 39. First, To minde them of the sayings of Christ in those things which he by himself, or his Servants had fore-taught them, opening their understandings to conceive the things of him, and so teach them, Luke 24.45, 46. John 14 26. Isa. 54.13.14. Secondly, To bear farther witnesse, and give in more evident testimony of Jesus Christ what he hath done, what he is, and will do, so firming them in confidence in him, and with courage to bear witnesse of him, John 15.26. 2 Tim. 1.12. Thirdly, To write his minde, and law in their inward parts, enclining their heart in faith and love acording to his minde, and so leading them, Heb. 8.8 10. 2 Cor. 3.3, 17, 18. Rom. 8.14. Fourthly, To be an Advocate within them, to teach them how to pray to God, and how to speak to men, Joh. 14.16, 17. Rom. 8.26. Zach. 12.10. Mat. 10 19, 20. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.11, 12. 2. Jesus Christ his baptizing them within, or by the holy Ghost, by his divine light, and power in his minding them of, and witnessing in them the things of Christ, effecting in them a new and Christ like Spirit, or disposition, Ezek. 36.26. 1 Cor. 2.16. He washeth, purgeth, and cleanseth them with pure water of the love of God, commended through the blood of Jesus, Rom. 5.1, 8, 10. Heb. 9.14. Rev. 1.5. Heb. 10.22. First, Bringing them into the hearty acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Christ, and their Lord, Saviour, Propitiation, Life, Wisedome, Righteousnesse, &c. and the All, and in All to them, 1 Cor. 1.30. Coll. 3, 10, 11. as be∣fore page 3. Secondly, Uniting them so to Christ in the beleif of his Death and Resur∣rection; that they begin to partake of the benefit thereof, being through faith, dead with him, and raised with him, so as they are thereby, and therein in some measure conformed to him, dead to sin, self, and world, and alive to God, loving, and living to things above, Rom. 6. Coll. 2.12. to 3.1, 2. 3. Filling them with the love of God he sheads abroad in their
hearts, Rom 5.5. and with the vertues of Christ, and some usefull gifts, with spirituall strength that they might walk out in the same, 1 Cor. 1.12. Ephes. 4.4-16. 1 Pet. 2.9. and in some more abundant filling, some are led to work miracles, and some to speak with other tongues, which as they are for unbeleevers, that never beleeved Jesus to be the Christ to convince them, 1 Cor. 14, 22. so they are rather the fruits of some abundant baptizing, then simply the baptizing it selfe; but this forementioned is the baptisme wrought by the Spirit, Col. 1.12. 4. Afflictions and Sufferings for the name of Christ, are a medium of Bap∣tizing into Christ, which afflictions and sufferings are called, The Fiery Tri∣all; that is, to prove, and try the Faith, Love, and Patience of the Beleever, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. & 1.6, 7. To melt, subdue, purge, and cleanse the Be∣leevers, Iob 33.15-30. Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. And to make them partakers of Gods Holinesse, and the quiet fruit of his Righteousnesse, Heb. 12.7-14. And as he hath chosen them through the Furnace of assliction, Isa. 48 10. So hath he appointed them through manifold Afflictions to enter into his Kingdome, Acts 14.22. As Iesus first suffered, and then entred into his Glory, Luke 24.26. That we may this way also bee conformed to him, in the fellowship of his death, and experiment, the vertue of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. And thus as Christ called his owne Tryals by suffering a Bap∣tisme, with which he was to be baptized, Mat. 20.22. Luke 12.50. And with which even his are in some sort to be baptized: Even so, though wicked men as instruments, doe afflict and persecute the Beleevers; yet because of his ordering and sanctifying hand, in trying, purging, and doing good therewith, he is said to baptize his even with fire, Mat. 3.11. Luke 3.16. And so afflicti∣on a medium of baptizing. Now of these foure Mediums, Word, Water, Spirit, and Affliction, there are but two put on the Ministration of the Church, or servants of Christ; namely, that of the Word, which they are sent to teach, open, Apply, Mark 16.15. 1 Cor. 1.17. 2 Tim. 4.2. And that with water in his Name, Iohn 1.33. Mat. 28.19. As for that with Spirit, it is his owne work, Iohn 1.33. And that of Afflictions, is his ordering, and sanctifying the evill works of wick∣ed men to beleivers good, Rom. 8.28. And as all these tend, and work together for effecting, and accomplishing one Baptisme, which is into Christ, there being no other baptisme of any kind approved but this one, that is into Christ: Yet the severall Mediums, as they are Mediums of baptizing into Christ, are in that sense called Baptismes: And though but two of these, that with Word, and that with Water, are to bee used, or minstred by the Church, or servants of Christ; yet the Do∣ctrine of them all belong to the Church and servants of Christ to teach what
they be, and what be the Ground, End, and Vses of them, and how to be accepted and received. And the Ground and Foundation of this Doctrine, and teaching thereof, is the same that is the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, Heb. 5.12. to Ch. 6.1, 2, 3. And as this Foundation is Jesus Christ; So the Doctrine of it, or (as some call it) the Doctrinall Foun∣dation is, That as through the disobedince and fall of the first Adam, all fell in him, and became under sinne and death in him, and were convicted, and sentenced to death in the conviction, and sentence that passed upon him, Gen. 3.6.11, 17, 19. Rom. 5.12, 18. And this, though without the knowledge or motion of the Individuals or particular persons that were to proceed from Adam, yet so verily, vertually and indeed, that all that came forth from him by propagation, doe then, and in that birth, and there-through partake of sin, and misery, and in their own persons beare the Image of the first Adam, as he was in his fall, Gen. 5.3. Rom. 5.17, 19. Iob. 4.1, to 4. Psal. 51.5. Rom. 9.8. Eph. 2.1, 2. Even so, by, and through the obedience, and righteousnesse of the second man, or last Adam; the Lord Jesus Christ, who as the publique man, in the room of all men, by the will, and appointment of the Father, and in onenesse of will with him therein; hath by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and so hath dyed for out sins, in which the truth of the sentence, Gen. 2 17. is fulfilled, and that curse denounced, suffered, Deut. 27.26. Gal. 3.10, 13. and by the power of God hath overcome death, and is risen for our justification, 2 Tim. 1.10. Rom. 4.25. 1 Cor 15, 3, 4. and hath through the eternall spirit by which he rose offered up his own spotlesse, and righteous body, yea, himselfe a sacrifice to God in the Heavens, and so hath obtained an eternall Redemption, Heb. 8.3. & 9 12, 14. And is exalted at the right hand of God, and filled with the Holy Spirit in the man, to send forth to men, Psal. 68.18. And ever liveth being the Mediator between God and men, 1 Tim. 2.5. Thus in Jesus Christ, as the publick man, a new Creation is made; and he hath so dyed for all men, and made the Attonement for them, that by interpretation, according to Gods acceptance of it in him, as in the publick man, all have dyed, and are risen, and Peace, and Righteousnesse, and Life, compleated for them, though in respect of their particular persons, they know it not, nor partake of it, nor can partake, unlesse by regeneration they be made in Christ, in whom it is, Rom. 5.18. 2 Cor. 5.14, to 17. 1 Iohn 2.2. & 5.10, 11, 12. Iohn 3.26. Yet it is so verily, vertually, and indeed in him for all men and unto all men, that whosoever of them in the appearance of this grace, come in beleeving into him, shall verily, and indeed, in his owne person, re∣ceive and partake of this Peace, Righteousnesse, and Life in Christ, and shall
beare his Image, Iohn 1.12, 13. & 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Acts 10.43. Rom. 3.22.24, 25, 26. & 5.1.5, — 11 — 19. And this, with the love of God here-through testified to men, as its held forth in the Gospel now, not only as it was in the promise at first, as a thing to be done in its season, eviden∣ced by testimonies of his goodnesse, and though not so fully opened, yet ver∣tuall to all Beleevers, Gen. 3.15. Heb. 11.6. No, nor yet alone added to this, the fuller pointing him out to come, and the everlasting Covenant confirmed in him, Gen. 12. & 15. & 17. And so the setting him forth in Types, Sacrifi∣ces, and Prophesies, of which Circumcision was a witnesse; yet so, as but one Nation partooke of those priviledges, Psal. 147.19, 20. And the Ordi∣nances given them, made a partition wall between that Nation and other Na∣tions, in respect of nighnesse to partake of the priviledges: But now is Jesus Christ set forth as he hath already come in the flesh, and hath done and com∣pleated all that fore-mentioned concerning him; and so slain the enmity, made peace for all Nations, and made them nigh by his bloud, and in the Gospell came and preached peace: In which Gospel, the Lord Jesus, with the things in him concerning our peace, are more fully set open, than ever before the ascension of Jesus Christ in our nature, and more abundance of grace, and spirit promised to all that beleeve on him, and this to be declared without difference to all Nations, Mat. 28 19. Mark 16.15. And this that Je∣sus Christ hath done by his Death, Resurrcteion, and Ransome-giving, and Mediation-making for all men, is rendred in the Gospel as the ground and rea∣son of all his Lordship over all, Rom. 14.7, 8.9. Acts 2.36. And also as the ground, reason, and proofe of the Resurrection of all men, 1 Cor. 15. to the end. And also as the ground, reason, and proofe, that God will at the last day judge all men by Jesus Christ, and cause all to confesse him Lord, Acts 17.31. Phil. 2 10, 11. And this given as the reason why God hath made him a Prince, and a Saviour, and filled him with spirit to give repentance, and remission of sinnes, and to rule all, John 5.27. Isa. 53. to the end. Phil. 2.7. to 11. Acts 5.30, 31. And indeed this is the foundation of repentance, and that whereby all are admonished to repent, Luke 24.46, 47 Acts 17.30, 31. And the foundation of Faith, and that which men are callssd on to beleeve, and there-through to beleeve on him, Acts 13.38.48. & 16.31. And all this appeares plainly to be meant, Heb. 6.1, 2. if it be considered with Chap. 5.12. and other places of Scripture, as Acts 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 3.11. And so like∣wise that the very same word of the beginning of Christ, is the foundation of the Doctrine of Baptismes, or of teaching Baptismes, or the Foundati∣on, Ends, and Vses of the Mediums of Baptizing, and so Baptisme it selfe; the Doctrine, and End of all being one, and tending to one Baptisme, and so,
1. As the knowledge, and belief of the death, resurrection, and ransome, giving of Christ, to have been for all men, is the ground why the Apostles did preach remission of sinnes to all in his name, and beseech them to repent, and be reconciled: &c. Luke 24.46, 47. 2 Cor. 5, 14 15, 19.20. Act. 13.32-37 38, 48. So likewise it was the ground of their baptizing with the word, and so discipling by the Word all such as were hearing, and did not turn away from the tender of the Gospell, 2 Cor. 3.14. Acts 16.31.32. 2. The same knowledge of the redemption wrought by Christ for all men, and his lordship over them, and having spirit to send forth to them, was the ground of their baptizing with water in his name, and so discipling those that refused not the Gospel when brought to them, Acts 2.41. and 16.14.31, 32. 3. The same knowledge, and belief concerning Jesus Christ, was the ground of their acquainting men with the baptizing, with the holy Ghost, and directing men to look up to, and wait on Christ for that, and to yeeld to the Spirit, as in the means he should be vouchsafed to them, Mat. 3.11. Acts 2.39. Mat. 28.20. John 14.16, 26. and 16, 7-16. 4. And on the same ground did they exhort to receive correction from the hand of God, and to be willing to bear the Crosse of Christ, directing them to look to Christ, and consider his sufferings, in patience to possesse their souls, and wait on him for profitable use, and issue, assuring them, they shall so receive it from him, Heb. 12.2-12. 1 Pet. 1.5-7, and 2.21. And thus did they teach all these as Mediums of baptizing tending to one Baptisme, even into Christ. But they never taught these meanes, or mediums of baptizing, to be either the foundation on which men were to be built, or to ground their hopes; nor yet to be the end in respect of attainments, as if life were had, and the true baptisme effected where ever these mediums are. For they alwayes set forth Jesus Christ to have dyed for our sinnes, and risen for our justification; to be the foundation, and thereupon built, and bottomed their exhortations to re∣pentance, faith, love, and use of the ordinances of Christ, and accepting of, and yeelding to the mediums of baptizing, as is seen in the places fore-quoted, and throughout their writings. And they have put the mediums of baptizing in their right place, as Posts and Gates to be waited at, and waies to be walked in, to meet with God, ac∣cording to that, Exod. 20.24. Prov. 8.34, 35. Isa. 64.5. Mat. 18.20. and 28, 20. Heb. 10.25. But union in, and with Jesus Christ and conformity to him, have they set forth, as the true effect, and compleating of Baptisme, and that in which life is had, Rom. 6.3-6. 1 Cor. 1.30. John 15.1. John 5.10-12. and with∣out
which life is not enjoyed, nor Baptisme indeed received and enjoyed, what mediums soever passe on a man. 1. A man may be baptized with the Word; the Ministers instructing, and he hearing it, and yet not partake of life, unlesse united with Jesus Christ, The Word that is preached by faith in him, Heb. 4.2. 2. A man besides his hearing the Word may be baptized with water in the name of the Lord Jesus, and so have the filth of the flesh, in the stain of Genti∣lisme put away, and yet is not purged in conscience by the spirituall applica∣tion of the blood of Christ, so as there be in him the answer-of a good con∣science to God-ward by the Resurrection of Christ, he is yet short of spiri∣tuall and eternall salvation, 1 Pet. 3.21. 3. A man besides his hearing the Gospel, and being outwardly baptized by the Servants of Christ, may also have from Jesus Christ some superna∣turall illumination, and inspiration, with spirituall force, in reproving, per∣swading, and moving; so knocking and calling for entrance, with promise of farther favour; yet if the heart be not overcome at his reproofs, and open not at his knockings, to let go other holds, and accept of, and rest on him, the man remains in danger still, Rev. 3.20. Prov. 1.23, 24. Ezek. 24.13. Gen. 6.3. whence that Ephes. 4.30. 4. A man besides his hearing, and receiving outward Baptisme, and par∣taking of some motions of spirit, so as in some sort he beleeveth, and maketh profession of Christ, may also come to suffer some things for the name of Christ: and yet if he abide not till Christ be formed in him, that he may be perfected by Christ, and his Spirit, all his sufferings may be in vain, Gall. 3.4. So as if a man be not overcome by the grace and spirit of Christ, in, and by these mediums to onenes with Christ, and conformity to him in some measure, he is yet short of that which is Baptisme indeed, in which happinesse, and to which the Promises belong: Truth it is, God may be said truly to have bap∣tized, because he hath done it by his Servants, and these mediums, and made them efficatious in opening their eyes to see, and moving their very heart; but they closing their eyes, and hardning their heart, in not yeelding up to the power and opperations of his grace, so as to have the scum cast off, and to be closed with, and conformed to Jesus; may yet in respect of the receit and blessing, be truly said, not to be baptized; as is foreshewn in the first and second pages. And thus I have as plainly as I can with so much brevity shewn, what the Baptisme is, that is so much commended in the Scripture, and what the medi∣ums of baptizing are, and of what use, that we may not mistake one for ano∣ther, nor confound all in one without distinction, and so make a confusion;
but that knowing all aright, we may know how, and when we are baptized into Christ, and how far, and not rest short of that But though the know∣ledge hereof might be usefull many wayes; yet that for which I have writ∣ten this, is principally at this time for information, about one of the medi∣ums of baptizing, about which it is greivous to consider the differences, and diffentions among brethren; yea, what judging, unbrothering, and separa∣ting from one another: and that is about baptizing with water in the name of the Lord Jesus; or which is all one, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is before shewn to be an ordinance of Je∣sus Christ, as a medium of discipling to, and baptizing into Christ, and so called Baptisme. And now minding what hath already been said of this, and all the other meniums, and so of the one Baptiime effected by them all: I will put to consideration in this. 1. What this Ordinance of Baptizing with water in the Name of the Lord, is? 2. Ʋpon what ground it is to to be administred? 3. To what ends it is to be administred? 4. Who are the subjects of of it, to whom it may be administred? 1. For the first, What this Ordinance of Baptizing with Water, &c. is? It is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, Annexed to the ministration of the Gos∣pel, as its now declared since the Death, Resurrection, and Ascention of Je∣sus Christ, and his sending forth the Holy Ghost, for testifying the truth of the Gospel, and engaging the Disciples to attend to the Gospel and Ordinances thereof, waiting for Christ to baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and so recei∣ving them into the family of Christ, by Baptizing them with water, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this ap∣pears in the Commission given Matth. 28.19. That it is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ is there expresse, vers. 18 19, That it is annexed unto the mini∣stration of the Gospel, is evident in that the Commission is for Gospel Preach∣ing, vers. 19.20. with Mark. 16.15. and Luk. 24 46.47. That it is annexed to it, as it is now revealed since the Ascension of Jesus Christ, &c. It is evi∣dent, in that they were not to go forth with this Commission till they received the Holy Ghost, and were endued with power from on high. Luke 24.47-49. Acts 1.4.5. That it was for testifying the truth of the Gospel: and engaging the baptized, &c. is evident, In that it is to be in, or into the Name of, &c. and so before John truely baptized with water, Acts 1.5. So circumcision be∣fore was a seale of the righteousuesse of faith, which Abrabam had before re∣ceived; That in Preaching it, he might testifie by circumcision, that he might be the Father, &c. Rom. 4.11. That it be done with Water, is also evident in the Commission; For though water be not named, yet it appears to be
encluded, and meant; That Baptisme with affliction is not meant, as given in Commission to his Disciples to administer, though afflictions are Meta∣phorically called water also; But his Disciples are to serve one another in love, and not to bite, and aflict; they are either the providence of God bringing correction as need is, Heb. 12. or the enemies of truth that afflict, and perse∣cute, Mat. 10. And it is the gracious work of Christ himself to order and sanctifie them, and make them means of humbling, purging, baptizing and con∣forming to Christ, as is foreshewn parge 12, 13. Also for baptizing with the holy Ghost, though that also be pure, spirituall and living water; yet is it not meant in the commission, as given in charge to the Servants of Christ to ad∣minister, for that is Christ his own work as is foreshewn page 12, 13. And endeed Baptizing with the holy Ghost, and blessing afflictions that they may help to baptize into Christ, is encluded in the promise (to the Servants of Christ discharging their commission) in those words vers. 20 And lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world, as is evident, comparing it with Mark 16.16, 17. Luk. 24.45.49 John 14.16, 18. But baptizing with the Word, and Gospel which is spirituall water, is meant, as that which is princi∣pally given in charge in the commission, as is foresnewn page 6, 7, 8. And yet that water is encluded is clear; but not alone from Johns baptizing with water, for that might have been, though in the Baptisme given by Christ after his resurrection, no clementary water were used, but only Word, and Spirit; wherein also that might be fulfilled, Mark. 1.7 8. Acts 1.4, 5. So that the allegation of Johns baptizing with elementary water would be forcelesse to urge it, meant in this commission, if there were no more to prove it; nor would it make it cleer and evident, that baptizing with elementary water is meant in the commission, if there were no more to prove it, but adding to the Baptists practise, the example of the Aposties baptizing with elementary water after the ascension of Christ, for so for a time, they did use circumcision also, and why not the ordinance given to the fore-runner of Christ for a time, though it had not been for continuance more then circumcision: nor will this help or add to the force of the argument, to alledge that, Mar 16.16. For, 1. That is not the Commission; the Commission is given vers. 15. Go preach the Gospel, &c. Now the beginning of vers. 16. is the Promise, and hope set before the Preachers of the Gospell. viz. That he that beleeveth (to wit the Gospel) and is baptized shall be saved; so that is promise, not precept. 2. To baptize with water is no more mentioned in Mark 16.6. then in Mat. 28.19. though encluded. 3. It is not said, he that is not baptized, shall be damned, as he that be∣leiveth not. 4. Simon Magus beleeved Philip, preaching the Gospell, and was baptized
(with water sure) in the name of the Lord Jesus, and yet not saved, Acts 8.13. So that some farther baptizing is there meant, so that all hitherto, if there were no more to be added to it, would be too weak to prove baptizing with elementary water, to be still in force: Besides, against this might be obje∣cted; That. All our Fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized to Moses, in the cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. Yet, but only those that came out of Egypt with Moses, passed through the Sea; and the following Generations were not carried in their persons back again, to have the Sea againe divided, and be lead through; but as they were of them, and one, and the same Church, and kept these wonders in beleeving remembrance, they were also bap∣tized unto Moses, brought to acknowledge him a man of God, and those Gods Lawes, that were given by him, and so did there rejoyce in God, Psal. 66.6. As in a like businesse the same is said, Hos. 12.4. Even so, it might be said, that the baptizing with water at the beginning, accompanied with those miracles, and visible gifts of the Holy Ghost, did baptize the Nations unto the acknow∣ledgment of Jesus, to be the Christ: But that the after generations, that come to the same faith, and so are of the same Church, are interessed in what was done to them; and, in beleeving remembrance of those wonders, are bapti∣zed unto the acknowledgment of Jesus, to be the Christ, and so rejoyce in him, according to that, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. And though this be true, usefull, and of force in some respects, yet the truth is, it is of no force to deny the use of elementary water in baptizing, to be included in the Commission given by Christ, but rather strengthens the acknowledgment of it; and now to shew that water is included, let it bee considered, 1. That the instructing with the Word, the work of the Holy Ghost, in the heart, and the sanctifying afflictions to such gracious helpfulnes, was never cal∣led baptizing, or baptisme, till the outward ordinance of baptizing with wa∣ter was first given, and then they are so called: As after the giving the ordi∣nance of Circumcision, the work of grace in the heart, by word, or affliction, was called Circumcision, and not before; So the ordinance of Circumcision, whence that gracious work had such a denomination, was an ordinance to continue, till compleated in the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. And likewise the ordinance of baptizing with water, whence the work of grace in the heart, by Word, Spirit, and Afflictions, hath had such a denomination as baptisme, is to continue till it be compleated in the glorious, and visible ap∣pearing of Jesus Christ, and the resurrection of the Saints, when also will be the end of the world, mentioned in the promise, and not before. As for Gods work∣ing on the peoples hearts, in leading them through the Sea, to bring them to ac∣knowledge
Moses to be a man of God, &c. That was no outward ordinance given to the people to use, but Gods own work upon them, and yet not called by the name of baptizing, till the ordinance of baptizing with water in the name of Christ was in use, which confirmes the continuance of that ordinance, till Jesus Christ come again, as is shewen, p. 5.6. 2. Our Saviour would not speak as a Barbarian to his Disciples; for those led by his spirit, would not so speak, 1 Cor. 14.15, to 19. Now baptizing with water, was that which they had been acquainted with, and the other not yet so fully understood by them. Now, though there was more in his words, which the Spirit in his comming gave them to understand, John 14.26. Yet that which they did understand, should not be in his words, in giving such a com∣mission to them, is derogatory to our Saviour to imagine, Pro. 8, 6, 7, 8, 9. And 3. The word baptizing is cleare, to be after used for baptizing with water, when water is not there mentioned; and that not only when baptizing is spoke of, as distinct from preaching the Gospel, that is preferred before it, 1 Cor. 1.1.17. But also where the distinction is not in such a manner exprest, Acts 2.38.41. & 8.12, 13.16. & 16.15.33. & 18.8. And, 4. These three former considered, and found true; then the Apostles pra∣ctise in discharge of their Commission, besides preaching Gospell, baptizing with water in the name of the Lord, Acts 8.36. & 10.47. Yea. and John Baptist also, baptizing with water, doth with the former proofes, clear it up, and evidence, that elementary water is to be used in this ordinance of bap∣tisme, and is included in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. And also in the pro∣mise, Mark 16.16. But now how much, or how little water, or in what manner, or how much dipped, or washed, is left in some measure to conve∣niency, necessity, and safety, in the judgment of the Church, there being no precept, nor plain and evident example for it. True, we find two examples, where water enough was, of going into the water, and comming out of the water; but we find no mention, either that they stripped themselves to goe in, or how farre they went in, or how much they were dipped, or washed, being in: Yea, of our Saviour, it is affirmed, he was praying when he came forth, and as he was praying, the Holy Ghost descended on him, Mat. 3.16. Luke 3.21, 22. And it being a custome in those Countries, for many to goe bare∣legged, and to wear Sandals, they might goe in to the knee; But neither their going in, nor comming forth, was their baptizing; For Jesus when he was bap∣tized, came straightway out of the water, Mat. 3.16. Mark 1.9.10. And as for the Eunuch, Philip, as well as he, went downe into the water; And then Philip baptized him, and then they came both out of the water, Acts 8.38 39. But no mention of the stripping of either, or their cloathing againe, b of the Spirit taking away Philip so soon as they came out of the water, whic
implyes no such stripping; besides, elsewhere it rather appeares, that for o∣thers, water was commanded to be fetched, Acts 10.47, 48. So that dip∣ping, or washing with water, is enough, most probable, the head, or face; but I will here for beare the reasons for that, enough is said before of this pag. 8, 9, 10 To shew, that in profession of Jesus to be the Christ, to baptize any of Adams race that refuse it not, with water, professedly in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, is the performance of the outward ordinance of baptisme; and one so baptized, is outwardly, and once baptized indeed: Nor can the addition (by the Baptizer) of some humane inventions, make the ordinance null, as is aforesaid. 2. For the second thing considerable, viz. Ʋpon what grounds this ordinance of baptizing with water, in the name of the Lord, is to be administred: And this appeares in the Commssion, with the ground thereof, Mat 28.18, 19. And the Tenor of the Gospel, John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Mark 1.16. with the residue of scripture, to be these, viz. 1. The certainty given in the Gospel of a peace, reconciliation, and redemp∣tion, wrought by Jesus Christ, in his Death, Resurrection, and Sacrifice of∣fered to God for all men, and his good will to have it made known, and ten∣dered to thema ll. This is the ground, both of preaching Gospell to them, 1 Tim. 2.4-7. And of baptizing any of them with water, Acts 18.8. 1 Cor. 2.13. & 15.4. as is already shewne in pag. 14, 15, 16. And he that hath not certainty in this, runs at an uncertainty in his ministration, which Paul would not in any thing, 1 Cor. 9.26. 2. The perscription of such as are to be baptized with water, to be subdu∣ed, or brought into, or under the instruction, or tuition of such, as have accept∣ed the Doctrine of the Gospel, and make profession of it, which men of un∣derstanding, and at their owne dispose be not, nor can be so judged, till they be found willing to heare, and to be instructed in the Doctrine of the Gos∣pel, Mat. 3. John. 4.1, 2. Acts 8. & 18.8. But children, not come to the use of understanding, are so, and so to be accounted, from the gracious pro∣vidence of God, putting them in the Family, and into the charge, and under the care, and tuition of such, whether by birth, or other providenciall way, Gen. 17.12, 13. Acts 16.15. But of this, more anon. 3. The command of Jesus Christ in his Commission, given to his Disciples, to goe disciple all Nations, baptizing them; baptizing being both with word, and water; neither to be prest violently, and where the tender of the Gospel is not rejected, the baptizing with word, and water, are of the same extent. And so the report of the Gospel, the work of God, in putting under the uition of such as have accepted, and doe professe the Gospell, and the com∣mand
of Christ, to disciple all Nations, baptizing them, is the ground, and bottome upon which this baptisme is to be administred: As for such as are to be baptized, to confesse their sins, and professe their faith, it is good in such as are come to the use of understanding before they be baptized; Yet though it be an encouragement, it is not the ground, and to them that think it so, it is but partiall, and fallible; But that set down before, is the Ground, and whole, and constant, and sure to administer one, as will yet more clearely appear anon. 3. For the third thing considerable, viz. To what ends, this ordinance of baptizing with water, is to be administred, and that is, 1. To be an outward, and sensible Testimony of the truth of the Gospel preached, both in that there in affirmed to be already done, by Christ for men, and also in the hope set forth therein for beleevers; and so, of the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, set forth thereby. Je∣sus his giving this ordinance to be administred, is a testimony of his faithfull mind, and the truth of the faith, and Gospel given to preach: And so, when John preached the Gospel, baptizing, and preaching the baptisme of repent∣ance, for the remission of sinnes, Mark 1.3, 4. He is said to have truly bapti∣zed with water. as witnessing verily the truth, Acts 1.5. And so, as all the Scripture, Moses, the Law, and all Types foregoing; so all the ordinances of the Gospel, doe testifie of Christ, John 5.39, to 44. Rom. 3.21, 1 Cor. 11.26. As Abraham received the signe of Circumcision, as a seale of the righte∣onsnesse of the faith he had, &c. that he might be the Father: Abraham his receiving the sign, was not simply his being circumcised, for so were all his fa∣mily; but his receiving that or dinance to administer, as a seal of the righteous∣nesse of the faith, its not said, which all he circumcised, had; nor of the truth of his own beleeving, but of the righteousnesse of the faith, that is, the Gospel God preached to him, which he had to preach to his Family, and so to be a sensible testimony, that he might be the Father of all that beleeve, Gen. 15. & 17. with Rom. 4.11. Even so also, the Apostles received this ordinance, to testifie withall to such an end; and so it is given as the Medium of discipling, in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. 2. To receive into Gods Family, or the Family of Christ, or Abraham, and so to engage the baptized, to yeild up to, and wait on God, in the acknowledg∣ment of his great name, and observance of all his ordinances, and the things he hath already commanded by Jesus Christ to his Apostles: And so, as Circum∣cision discipled into Abrahams Family, and bound to the Law, after given by Moses, baptisme disciples into the same family of God, and binds to beleive, and observe the sayings, and commands of Christ, fore-given in the Gospel;
and this is cleare in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 1.13.-15. And in that baptisme, is into his name, and no other. 3. To set, or lay before them, the hope that is set forth in the new Testa∣ment, confirmed by the death of Christ, for his baptizing them with the Ho∣ly Ghost, and so sending forth spirit, to teach, and write his sayings, and Law in their hearts, Mat. 3.11. Acts 1.4, 5. Luke 24 46, to 49. &c. as pag. 11.12. And so, by witnessing the truth of the Gospel, accepting, and engaging them into the Family of God, and setting such hope before them, they may disciple them, that so in beleeving, they may throughly repent, and lay hold on Christ, and therein receive remission of sinnes, and spirit, to lead a new life: And thus is this baptisme unto repentance, and to be received for the remission of sinnes, Mat. 3.11. Mark 1.4. Acts 2.38. Neither, as some vainly glosse it, causaliter, that it should cause it; nor declaratively, as if it did verily declare remission of sinnes received; But as a Medium of comming into Chrrist, that in beleeving, it may be received: And these are the ends of administration, and not such, as in which this ordinance is made like the Types of the Law, to have a sensible, and visible figure, or resemblance of Christ, in the manner of his death, and resurrection, and conforming us to him, for which no word, that conformity being the work of his Spirit, by word, and affli∣ctions. 4. For the fourth thing considerable, viz. Who are the subjects capable of this ordinance of being baptized with water in the name of the Lord, and so may have it administred to them: And that is expresse in the com∣mand, and commission given by Jesus Christ to the Apostles, Mat. 28.19. To be all Nations that were not fore-discipled, and refuse not in the tender of the Gospel to them, to be discipled. They had a massage of good newes, of Peace, and Salvation, to declare, and tender to men; To all People; To all Na∣tions, every Family; To every man in the whole Creation, Luke 2.10. Acts 13.37.48. Luke 24.45, 46, 47. Mat. 10.11, 12. Luke 10.5, 6. Mark 16.15. And this, that they might be discipled, that is, wonne in to accept mercy, to repent, and beleeve, whether they doe so accept, or no, John 3.17. & 5.34. Psal. 78.5, to 10. Ezek. 2. to the end. And for declaring this, they ad∣venture their peace, safety, and life, among men, Mat. 10. But if any Coun∣try, Family, or, man refused this Gospel, and would none of it, they were not to force it with violence; but to depart, and wait if God at another time would give them repentance, &c. Mat. 10.13, 14. Luke 10.5, 6.10, 11. 2 Tim. 2.24. Mark 5.17, 18. But what Nation, Country, Family, or man soever, did accept the Message, and were willing to be further instructed; those, and all under the tuition of those, being presented by them, are they to goe
on discipling them, by baptizing with word, and water, baptizing them with water in the name of the Lord, and farther instructing them with the word, And thus to all Nations now, as John did before to the Jewes, Mark 1.3.4. So as they are to goe to disciple all Nations in this manner, so proclaiming, and tendering Gospel to them, that none that reject the Gospel, be constrain∣ed to be baptized, and farther taught; So likewise, none that refuse not the Gospel, are to be refused, or put by, but to be baptized, and further taught, whether they be such, as in whom it yet appeares not; that they have in heart, truly repented, or doe beleeve with the heart, or such, as it appeares they doe with the heart beleeve, or such, as have also in their beleeving, received the Holy Ghost, all, and every of these: So John affirmes himselfe, to baptize indeed those whom he called, Generation of vipers (a name never put on any that did truly repent, and beleeve) and reproves them of their vain confidence, and boasting, and intimates, as if some of them were chaffe, notwithstanding his flooring of them, Mat. 3.6.11, 12. And so of Christs owne Disciples, which were baptized, and all others, called the multitude, John 4.2. & 6.61. And it is expressely said of some of them, That from the beginning they belee∣ved not; And after that sore judgment on dissemblers, Acts 5. its said, And of others, durst no man joyne himselfe unto them; which intimates strongly, that before they did, Acts 5.11, to 13. Besides, he that weighes what is said to divers Churches, and what the Apostles minds them of, from those that. went through the Sea with Moses, may easily perceive such to have been bap∣tized, 1 Cor. 10.1, to 11. And for those, that in hearing the Gospel, have be∣leeved before baptizing, some unfeignedly, and some feignedly, they were al∣so baptized, Acts 8.12, 13.36, 37. & 18.8. Yea, even such as in beleeving the Gospel, did also receive the Holy Ghost, before they were baptized with water in the name of the Lord, they also were so baptized, Acts 10.47, 48. So that no one of these can be set forth to limit the ordinance of baptisme to any one, or two sorts of them, it being to be administred to them all, and all the children by gracious providence, put in their tuition, and charge, to bring up for the Lord, being a part of themselves, and presented by them to be bapti∣zed: And this appears evidently in the Gospel, and by the commission given, to be the plain, and expresse command of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1. By the ground of the Commission; namely, That all Power is given to Jesus Christ in Heaven and Earth, vers. 18. And this by vertue of his death, resurrection, and sacrifice offered to God, in which, children are also concern∣ed, Rom. 14.8, 9. Phil. 2.7, to 11. 1 Tim. 2.5, 6. 2. By the businesse he set them about, which is to Disciple, or make Di∣sciples, or bring them into the House of God, the Family of Abraham; And so as before they made Disciples, or received into the Family of Abraham,
one Nation; and proselited into that Nation of any Nation, and then in Di∣scipling, the Fathers Discipled the Children also by circumcision; even so now in Discipling by baptizing the Parents, they are to Disciple the Children now by Baptisme, as then by Circumcision that did precede this ordinance of Baptisme. As for Johns Baptisme, That was to floor into the acknowledge∣ment of Christ come in the flesh, but not to bring into the Family of Abra∣ham, for he was to baptize none; but those of that Family before: And Circumcision was in force, untill the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and now Baptisme supplyeth that also, Col. 2.11, 12. So that as Circumcision was an ordinance of the Gospel as then revealed, so Baptisme is now an ordinance of the same Gospel, as now more fully revealed; and as Circumcision was for Discipling, or making of the Family of Abraham then, so Baptisme now; and as the work of grace had its name from Circumcision then, so from Baptisme now; as is foreshewn; only Baptisme now is more free, and of larger ex∣tent, Col. 3.10, 11. So that the businesse of Discipling leads us to understand children now as formerly. 3. By the command, To Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, before the priviledges of ordinances belonged but to one Nation; and yet to all that Nation, and so it was called one Nation, &c. Gen. 12.2. and 18.8. and 35.11. and 46, 3. Deut. 4.6, 7, 8. Psal. 147, 19, 20. Yet of these, such as walk∣ed in Gods statutes were a holy nation, Exod, 19.5, 6. But the whole Nati∣on was circumcised; and all but those by circumcision made of that Nation were strangers to their priviledges, Ephes. 2 12. And so neither John Bap∣tist, nor the Disciples of Christ, till the resurrection of Christ, might go to mi∣nister to any other Nations, Mat. 10.5. But now being risen, he commands them to go, and make Disciples all Nations; now as the children were a part of that one Nation, so are they of all Nations, and are Discipled in Disci∣pling Nations, or Families, though still such as are prevailed within the hea∣venly call, and chosen, are the holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. 4. By the manner of the expressions, and words in the Commission; Go ye therefore and (teach, or) Disciple all Nations, baptizing them, &c. He saith not, teach, or make Disciples first, and then baptize, nor so much as Teach, or Disciple, and Baptize; much lesse saith he, baptize them taught; All these are Additions, and Glosses put by some to the Text, to make it serve their private ends; but the words are plain, in which are two things observa∣ble in this businesse, whoever scoff at it. First, That he propounds baptizing as the medium, or way of teaching, or discipling,; Go disciple all Nations, baptizing them; A like speech in a∣nother businesse, Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us run with patience the Race that is set before us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; Now
none can first run, and then look, but running in looking; yea, looking is the way of running; for in beholding his glory, that is seen, which allures, drawes, saves, and so makes to run, Isa. 45.22. and 55.5. As the Beleevers shining is by holding forth, the word of life in word and conversation, Phill. 2.15, 16, So here discipling is by baptizing, when its said, disciple bap∣tizing. Secondly, That when he saith, Go ye Disciple all Nations, baptizing them; It being our Saviour that spake, the Disciples that were spoken too, and the Nations that were spoken of, whom Jesus wils his Disciples, to di∣sciple, baptizing them; we are to note, that the word (them) is referred to the Nations fore-mentioned: And can be referred to no other supposed persons; as for that is replyed by some, that the word them in the Greek is of the Masculine Gender, whereas the word Nations is of the Newter Gen∣der; and so them cannot be referred to Nations. They may cheat us that know not the Greek Tongue, if we will be weaned from the scope of the words; but they that know the Greek Tongue know; that the word Na∣tions, or Gentiles in the Newter Gender hath frequently a word of the Mascu∣line, as this word them, comming after it, and to be referred to it; and often so used in the writings of the Apostles, as Rev. 2.26, 27. He that overcom∣meth, and keepeth my words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron. And here them is, and can be no other but the Nations, so Acts 28.28. The salvation of God is sent un∣to the Gentiles, and that they will hear it; where (they) can mean no o∣ther but the Gentiles, so Acts 13.48. and 26.17, 18. And so its evident, that in the Commission to disciple all Nations, baptizing them: That this them is the Nations they are to disciple, and so comprehends as many, as refuse not to be discipled by them; Nations, Families, them, and their children; and thus it fully appears in the Commission; children also are encluded. And yet that this may appeare according to the scope of the Gospel, I will add more. 5. That this also hath been the way of God from the beginning of the Gospel preaching, to number children with their parents under whose tuition they were, untill the children fall to cast off that tuition. And so in the first Ages of the world, those under the tuition of such as professed the name of God, were called, the Sonnes of God, when it could be neither for their good disposition, nor their good conversation; but only for the name of those un∣der whose tuition they were; and when the tuition was cast off, that name was lost, Gen. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And in after Ages, when God revealed the Gospel more fully to Abraham, and made his covenant with him, to be tanght in his Family, and gave him an ordinance for admission into that Family, he willed
him, to take in the children also by circumcising all his Males from eight daies old, and upward, Gen. 17.11, 12, 13. And after this when he ordained the Passover, and brought his people out of Egypt, and directed them about the receiving in any one of the Gentiles to become one Nation with them; He willed, that the children of such a Gentile should be received also by circum∣cising all his Males, Exod. 12 48, 49. And our saviour gives us to understand it still to be according to the mind of God; that the discipling of the Father, is a discipling of the children; when he saith of Zacheus, Luk. 19.9 This day as salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also is become a son of Abra∣ham. And like to this Doctrine did Paul preach to the Gaoler, Acts 16.31. Beleeve in the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, and thy House. Which can be no lesse then in their comming into Christ, a bringing the meanes of salvation to their Families; yea, so far as by baptizng them, they may be ad∣mitted, and have interest in the means; all which sounds like the Commission, Mat. 28.19. 6. That the children of the Jewes, or circumcision, were a part of the Jew∣ish-state, yea, Church-state, and fellowship, having interest in the ordinances, and promises to that people; and so by our Saviour it was said, of such are the Kingdome of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. And this Church-state given to the Gentiles, shall not the children of the Gentiles that receive it, be of the same Church state, as the Jewish children were? Mat. 21.43. Acts 28.27, 28. and 13.46.47. 7. The children of the Jewes, while Baptisme could not be administred to children because Circumcision was still in force till the Resurrection of Christ, yet they had Imposition of hands, an ordinance that seems to require more in those to whom administred, then outword Baptisme doth; yet our Saviour received the little children to this ordinance, and blessed them, and reproved his Disciples for rebuking them that brought them, and counted their being brought their comming; and said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdome of Heaven, Mat. 19.13.14. 8. The types that went before, and are set before us for usefulnesse about Baptisme, doe comprehend children, and those under the tuition of Beleevers, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. 1 Pet. 3.19. 9. Whole housholds are affirmed in the writings of the Apostles to have been baptized, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. And no warning given us to except children in understanding thereof; and we were before directed, when a seal of admission was given to a houshold to understand the children also, Gen. 17.12, 13. Ezod. 12 48 10. As the Nation, and Church of the Jewes, had their children admitted
with themselves to an interest, and right in all the ordinances of God, to use as they were sitted by instruction, being at first Circumcised, and also had the promises, and hope of spirit set before them, Rm. 3.2. & 9.4. Acts 2.39. & 3.25. So now its affirmed, as that which was fore-prophefied, though not so clearly revealed before the ascension of Jesus Christ, That the Gentiles should be follow-heires, and of the some Body, and partakers of his promise in Christ, by the Gospel, Eph. 3.6. sutable to that, Acts 2.39. And if the chil∣dren of Christians were cut off, the priviledges were streightned, which I be∣leeve, none understanding Gospel rightly, will affirm. 11. Yea, to say in a word, children are mentioned in the Apostles writings, as part of the Christian Churches to whom he wrote, Eph. 6.4, Col. 3.21. And Fathers willed to bring them up in the nurture of the Lord; And they affirmed to be thildren of Abraham, that walk in the steps of the faith of A∣braham, Gal. 3.8. And did not Abraham begin to teach his children to keep Gods commands, by engaging them thereto by Circumcision; and shall not we begin to teach our children to keep Christs commands, by engaging them thereto by Baptisme. So that as the Gentiles come to be fellow-heires with the Jewes, and as chil∣dren have formerly been a part of the Jewish Nation, and Church, and are now a part of the Nations, according to the scope of the Gospel, and the words of the Commission given by Christ, there is an expresse command for the bap∣tizing of them. 12. But yet, as the Gospel is rightly understood, beleeved, and in the heart of any, there is yet more to be said for little children; as namely, 1. That though they be conceived, and borne sinners, yet while they are not come to the use of understanding, so as they have chosen no Idol, nor are yet capable of the meanes that should bring them to beleeve, he that is the fa∣ther of the helplesse, hath them in his protection; and he that will not gather where he hath not sown, will not charge them with unbeliefe, and so, not with their other sinnes; And so, in a sense of Christs account, they may be said to beleeve, Mat. 18.2.6. with 19.13.14. And though beyond our under∣standing how, yet its as beleivable, as that there should be an carnest expectati∣on of the creature, Rom. 8.19. But, if God will accept it as so, who are we, to fault him? and if he will account our bringing our children to him, their comming, let us accept of it. 2. That it flowes from the word of grace, in the heart of a beleever, and the Law of God, and commands of Christ written therein, to disciple their children, for the faith they have in beleeving the love of God to them, and the Redemption wrought for them, leads them to take them as the price of bloud, put in their hands to bring up for God, as Jacob took his children;
And the love that hath sprung up from Gods love in them, leads them to love, and accept whom God accepts, and to reckon according to his judgement, and so to receive them by Baptisme, into his Family to bring up for him, having his allowance. And thus much about this medium of baptizing. As for objections against baptizing children, I have purposed to avoyd con∣tention, and so shall meddle little farther then what is already done: As for the demand of an example of children mentioned to be baptized; they are enclusively mentioned in the word Nations, the word Housholds, in types mentioned; But its enough, it is commanded, and was fore-mentioned; and there was reason of small mentioning them; because the writings were at the first calling of the Churches: And it would have broke the Jewes in peices to have seen their Circumcision at first to thrown downe, which they yet so esteemed, and even the Apostles saw not the largenesse of the extent of their Commission at first, Acts 10. and 11. As for that is said, Children under∣stand it not. Its answered, As much as they did curcumcision; and though they doe not understand it when baptized, yet as Christ said to Peter, they may afterward, John 13.7. The pervertings of the Text, abuse of single ex∣amples to limit with &c. I will omit, nor will I presse any to more speedy baptizing their children, then according as by the light they have in the Gos∣pel, they see cause. As for such as beleeve not the report of the Gospel in the extent of it, I pitty them; because I see not how they can go upon any cer∣taine grounds to baptize any children at all; seeing they are not certain whe∣ther Christ dyed, and rose for them, or not, but though I see not, I hope some of them do, or else they would not do it. But I will proceed no farther in this, beleeving it already proved, that all of as that were baptized in our infancy in the name of the Father, and of the Sin, and of the Holy Ghost professedly, we have been baptized; and had there been some more errors then were of mens mixtures in the administrati∣on thereof; though they were evill, and to be repented, yet they made not the Lords Baptisme null, as is shewn pages 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18. So that I looke at my selfe, and all so baptized, as engaged in the very acceptance of this Bap∣tisme, as in the greatest, and most solemne row: To beleeve, and yeeld to the sayings of Christ, to wait for, and yeeld to his spirit for conforming to the Douth of Christ, that we might not live to our selves, but unto Christ. So that other baptizing with elementary water we need not; but such a remem∣brance of Gods mercy, and our engagement in that Baptisme, that we yeeld to all the operations of his grace in his sayings, in afflictions, and motions of his; that the Baptisme into onenesse with, and conformity to Christ may be more effected in us: But for men that have been baptized in the name of the Lord in their infancy, after they come to beleeve, to be pressed again to be baptized
with water; I cannot but look at, as evill, and sinfull; because there is no∣thing in Christs Commission for it, no precept, or example for it, nor pro∣mise to it in all the Scripture; nor yet have I ever met with any place aledged for a baptizing again with water any that were once professedly baptized so in the name of the Lord Jesus before, but only that one place Acts 19 4, 5. Where if that were true as they conceive, and granted, as they would have it, namely, That those twelve were fore-baptized with water to Johns Bap∣tisme, and then baptized again by Paul in the name of the Lord Jesus. Yet makes it nothing for their purpose; for then it would follow, That those who formerly baptized them, did not themselves understand, what Johns Baptisme was, though they named it, and baptized unto it; and so they were not before in words, or professedly baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, or in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and Holy Ghost. And then it was not baptisme that is the ordinance of the Lord, and so it Paul did baptize them in the Name of the Lord Jesus; It was because they were not so baptized before at all, as we in our infancy were, and so it makes nothing for baptizing again, any that were professedly baptized in that name; But indeed, there is no such saying, as that either Paul baptized those Twelve, or that they were baptized again, the contrary rather appears. For Luke in his story, telling of Pauls journey to Ephesus, And that he found certain Disciples there; In the second verse, tells us of Pauls Question, and their Answer; And in the third verse of Pauls Reply to, or Demand on their Answer, Ʋnto what then were ye baptized, and their returne of Answer, unto Johns Baptisme. And then Luke tess us again of Pauls returne of Answer, and instruction therein to them verse 4, and 5. And then of his Action towards them in verse 6 In verse 4 Paul first justifieth Johns Baptisme, (as our Saviour, Acts 1.5.) John verily baptized with the Baptisme of repentance; Then Paul describ∣eth Johns Baptisme, both in the doctrinall, and practicall part thereof, verse 4. Saying, that is, John said unto the people (that is, those John preached too) That they should beleeve on him that should come after him, that is on Ghrist Jesus; And then in verse 5. he deseribes the practicall part of Johns Bap∣tisme by 1. The Time. 2. The Action. 3. The Manner of it. 1. For the Time, He stayed not till the people could testifie such, and such a worke of grace in their hearts; But when the people (that is, Johns hearers) heard this (that is) did attend, and were willing to heare Johns 'Do∣ctrine and be baptized. 2. That is the Action, Then they were baptized, John baptized them with water: And 3. For the Manner, It was in the name of the Lord Jesus. So hath Paul shewn Johns Baptisme to be right, And that he did truly baptize with
water, as Acts 1.5. And so if Apollos, or other baptized these twelve with Johns Baptisme; it was right, and enough for the outward, and they needed no more for that; nor doth Luke say Paul baptized these: But in verse 6. Luke tels us Pauls Action, and Gods Blessing on it, he saith not, when Paul had baptized them, But when Paul had layed his hands on them (which is not Baptisme, but another ordinance of God, called imposition of hands; In which men praying to God for any, as in confidence, they lift up hearts, and hands to God; so in testimony of that confidence they layd on their hands on the party prayed for, Heb. 6.2.) like the same done by Peter and John, Act. 8 15, 16, 17 and the same blessing there was here; so that all the way here appeares no second baptizing with water, and however taken, nothing to the purpose of such urgers of it; indeed it is a greife, that there is found so much Antichristianisme, and so many corruptions in Ministers, and ministry, and such additions of mens superstitions, in any Congregation, or Church of pro∣fessed Christians, to dishonour God, and as should make the Lords people to abhor the Lords Ordinances, yea, this of Baptisme; yet surely, This is also a greife to many, that some of the Lords people doe not discern to put diffe∣rence, between the corruptions and superstitions of men; and their posts set up by the posts of the Lord, and the ordinances and posts of the Lord himself, so as for want of discerning, in abhoring mens corruptions, they abhor also the ordinances and posts of the Lord, in which they doe verily transgresse, 1 Sam. 2.17, 24. Though indeed those evill doers are the cause thereof; And indeed for such as on such occasions have been troubled, about their Baptisme received in Infancy, and thought in their Ignorance, and rash Zeale to better it by a renewing; though their practise be not justifiable; yet I rather pitty them, then judge them; and desire they may not be led into farther inconve∣niences, but that they may walke in the faith of the Lord Jesus, and love of their Brethren, according to that name into which they were at first baptized; But for such, as have once been outwarldy and professedly baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, that is, In the name of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, though in their infancy, to renounce that Baptisme, as null, as vaine, as Antichristian, and Antichrists Baptisme, that they may have, and receive ano∣ther Baptisme, and put the Title of the Lords Baptisme upon that: This is surely more evill then the former, and much more to be lamented; As may appeare in three things; in which, oh that I were mistaken; that is to say, 1. The evill they intimately and unknowingly they do in this businesse. 2. The evill courses they are constrained to take to accomplish this business. 3. The evill fruits that do follow the accomplishment thereof. 1. For that they intimately, and unknowingly do, let it be considered;
what was professedly done in the Baptisme they renounce, as null, and Anti∣christian; And there will be found, That in that Baptisme, they were recei∣ved into, and engaged unto the acknowledgement (even as now) of, First, The Name of the Fater, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, or of Christ, as set forth in the Gospel. Secondly, The obligation (or covenant) to be the Lord Christs, his own, and to own his Lordship. Thirdly, The hope of, and waiting in use of his ordinances for his holy Spi∣rit, to enlighten, teach, &c. The Commission and promise of Jesus Christ, Matth. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16. being of as large, yea of a larger extent, and as sure as that of God by Moses, Deut. 29.9, 10.15. and 30. with Rom. 10.4.8.10, And the ordinance being the Lords, could not be null in it self by mens failings? Now then, was not the dipping in, or washing with water, man, or childe, that made it Baptisme; but by vertue of Christs Com∣mission given, the Doing in that Name; And surely, when this baptisme is re∣nounced, they have not another Name of God, another Gospel, in which is truth to declare, and into which to baptize again; Nor have they another Je∣sus, that is the Christ, and Jesus a Saviour indeed, to engage unto by baptizing again. Nor have they another Spirit, That is the Spirit of the Father, and Son, to set in hopefulnesse for their baptized to waite for; If these things could be done in a second baptisme, it might be borne, 2 Cor. 11.3, 4. If not, Then the first that was with water in that name being renounced, what is the second (for a Church order, and such, or such a called Minister to baptize, or such an Age of the man, or such a word of grace in the man, are not of the effence, or being of outward baptisme, as is foreshewed;) is it not in the receipt of it, up∣on the renouncing of the first; A secret Hidden, and intimate deny∣ing of, First, the name into which they were at first baptized, and so the Gospel and Scripture setting forth that Name, and so leading to set loose from heeding Scripture Testimony. Secondly, the obligation, in which men were in that baptisme engaged un∣to Jesus Christ; to own and acknowledge his Lordship, and walk in his way, which when they came to understand, If they renounced not the name Chri∣stian, they have also accepted; But now in denying that first Baptisme; They deny all that continue that Baptisme to be obliged, or engaged by any Cove∣nant, or Vow on their part, to own the Lordship of Jesus Christ, To beleeve his sayings, to attend his Word, and Odinances, and to walk in his wayes, and so set men loose from their obligation to the Lord, and so far led to deny him, that bought them; And also to deny, Thirdly, That hope of the Spirit which was set before them in that Baptism.
And that this evill lurketh in the denyal of the Lords baptisme once received, And that it is a dangerous evil, is evident by the Commission for the ordinance, and all fore-writ about the grounds, ends, and subjects of it. But that any of our brethren, either Baptizers, or Baptized doe this evill knowingly, or pur∣posely, (yea surely I think at the first, They would abhor the thoughts of such an evill) I do not charge them with it; But as a sin of ignorance, intimate in the renouncing the first baptisme: I desire, they might never come know∣ingly to do such evill. 2. For the evill courses they are constrained to take, To bring men to re∣nounce their first Baptime, and take up another, and to justifie the same, when opposed by Scripture; Though all of them take not every of these wayes, But some one, some another, but I will mention none, but what I have met in their discourses, and writings in my hands. First, adding too, or taking from, many sayings of Scripture, to force in that they have no Scripture for, as in Mat. 28.19. First Teach, & then Baptize, and Baptize them taught, which are not there; Mat. 3. Denying them to be A generation of Ʋipers in that sence, whom John calls so; others denying John to have baptized them, when he saith he did. But water, and laver men∣tioned, Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.4, 5. For elementary water, which appears by our Sa∣viours exposition to be otherwise. Joh. 3.14.15, 16. And by Pauls, Rom. 5.8, 10. with Tit. 3.5.6, 7. And so denying all our Forefathers, till Johns time, from entring the Kingdom. Secondly, Pretending their refusall of their first baptisme to be; because there is no mention of Children, not come to the use of understanding in ei∣ther precept, or example, to be baptized, and so the Scripture to be silent in it; whereas they are much mentioned in that, as in the Gospel, That Jesus Christ dyed, and rose, and gave himself a ransome for them And its already shewn, They are encluded, and as much mentioned, as any others distinct in the com∣mission, and encluded in the tenor of the Gospel; in which in former times, they were mentioned expressely, and since intimately; So that the Scripture is not silent in it. But as under the Law, for any once outwardly Circumcised, upon their repentance, and faith, to be circumcised again; And so now since the Commission given for any once baptized with water in the name of the Lord, upon their repentance and faith, To be baptized with water again, there is neither Precept for it, Example of it, nor Promise to it, and the Scripture is altogether silent in it; And yet this they do, and stand to maintaine. Thirdly, Slandering, and defaming such, as at their perswasions, will not renounce their first Baptism, and accept of theirs as maintainers of Anti∣christ, denyers of the Lords baptisme, deniers of beleevers to be baptized, dis∣obedient to, and breakers of Gods Commandements, especially, This of bap∣tisme,
whereas it appears by that already said, That for the Lord Christ they stand; For his sayings they plead, and its before proved, to be the Lords bap∣tisme they stand for; nor do they deny beleevers to be baptized with water, if they were not fore-baptized; and if they were, there is no allowance in Scripture to baptize them with water againe, and for their disobedience to Gods commands, they count it meet to acknowledge it, and seeke for healing through Christ, in all through ignorance, weaknesse, or violence of temptation, they may be found to be faulty in, but to allow or maintaine themselves in disobedience to Gods commands, I hope the Lord will preserve them from; But to doe as their oponents, cry it out, in private and publick; We walke in the wayes of Christ, we keep the Commandments of God; They looke at, as too pharisaycall; And yet sure to tell such as were once baptized in the name of the Lord, That their Baptisme was no Baptisme; and so to take them off their engagements to be the Lords, and live to him, is to break, and teach men to break Gods commands. Fourthly, Laying forth evill, and unsound Opinions, or Doctrines to ground this their second Baptisme on, as That (speaking of the Ordinance of Baptisme to say) to faith exhibited by Baptisme is salvation promised, and setting forth what baptisme is, to say, its the application of water upon faith, which needs no confutation, but the mentioning, though I have answered those under whose hands I have it; But I verily beleeve, few there be, that will reason so grossely, though some have done. But this have I found in those more sober; That they declare their baptizing with water, as a foundation businesse, and so make it a part of the foundation, and those other principles of doctrine, mentioned Heb 6. to be other parcels of the foundation; be∣cause its said, The Foundation of Repentance, &c. Whereas it hath been told them; That the Word, the Foundation of such a thing argues not, that thing to be the Foundation; as to say, The Foundation of an House doth not argue the House to be the Foundation; nor is Baptisme there put in, But the Do∣ctrine of Baptismes: And though this hath also been alledged, That Jesus Christ is the Foundation; Yet that hath been answered, That he is the Foundation cmminently, but not only, others may be a part of the Foun∣dation, but he the cheif, even the Corner-stone; And for this alledged, Ephes. 2.20. Built upon the Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himselfe being the cheif Corner-stone; To which this an∣swer given; That by all that went before, and followed after in Ephes. 2.20. These words, The Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, im∣plyes not at all, That the Prophets, and Apostles are the Foundation any more, then the naming the Foundation of a House implies, that the House is the Foundation. But with that went before, and which followes, It proves;
First, That Jesus Christ, is the foundation, which was set forth, and laid by them, that were both eye witnesses, and the first witnesses of Jesus Christ his comming in the flesh, and of his Death and Resurrection, &c. Both the prime Apostles, and the Residue that were Prophets, and Evangelists also; For the Prophers are here mentioned after Apostles, Acts 10 41. Hebr. 2.3.4. As also, That he is the foundation upon which these Apostles, and Pro∣phets, and all the beleevers, that were Jewes, were built; And the beleevers that were Gentiles were built also upon the same foundation with them. Secondly, That this Jesus Christ as he is the foundation; so he is also the corner stone, that couples the walls, or buildings together, so as in being built on him, the Apostles, and Prophets, and the Jewes that beleeve; yea, all the Church that went before, and the Gentiles that beleeve; yea, all that come in to him, and are built on him after, They are by him united toge∣ther, So as they are one house, houshold, or Church, Ephes. 2.14-18. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.9. with 1 Cor. 12 12 13; And so Christ is affirmed to be both the Foundation, and The corner-stone Isa. 28.16. And this not only primely and emminently, but also onely, For Thirdly, Other Foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Je∣sus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Neither is there Salvation in any other; For there is none Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.11, 12. To this, though nothing be opposed, yet not yeelded; but waved, That it might not weaken another opinion, About the necessity of the outward Ordinance of Baptizing with water, which is implyed by the reasoning of many, and affirmed by some, To be as necessary as Faith; though our Saviour would not so affirme of that, which without controversie was true Baptisme, and more then outward baptisme sure. Mark. 16.15.16. Fifthly, By Interogations, and Queries, to put men to a mislike of their first Baptisme; As, were you so dipped, and plunged in water, when water was thrown on your faces? Did you so coufesse your sinnes, and confesse your faith? Had you such and such holy ends, if not, then your Baptisme was no Baptisme? And so urge them to renounce it, whereas though such things had been good, and commendable in the Fathers of Families pro∣selited from the Nations, when circumcised, yet not required of all under their tuition, so one may say of Heathens when discipled, such things are commendable in those of understanding when baptized, but not required in all under their tuition; yet notwithstanding there is no precept en∣joyning any to such or such a plunging, or a particular, and verball confession of sins; or such a confession and declaration of Faith, and such holy ends to be aymed at in all that are received to be Baptized, so as to put a necessity in such a case, more then God hath, is but mans Doctrine, and yet also an error
in the manner, is before shewn, not to null Baptisme, done in his Name. Sixthly; By urging, when other meanes prevaile not, to returne to Rome, for (say some) your Baptisme binds you to be faithfull to that Church, into which you were membred, when baptized: whereas this, is not only with∣out, but against Scripture: For, first we were not baptized into the name of a man, or Minister, or any order of men, or any Church, or Church order; But into the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. &c. Secondly, in Baptisme we were reduced into the outward Church, or Family of God, that professe his name, and not into a Church Order, or membred into this, or that parti∣cular Congregation, no such thing in the Commission: The Eunuch was bap∣tized rightly sure, and yet received into no particular Congregation, or Church Order, Acts 8.38 39. Yea, there were many baptized, and that Churches also, before set in the outward order, as is evident, by comparing Acts 13.14. with 14.1.19.21, 22, 23. That is not the end of Baptisme, to member into a particular Congregation, or into an outward Church-order; such a businesse rather leads to the faulted, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12, 13. & 4.6. No, nor to give the liberty of acknowledging Brotherhood; Ananias rightly called Saul Brother before he was baptized, Acts 9.17, 18. Seventhly, by taking advantage; when by these means men are made doubt∣full of their first Baptisme, and incline to think well of that they hold forth; to urge them while they are yet in their passion, to receive their baptisme, presently pressing thereto, Acts 22.16. & 2.38, 39. Which was not to such as were in any sort, or at any time baptized in the name of the Lord before: And now, why tarriest thou, were rather words of encouragement, to take a∣way feares, then of pressing to the suddennesse simply, Acts 9.11. to 17 18. And surely, for such as had vile thoughts of Jesus, judged him not to be the Christ, but persecuted, and crucified him, and were never fore-baptized in his name: It was meet, on sight of their sinne, they should repent, by chan∣ging their minds into right thoughts of Christ, and testifie the same, by being baptized in his name; and what is this for any so fore-baptized, to be baptized so againe? But for men that were fore-baptized with water in the name of the Lord, and have since been enlightned in the knowledge of his grace, and so come to high thoughts of him, as the onely he, the Foundation, the Peace, Life, &c. So as they rest on him, and submit to him, would any have them to repent, and change their minds in this, to more base thoughts of Jesus, and to testifie it, by renouncing their first Baptisme, and taking up another? I hope not; though the evill Spirit may secretly have such an aym, to produce it after∣wards. The Lord keep us all from this, and I verily beleive, all they in begin∣nings will say, Amen.
3. For the evill consequences that follow on the practice of renouncing the first Baptisme, and taking up a second; They are such as are more ordi∣nary, and usuall, and in a sort, necessary; or such as are occasionall, though not so ordinary: The more necessary, and ordinary evils that flow from this practice, are; First, by pressing the necessity of, and magnifying the outward ordinance, &c. A baptizing rather into Baptisme, or the name of Baptisme, then into the name of the Lord, though words carry it so; whence many in change of their opinion, and Congregation, are baptized the third time. Secondly, A slighting of the Lords ordinance of Baptisme fore-administred, and contending against it, and in magnifying their new Baptizing, an intimate slighting of the gracious operations of the Holy Ghost in the hearts, and ap∣pearing in the lives of Beleevers, retaining their first baptisme, and not accept∣ing theirs; Yea, I have it under the hands of some, that all was Antichristian, and of the world, before their second Baptisme received, and so to be disclaim∣ed on receit thereof. Thirdly, A separation from Brotherhood, and Fellowship in the Gospel, and ordinances of Jesus Christ, with those they have had even spirituall fellowship withall, and tastes of his goodnesse in, Before. Fourthly, A judging, despising, and censuring deeply, all those that maintain their first Baptisme, and approve not theirs. The occasionall evils which are not indeed so ordinary, are the springing up, and appearing of that evill, which is foresaid to be intimately, and knowingly done in the renouncing of the first Baptisme, and taking up another, as page 33. when in zealous justifying of it, after followeth in some, such a magnifying of that obedience (as they conceive) to the ordinance of Baptisme, as they even put that Baptisme in the place of Christ, and that obedience in the place of Faith, and so ground, and bottome the justification of themselves, and others and their hope of life on their own works, as their Declarations declare. But, in some others, in a contrary, and more fearfull extream. A slighting of the Gospel which is written, that declareth the name in which at first they were baptized, as a Dead, a killing Letter, yea, as a Fable, in the words whereof, truth is not; but in some misterious, or misty imagination of an Allegoricall sense. And with this ere long, a slighting of the personall body of the man Christ; And so, of his dying for our sins, and rising for our justification, and offering himselfe a Sacrifice to God for us; and sitting in Heaven to appeare before God, and mediate for us, as but a Figure, a Type, a Shadow, and of no farther profitable use to us. And with this, a slighting of all the operations of the Spirit, that testified of him, and effected Faith, Love, Union, Conformity from that appearance of him: All which they count but fleshly, and knowing
Christ after the flesh; how neer this is to that sinne mentioned, Heb. 10.29. the very mentioning it doth declare. And for those, that after knowledge, and warning, persist in this evill, they soon come to deny the very being of the body of the man Christ, and the resurrection of the bodies of men that dye. I suppose, all that have any spark of grace remaining, will look at this as a fearfull evill; and it might warn to shun that practise, which gives occasion of . But in this I desire none to mistake me, as if I affirmed, such as re∣ceive a second Baptisme, are necessitated to this, nor yet all such as renounce the first, to accept the second, or that only such doe fall into this evill: Not so, far be it from us so to thinke, or judge: But in observation, this some discerne, that for the most part, such as fall into this evill, are of those that were never baptized into the knowledge, and acknowledgement of the Death, Resurrection, and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, in the extent, and ver∣tue of it for all men, and so were either zealous opposers of it, or if in some sort acknowledging it a truth, yet counting it but a common, and light mat∣ter, which yet is the Foundation, as is shewn, pag. 18.19. Yet mostly, those of these that fall into this evill, are such as before they fall into it, come to renounce their first baptisme, and accept a second, though when they fall into it, they count themselves above all ordinances, and so slight their second also, in respect of themselves, or else such as in their judgment come to be snared with that practise, and to approve it as good; But conceiting Miracles of right to be done by such as Baptize, they wait, and seek, for such like things, till they conceit themselves above ordinances, and then not needing it, both sorts of them still approving such a practice for others; it being the way to set them loose from that name into which they were at first Baptized, that so slighting Scripture, they may beleive them. And yet still farther I desire to be noted, that there are two sorts of men that maintain this practise of renouncing the first Baptisme, and taking up a se∣cond. First, such as doe not beleeve Jesus Christ to have dyed, and given himselfe a Ransome for all men; or that there is any gracious life in him for them all; But that Christ did this only for a certain company elect in Gods hidden Counsell from Eternity, and that shall infallibly beleeve on him in time, and so oppose the testimony of Scripture, that saith, He gave himself a ran∣some for all men: These, I know not how they can with a good conscience, walk∣ing in their Faith, baptize any, till upon good grounds they be perswaded, that they doe in heart beleeve in Jesus Christ, and so are apted for renoun∣cing their first Baptisme, and taking a second, though being brought to be∣leive, they might enjoy the use of their first Baptisme, and have no good grounds to renounce it, and take up a second: But it is meeter to reason
with them, and informe them about the truth of the Scripture, in the ex∣tent and vertue of the Foundation, Acts 18.2.3. than to contend with them about the ordinance of Baptisme, in which it is no marveil though they be mis-led. But there are some, that doe professe to beleeve, and hold forth the extent of the Ransome; Oh that they would seriously, without preju∣dice, or offence-taking, consider the things written, for it is marveilous to me, and others, that any rightly understanding that businesse, should deny the Baptizing of Children, by Gods gracious providence put into the Tuition of such as beleeve, and professe Jesus to be the Christ; But yet more marvei∣lous that any (I hope there are not many) will say, A horse may as well be baptized as an Infant; surely, they will deny that to be true for a horse, that they will acknowledge to be true for an Infant; that Jesus Christ took their nature, and dyed for their sinnes, and rose for their justification; and that such as we treat of, are by gracious providence put under the Tuition of Chri∣stians; to be brought up for God, in his feare: And that (as John 13.) They may be instructed after, in this ordinance they now understand not; all, or a∣ny of which, I hope none will say of a horse. And thus have I shewn the cause of feare and griefe in such a practise, yet not to cast aspersions on the person of any, but to shew the evils that are so incident to such a practise; neither yet to unbrother any because of such a practice, unlesse such in whom, the last mentioned, occasionall evils appeare, 1 Cor. 16.22. For it belongs not to me, or others, to judge any, in obser∣vance of an outward Ordinance, who, through some appearance in Scripture to their understanding, Doe that which they doe unto the Lord, Rom. 14 1. to 10 Yet this I wish, that in this businesse, the Tenour of the Gospel, and the Commission of Christ, be considered; and that in reasoning, they would state the question right, not whether Beleevers may be baptized, for that none denyes, but whether Beleevers, that were fore-baptized in the name of the Lord, are, after they come to beleive, to be baptized with water in the name againe; and then, whether children in Beleevers Tuition, may not he so baptized, and till they can prove the one, and disprove the other by that Gospel, and without taking the foresaid evill wayes, cease pressing their pra∣ctise on others: And such as are not yet entangled, to consider what is said, and not suffer themselves to be snared. If any say, we doe, and may run into as many evils, I confesse, we are as weak as others, and so I will neither justifie my selfe, nor judge them, but pray for the healing of their follies, and mine: But whatsoever evils through weaknesse or violence of temptation, I, or o∣thers may be overtaken withall; yet this I affirme, that the remembring, minding, and retaining the Lords Baptisme we have received, leadeth not to, but preserveth from such evils; For it leadeth us to acknowledge the great
Love, and mercy of God, in the gift of his Son, and testified, and tendred to us in the Gospel of his Sonne, into whose name we were baptized, and so to count our selves engaged as by vow, and solemn Covenant (which since we came to use of understanding, we have accepted) To be the Lords, to live to him, to beleeve his sayings, and wait for his Spirit, and walk in his wayes, as is fore-shewn, pag. 23.24. If any say, we plead thus to save our selves from trouble among men; I answer, what through frailty we may doe, we desire to acknowledge, and seeke preservation from, or, if overtaken, healing of it; But it will be no comfort, to suffer for that we have no command in the word for, but in our apprehensions, much against it. But although wee shun that practise, yet if we hold forth the word of life, in word, and conversation, ac∣knowledging the sayings, and ordinances of Christ, and our Brethren witnes∣sing against the Idolatry, and evill wayes of men, we shall suffer as much as they, yea, and with them, while we acknowledge that truth, which some of them with us doe hold, though we urge not a second Baptisme, as of old some did Circumcision, to glory in the flesh, and boast of another mans line with∣all, which, in our judgments, would befall us in that practise: Wherefore I say no more to this, but the Lord make us so mindfull of him, in whose name we were baptized, that we may, in beleiving his sayings, attending his Ordi∣nances, and accepting to beare his reproach, wait on him for his spirit to bap∣tize us more and more into union, and conformity with Jesus Christ in his Death, that we may experiment more the vertue of his Resurrection; So shall we be more separate from the world, in the Idolatry, Pride, carnall Reasonings, Superstitions, Customes, Fashions, Vncleannesse, Covetousnesse, and Oppressi∣ons thereof, and be found more Loving, Tender, and Faithfull to one ano∣ther, and fruitfull to the Spirit. And so will our differences be healed, which God of his mercy grant, that we may not bite one another, that so there be not a devouring, nor turning any out of the way; But that we may all grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen. Your Loving, though Vnworthy Brother, THOMAS MOORE. FINIS.
