N805 E536_26 R205306 99864718 164837
A New-yeers Gift for the Kings most excellent Majesty now at Windsore, from his loyall and faithfull Subjects residing in and about the Cities of London and Westminster; and a Declaration of the Kings Majesties speedy coming to London. depiction of a haggard Charles I C R London: Printed for T. G. 1649.
A New-yeares Gift for the King. SOrrow may endure for a night, but Joy cometh in the mor∣ning, (saith the Musicall King and Prophet.) England hath had a long night of sorrow, the Sun of her glory (which was wont to ejaculate the splendent rays of opulent magnificency, through all knowne Lands) hath of late years been so eclipsed, that all her former lustre hath been involv'd in Cymerian dark∣nesse, the glittering of her owne unnaturall Sword did so dazell her (purblind) eyes, that she could not see his own miserable state, and precipitation unto utter ruine: nor move her hand to retex that unnaturall cord which tyes her fast to destruction. To reiterate the story of Englands late condition, would not be sutable to my present discourse, for my theme is joy, and as I am a most joyfull Subject my selfe, by the nourishing of my hopes, I desire to excite others, by this subject of joy to be joyfull Subjects too. Give way thou sable night of sorrow to this illustrious morning of joy: Aurora is risen in the East, and the Northern Star is become our Hyperion: the tenebrous Clouds which did invelop our happinesse, are dissipated by the approaching splendor of the Sun. Briefly, he whom we for a long time sought, and for whom we have sighed, sobbed, wept, prayed, fasted, I and fought too, to gain, that is, our most gracious and truly dread Soveraigne Gods anointed King Charles, is now by divine motion, with peace and joy, with se∣renity and affection, after so long absence, coming to capitulate with his great Councell the Parliament, concerning our ma∣lady and cure; to expresse this generall exultation in it's true dimensions, let us forme in our fantasie the Idea of the Tribes of Israel when they came to Hebron 2. Sam. 5.1. to choose Da∣vid for their King, after the death of Saul and shbosheth his son, we are, said they, thy bones and thy flesh, ah sweet expressions: so near a connexion is there between all good Kings and their
Loyall Subjects; Such congratulations, or the like, doth Royall Charles with in his Princely Journall; yet there are in En∣gland too many Jebusits that will say to King Charles as those did to K. David, v. 6. unlesse thou take away the lame and the blind thou shalt not come hither, these lame judgements and blind af∣fections, cause them as they do so misconstrue his Royall acti∣ons, making a Mountain of every mole-hill of his imperfections; but a religious David must expect a gracelesse Shemei to curse him and to call him bloody man, and man of Beliall, 2. Sam 7. but on the contrary, all true hearted Subjects will raise up a loy∣all strife, and stir up a zealous contention among themselves; who shall have the most or first place or part, in bringing the King home to his house, and I doubt not but many good and gratefull men, remembring old grace, and favours, will like Mephibosheth, and Barzilai, 2. Sam. 19.22.23. meet their long absent Soveraign with contratulary entertainments and expres∣sions of extraordinary Joy, for his return. Come then beloved King unto thy beloved people, make glad the places of thy Royall presence, and while thou abidest in one place, maist thou be with longing desire wish'd for in all places of thy Kingdome; may thy Subjects flow to the Sea of thy ver∣tues as small rivers to the maine Ocean, and like faithfull Bees, let them bring sweet honey of obedience unto the just hive of thy protection. Let them in the softest hearts hatch the pro∣mises, and let their tongues sing of thy honor. Let thy Adaman∣tine goodnesse draw the iron hearts of those that are refractory unto their duty. Let them be turned back and put to confusion that seek thy hurt, Psal. 70.2. Let these be the reward of thine adversaries from the Lord, and of them that speak evill against thy Soule, Psal. 109.10. Let thy heart be sound in the Statutes of the Lord, and enter thou with thy people, into the Covenant of the Lord, Deut. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 1. Rev. 2.3. Let thy Princely Sons be as plants up in their youth, Psal. 143.12. Let thy Daugh∣ters be as stones polished after the similitude of a Palace. Let all thine enemies be cloathed with shame, but upon thy Royall head let thy Crowne flourish, Psal. 132.18. Let Peace be in all thy Lands, and plenty in all thy borders, let England (Gods Israel) rejoyce in their maker, and let the children of Zion rejoyce in their King, Psal.
89.36. Let thy seed endure for ever, and thy throne as the Sun before God. Let not the foot of Pride come against thee, and let not the hand of the wicked remove thee, Psal. 36.11. Let not them that are thine Enemies rejoyce over thee, neither let them wink with the eye that hate thee without a cause. Let them shout for joy and be glad that favour thy righteous Cause. Yea, let them say continually, let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the posterity of his servant. Let thy trust (ô my King) be in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high, thou shalt not be moved, Psal. 21.7. Let thy daies be as the daies of heaven, and let thy seed be as the Stars. Let all mistakings, jealousies, and misconstruction between thee and thy People be moved as far as the East is from the West, or he North from the South. Let thine eares be attentive to heare the sound advice of thy People, and let thine heart incline to the wholsome admo∣nitions of thy great and grave Counsell the two Houses of Parliament. Let the Counsell of honest Hushais prevaile with thy pious thoughts, 2. Samuel 17.15.23. and let all false and trai∣terous Achitophels go hang themselves, or the hangman do it for them. Let all faction and pertakings be laid aside, and let charity and unity bind thee and thy People firmely together. Let thy exemplary conversation convert or confound all thine enemies. Let them all be ashamed who have spoken evill against thy sacred Majesty, when the universall eye shall see (and ac∣knowledge) all thy actions to be grounded upon the foun∣dation of grace and goodnesse, and thy innocency purge
thee from all infamous and treacherous Calumnies. Let thy Piety and Zeale towards God and his Church make all Hereticks, Shismaticks and blinded Sectaries recant their damnable opinions, and returne to their o∣bedience of God, and his true Church, and of thee their lawfull King and the annointed of God. These humble admonitions, (and hearty wishes most gracious and dread Soveraigne) our Loyall Subjects present unto your Royall Majesty: not that they deem your Grace, to want divine endocuments, (having been alwaies taught and led by the spirit of truth) but to shew their inward zeale to your Highnesses happinesse, ho∣nour, and safety: For out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaketh (saith the author of truth) and now gentle Readers (and Christian Country-men) I have spoken as is weake to the Kings Majesty him∣selfe. Many of his Majesties old Servants are come to read-minister their duty and service unto him their Soveraign master, and 'tis too probably conjectured that all our former clouds of sorrow and discontent shall soon be ex∣haled by the beams of benignity on both sides, either party inclining to St. Pauls counsell, are willing to bear one anothers burden, and the Sea of Love which covers a multitude of sins shall drowne all State grudges. The King shall comply with his Parliament, the Parliament agree with the King, the People in generall shall yeeld to Caesar his due, and Caesar (as he hath been) shall con∣tinue a gracious Soveraigne to them. Briefly, The Kingdome shall have Peace and Truth, the Churches Uniformity, and Concord almost quite lost, Ireland hopes of a speedy reduction, Sectaries and
Blasphemers shall be bridled (if not extirpated) and Church Government with true Religion established. God grant it may, Amen. But now I think on't I should do evill in omission of one thing very well worthy of recitall, which is this; Since his Sacred Majesty was first delivered by the Scot∣tish Commissioners to our English Lords, a various ru∣mour hath been whispered by vox populi as what they mean to do with the King, and though life, words (and thoughts) of some being nourished by Loyall fear, and of others by fantasie, but my conclusion shall be with the confidence that I have in the reality, [and integrity] of the Parliament, whose serious Protestations, (both Vocal and Literall) have so often promis'd to the world, that not an haire of his Royall head shall perish, nor a∣ny hurt betyde his Sacred Person, which lies in their power to anticipate, but on the contrary that they will rather adde to, then substract from him any of (either) his just Prerogatives or Revenues, making him a greater Monarch then before, either he or any of his Ancestors or Predecessors, were this if it be certain (as question∣lesse it is) we shall (by Gods gracious permission) see very suddenly, that the King shall rejoyce in God, Psal. 63.11. who sweare by him shall have glory, for the mouths (of evill speakers or) them that speak lies shall be stopped, Amen.
Postscript. MOst Sacred Soveraigne even with my soule, I wish thee re-inthron'd (without controule,) I am a Citizen that very fain, Would vie thy Royall Person here again; Oh how both I and many thousands more, Think long to see thee as thou wert before, The Princely off-spring, and the mournfull Spouse; (To whom this age no Joy but Griefe allowes,) O might I see you altogether come; To make St. James'es or White-hall your home; That day I'le count a day of Jubilation; A day that bringeth joy to all our Nation: I'th' interim I'le rejoyce (and think me blest,) To see thee first to usher in the rest; And on that blessed day (or night when 'tis) That show to London comes with joy and blisse, He who spares Wood or Ropes to burn and ring, I wish him hang'd and burn'd, God save the King, The Parliament likewise. And curb their Enemies. Amen. FINIS.
