P245 E1182_1 99864382 116610
THE SOULE OF FASTING: OR AFFECTIONS Requisite in a Day of, solemne Fasting and Humiliation. According to the Pattern, Neh. 9.5. &c. By H. P Imprimatur. Charles Herle. LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for Thomas Ʋnderhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1644.
Christian Reader, FRom the Experience, that of∣tentimes a little thing helps the Weake, and specially the Willing; and from the Desire to prevent the great Evill of Formalitie in our solemne Humiliations; These few Advertisements are offred to thy Eye and heart. Confident that the Substance of them is beyond Depising, except among those, who not onely Deny, but Despise all the Power of Godlinesse. I have ven∣tured to send them out, thus naked and alone. If they Profit thee any thing, thy Prayers may helpe to quicken to Some fur∣ther endeavour for thy Good, him who is devoted Novemb. 20. 1644. Thine and the Churches servant in Christ altogether, H. P.
The Soule of Fasting. Nehem. 9.5, &c. 1. AN Awfull Regard and Reverence of the Glorious Majesty of the Great God, with whom we have to doe by a through Appre∣hension of His Infinite and Incompre∣hensible Perfection, in all His Attributes, and of His Absolute Soveraigntie, as Creator, Preserver, and Ruler of Us and all things in the World, ver. 6. 2. Thankfulnesse for all the Goodnesse of GOD vouchsafed to us, by a Large Appre∣hension of all His manifold Favour, Ge∣nerall to His Church, to Our Nation, Particular to Us, and our Friends, Tem∣porall, Spirituall; Illustrated marvel∣lously by our Deservings, not onely of no good, but of extreame ill, ver. 7. &c.
3. Sorrow for Our Sinnes, and our Nati∣ons, and Forefathers Sinnes, by a deep ap∣prehension of the cursed Nature of Sinne in Generall, and vilenesse of such Sinnes in Particular; Aggravated by all circum∣stances that may be; Specially by GODS Mercies and Chastisements, ver. 16. &c. 4. Sence of Our Misery, Felt and Feared, all proceeding from GODS Hand, from His Displeasure, Provoked by Our Sinnes, and Impossible to be avoyded, but by His Favour, which is not to be presumed upon, if We con∣tinue in Our Sinnes, ver. 32. &c. 5. Faith in the Covenant, Truth, Good∣nesse, and Power of GOD, for all times and purposes, ver. 32. 6. A Covenant renued with GOD of all Observance and Fidelitie, specially to Amend what we have acknowledged a∣misse in our selves, and professed Sor∣row for, and Feare of, before GOD or Men, or both, ver. 39. and Chap. 10. throughout.
Directions about these. 1. IN the Word read or preached, those things are to be most care∣fully observed, which may quicken and confirme any of these. 2. All these are to be presented in Prayer, Summarily in every solemne Supplication such a day, private or pub∣lick: but the enlargements may be vari∣ed, and one while more of one; and ano∣ther while of another. 3. Before-hand it would be greatly helpfull to have written by us; 1. Am∣plifications upon GODS Attributes; 2. Catalogues of Choicer Mercies; 3. Catalogues of Sinnes; 4. Aggrava∣tions of Sinnes. 4. The Day is to be begun with those thoughts, specially which relate to our selves, though taking in others also. 5. And it is not to be ended without some secret, yet solemne review of the soules behaviour, from first to last; and
an earnest Labouring to fasten all the good thoughts it hath had, upon it, and to reinforce the sute to GOD, to settle them upon it, firmely and lastingly. The GOD of All Wisedome and Grace, teach us to practise and improve these Remembrances, to His Glory, and Our Eternall Good by Jesus Christ. FINIS.
