P3566 R215585 99899415 153496
The Proceedings at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer Held at the Sessions-House in the OLD-BAILY, For the City of London, County of Middlesex, and Goal-Delivery of Newgate, which began on the 29th of August and ended on the 30th Instant, but Especially the Tryals of S. Tufton, and Joh. Culfant. LAurance Adington was Indicted, Ar∣raigned, and brought upon his Tryal for a Fellony and Burglary, com∣mitted on the House of Edward Page in the Parish of Little St. Bartholomews, which upon evidence appeared in this manner, viz. The House of the Prosecutor being Broak-open in the Night time, and six Silver Tan∣kards taken thence to the Value of 30 l. the next Morning a pick Lock Key was found in the Cupboard from whence the Plate was ta∣ken, when some suspition Arising of the Prisoner, he was pursued, and taken at Lambeth-Mash, as he was entring a suspitious House, and upon search, a pick-Lock Key found in the said House, so that the Prisoner having been Burnt in the Hand, and upon suspition Committed to Bridewel in Southwark, where he confessed to one Rose that he had the Plate, but it was too deep gone to be recovered, though at his Tryal he pleaded Ignorance, and called some witnesses, but one being as Scandalous as himself, she was Committed to Custody, he was found Guilty of the Fellony. Frances Marsh was Tryed for picking a Watch and about 30 s. in Mony out of the Pocket of one Edward Brooks, when in Court upon Oath it appeared, that the Prisoner was in Company of another Woman, picked up the Prosecutor in Fleet-street and proffered either to give or take a Bottle of Wine, which agreed on, they went to the Green-Dragon-Tavern, and there Hug'd him so long till they had pickt his Pocket of the Watch and Mony afore∣said, but he presently missing them, upon search found his Watch about the Prisonr, her Plea was, that she having a wicked Husband that lived with another Woman, he had set on the Prosecutor to take away her Life, to be rid on her, denying that she ever had the Watch, or committed the Fact, but it being Evident, she was convict of the Fellony and Robbery. Sackvil Tufton Esq; a Captain of his Majesties Foot Guards, was Tryed for Killing Agrith Hasselwood, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields on the 21st of July last, which upon evidence appeared in this manner; The Prisoner being at the Head of hi Company, to be Assisting to the She∣riffs in the performance of their Office, upon the Execution of the Lord Russel, when the said Lord Russel was brought in his Coach, he caused his stand of Pikes to charge, in Order to keep off the Throng, when on the out-side of the Companies, there being a Ring made by the Constables and Bill-Men of the Hamlets, the Deceased being one of them, it unfortu∣nately happened, that the Prisoner pushing with his Pike or leading Staff, struck him on the Breast, into which towards the Left-side the head of the Staff entred four Inches, upon which the Deceased cryed out he was a Dead Man, Vomiting Blood at his Mouth, and de∣siring those that stood by to Seize the Prisoner, saying he had Killed him, and within less then an hour after Died. This being sworn on the part of the King by divers witnesses, the Pri∣soners witnesses were called, who declared, that the Constables and their Assistance had Orders not to Enter the Field, but to keep Guard in Holbourn, that they pressed hard up∣on the Guards, which oblidged them to charge their Pikes for the keeping their Orders clear, that at the time the Pikes were so charged, and the wound given, the Prisoner stood on the Right-side of the Pikes, and that the wound was received on the Left, which could not probably be done, and that the Prisoners Pike was at least a yard shorter then any of them, and that in all likelihood it was given by some other, and further alledged, that by reason of a weakness in his Arme, he was not capable of giving such a Thrust, and that he was a Man not Subject to passion or rash Actions, whereup∣on he was found Guilty of Man-Slaughter only. Joseph Curtis, and Peter Neverson were Try∣ed for Stealing a Silver Tankard, Valued 4 l. from one William Mock in St. Magnes parish on the 7th. of August last, which Fact be∣ing plain, they were both found Guilty of the Fellony. Thomas Norton took his Tryal upon an In∣dictment of Fellony and Burglary, for Break∣ing the House of John Hopton of St. Sepulchers Parish, and Stealing out Coats, Cloaks, and Breeches, and the like, upon which it was Al∣leadged that the Prisoner working in the House
and knowing the ways of it, had the better op∣portunity to get in at the Garret-Window, and what will rather induce the Evidence to believe was, that he was taken with a pair of Breeches lost at that time, to which he answered, he found them in Wapping, but not being able to prove his Allegation, he was found Guilty of the Fellony, though not of the Burglary. Edward Daniel was Tryed upon two In∣dictments, one of Fellony and Murther, and another for Fellony and Manslaughter, upon the Inquisition of the Coroner for Killing Edmund Deering, on the first of August, in the Parish of New-Branford; the Evidence thus, the Prisoner, the Deceased, and one Charles Macarty (not yet taken) being at a House in the said Town, a Quarrel arose about Drink∣ing Healths, so that the Deceased and Macarty drew about words, and flnging a Brandy-pot, but being parted; Soon after a differance happened between the Prisoner and the Decea∣sed, upon the formers taking Macartys part, but notwithstanding, being seemingly made Friends, they contrary to the expectation of the Company went out and Fought, where after some passes, the Deceased received a Wound, of whih in a short time he Dyed, but no Mallice appearing, the Inquisition of Man-Slaughter was only found. John Smith was Tryed for Stealing a Par∣liament Robe, from a Person unknown, the which upon his offering it to Sail in Bishopsgate-street, was stopped, and he giving no satis∣factory account where he had i, he was com∣mitted, and upon his Tryal alleadged that he found it between Hackney and London, taking it to be an Aldermans Gown, but that Story appearing Frivilous, he was found Guilty of Fellony. William Smith was Tryed upon two Indict∣ments, one for Stealing Cloath from Oliver Sams, and another for doing the like by Richard Kemps, both which appearing plain by his former Confession, and part of the Goods be∣ing found about him, he was found Guilty to the Value of 10 d. Sarah Parson was Tryed for Robbing Tho∣mas Midwinter, of St. Botolphs, on the Third of September last, of six Coats, four Petticoats, a Parsons Gown, and divers other Cloaths, which She confessed to have delivered to one Elizabeth Thompson, whereupon by her own confession she was Convicted. John Bowman was Tryed for Killing Thomas Haydon by running over him with his Cart, but it appearing upon Evidence that the Child fell just under the Wheel, and that the Priso∣ner neither saw it nor could have prevented it, if he had, the Fact was found Chance-Medley, and he acquitted. This day the Wife of Mr. John Gibbons, Presented a Petition to the Court purporting that seeing her Husband was committed Pri∣soner to the Gate-House for High-Treason, and had continued thre a considerable time to the great prejudice of his Family, he Humbly be∣sought the Honourable Bench that he might be Tryed or Bailed, but he being committed before the last Sessions, and not taking she be∣nefit thereof to make his Prayer, It was the opinion of the Court that he had over-stayed the benefit of the Act, and that it say not in their Power to grant his Request. Augustine Hankinson and Huphy Steech, took their Tryals for Stealing a Campaign-Coat, from one Robert Clark in January last, but they producing divers to attest his former Honesty and good Behaviour, so that in the end the Jurors supposing the Witnesses might be mistaken in the Coat, Mr. Clark himself not positively owning it, they acquitted the Prisoners. James Knowel was Tryed for Killing George Atkinson  on the 3d of July last, which appeared upon evidence, that the Prisoner & Deceased, Drinking together many hours, at last fell to quareling, but being both pacified, they went together into the Field, and there drew upon each other, after divers passes, the latter received a Mortal wound in the Belly, of which he Died, but the Prisoner pleading he did it in his own Defence, and no former Mallice appearing, he was found Guilty only of Man Slaughter. Gabriel Whinyard, Richard Goodman, Thomas Richards, and John Everard, were Tryed the first for Killing, and the rest for being accessary to the Murther of R. Lake, when upon evidence it appeared that on the 9th of July last, they drinking together in an Ale-House in St. Martins-Lane Fought, viz. Whinyard and Lake, so that the latter by a fall, had his Jaw broken, of which within 4 days he Dyed, so that Whinyard was found Guilty of Man Slaughter, but the rest acquitted, it not appearing they were any ways Aiding or Abberting. John Culefant was Tryed for Printing, and Publishing, two Scandalous and Seditious Libels, the one Intituled, The Second part of the Growth of Popery, and the other, The Second part of Ignoramus Justice, and it being pro∣ved, he brought the Coppy, Corrected the Proofs, and Incouraged the Work, he was found Guilty of the mis∣demeanour. James Handcock was Tryed for Stealing a Silver Tankard from Will. Clinch, in Amen Corner, the which being plainly proved, and he being before Burnt in the Hand, he was found Guilty of the Fellony. Jane Wixal was Tryed and found Guilty for Stealing three Silver Cups and a Pinner from William Woodvil of White-Chappel, on the 18 of July last. John Robinson was found Guilty of Pette Lacenary, for Stealing Lace, Tape, Parchment and the like, on the 15 of August, from Elizabeth Adams of St. Giles's in the Fields. Richard Smith was Tryed and found Guilty for Pick∣ing the Pocket of An Redd, of 21 Guni near Bos-Bridge, on the 19 of June last. Elizabeth Bird was Tryed and Convicted for Steal∣ing Knives, Swords, Canes, and Whips, to the Value of 20 l. from Ephraim Waradine in St. Martins Lane, on the 25 of May last. This Sessions five Persons received Sentence of Death, viz. Richard Smith, Sarah Parson, Mary Marsh, Eliz∣abeth Bird, and Francis Marshal. Five Burnt in the Hand, viz. Edward Daniel, Gabriel Whinyard, Jane Wixel, John Smith, and Tho. Norton. Four ordered for Transportation, viz. James Hancock, Joseph Curtis, Peter Neverson, and Laurence Adington. Two Sen∣tenced to be Whipped, viz. John Robinson and Wil∣liam Smith. And Lastly, John Culefant was Fined Two hundred pound, to stand in the Pillory, once at the Royal-Exchange, and once at Chancery-Lane-end, to continue in Prison till the Fine be payed, and give Security for his good Behaviour, during the space of two years. And so Ended the Sessions. LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, 1683.
