P4046 E843_6 99863279 115469
THE QUAKERS UNMASKED, And clearly detected to be but the Spawn of 'Romish Frogs, Jesuites, and Franciscan Fryers; sent from Rome to seduce the intoxicated Giddy-headed English Nation. By an Information newly taken upon Oath in the City of Bristol, Jan. 22. 1654. and some evident Demonstrations. By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esq; 1 Sam. 14. 15.And there was Trembling (or Quaking) in the Host, in the field, and among the people: The Garrisons and the Spoylers, they also trembled, and the earth Quaked; so it was a very great Trembling (or Quaking.) 2 Tim. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8.Having a form of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof; FROM SUCH TURN AWAY. For of such sort are they which CREEP INTO HOUSES, and LEAD CAP∣TIVE silly women, laden with sins, led away WITH DIVERS LUSTS; Ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so doe these resist the truth; MEN OF CORRUPT MINDES, Reprobate (or of NO JUDGEMENT) concerning the Faith. The Second Edition Enlarged. London, Printed for Edward Thomas in Green Arbour, 1655.
The Quakers unamasked and clearly detected to be but the Spawn of Romish Frogs, Jesuites, and Franciscan Popish Fryers; sent from Rome, to seduce the in toxicated Giddy∣headed English Nation. THe 2. Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. But there were also false Prophets among the people, even As there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresie, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destru∣ction. And many shall follow their pernicious wayes, by rea∣son of whom, the way of Truth shall be evill spoken of, and through covetuousnesse shall they with seigned words make Merchandise of you; whose judgement now of a long time lingrth not, and their damnation sum∣breth not &c. is both a prophesie of our times and lively Character of our Nation, who had never more cause to minde and practise that caution of our blessed Saviour, Math: 7. 15. 16. 17. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are Ravening wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits: then they have at this day, when such multitudes of Romish wolves, Locusts, Caterpillars, of all Sects, Orders (as Jesuites, Franciscans, Benedictines, Domi∣nicans, and the like) come freely over in whol Troops from forraign Seminaries▪ and Gels, act their severall parts and
on the Theatre of our distrac Enemies. ▪ all the nds round about ∣ble all the Beasts of the  to . Many pa∣stors have destroyed my Vinyard, they have tro my, n under  have  my▪  poion a desolate wildernesse. They have made it desolate, and being desolate, it mourneth unto me; the whole land is desolate, because no man layeth it to heart. And may it not be our complaint, (at least in respect of the purity, sincerity, practicall power of Religion, Church-Discipline and order, if not of our civill Rights and Liberties) at this very instant. Compare but the Stationers Beacons fired with Ramsy the Jesuites examination at Newcastle (June 1653) my Romes Master Peece, The Popish Royall Favourite, Hidden workes of Darknesse brought to publick Light, my Epistle to the Second part of A Seasonable▪ Legall and Historicall Vin∣dication of the Fundamentall Liberties and Lawes of-England, and this ensuing late Information, taken before the Towne-Clark and Magistrates of the City of Bristol concer∣ning the New Sect of QVAKERS or SHAKERS (derived rather from prophane Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 9. and those the Prophet David thus prayes against, Psal. 6. 9. 23. Let their eys be darkned that they see not, and MAKE THEIR LOINS CONTINVALLY TO SHAKE; then from that perfect E∣vangelicall Spirit and love of God which casteth out feare, shaking, torment, and makes the Saints alwayes rejoyce in Gods love and favor, 1 John. 4. 4. Phil. 4. 4. Rom. 5. 2.) lately brought into and set vp in England by Franciscan Fryers and Jesuites sent from Rome, who spread themselves like Gan∣greens or Locusts over most parts of the Nation: and make the very Pillars of our Church, State and whole Land to shake and
and then▪ me may (by way of seasonable admonition) conclude of them, their Disciples, all other New Sects and  Conventicles, of late years erected amongst us by them and their Confederates, in every corner, in St. Johns word, 1. Epist. 2▪ 18, 19, Little children it is the last time▪ and  have heard that Antichrist shall come▪ EVEN NOW ARE THERE MANY ANTICHRISTS: whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from us▪ but they, were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that it might be made manifest, that they were not at all of us: which will evidently appeare by; The INFORMATION of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol aforesaid Ironmonger, taken the 22. day of Janua∣ry 1654. Who informeth ON HIS OATH; that in the Month of September last, this Informant had some discourse in Bristol with one Coppinger, an Irish man, formerly a School fellow of his, that came purposly thither for his passage into Ireland, who told this Informant, THAT HE HAD LIVED IN ROME AND ITALY eight or nine yeares, and had taken upon him THE ORDER OF AFRYER OF THE FRAN∣CISCAN COMPANY: And he told this Informant, that he had been AT LONDON lately for some months, and whilest he was there, he had been at all the Churches, and Meetings, publique and private, that he could heare of, and that none came so neer him, As the Quakers: And being at a meeting of the Quakers, he there met with two of his acquaintance in Rome (the which two persons were of the same Franciscan order and company) that were now become chief speakers amongst the Qua∣kers, and he himself had spoke among the Quakers in London about thirty times, and was well approved of amongst them. And this Informant further saith, That the said Mr Coppinger asked him, what kinds of opinions in Reli∣on there were in Bristol? and this Informant told him That there were severall opinions and judgments: and not naming any opinions of the Quakers; the said Mr. Coppin∣ger
asked him, whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol? And the Informant answerd him, NO. Whereupon the said Mr. Coppinger told him, the said Informant, 2 or 3. times, That if he did love his Religion and his Soul, he should not heare them: Whereupon this Informant told him, That he thought none of them would come to Bristol: who expresly replied, that if this Informant would give him five pounds, he would make it five hundred pounds, if some Quakers did not come to Bristol within three weekes or a moneth then following. And on the morrow following the said Coppinger departed this City for Ireland, his native place, and about eighteen dayes after, there came to this city [Most likely his two fllow Franciscan Fryers fore mentioned, who have there done much hurt and gained many Dsciples, some where of disturbed two of the Ministers publickly in the Church, and assaulted, reviled one of them in the streets very lately] two persons that bear the name of Quakers. This is a true copy of the originall Information ta∣ken upon oath at Bristol as aforesaid, the 22 Ianuary last: from whence the Reader and whole Nation may take notice, especially those in present power, who should prevent such dangerous growing mischeifs with greatest care, not connive at them any longer: 1. That there are See Cromwels Speech in the Painted Cham∣ber, Sept. 4. 1654. p. 16, 17.multitudes of Romish Emissaries and Vermin now residing and wandring up and down freely amongst us, to seduce and divide the people, by setting up New Sects and Separate Congregations in all places, and Broaching new Notions and opinions of all sorts, or old Heresies or Blasphemies; not saying Masses, praying to Saints and Images, or crying up the popes Supremacy &c. as hereto∣fore. 2. That they are the chief Speakers and Rulers in most Separate Congregations, and particularly amongst the Quakers, amongst whom the Franciscan Fryers act their parts as well as the Jesuites. 3. That they have their severall Missions and Directions into all parts from their generals and Superiors, of their respective orders, residing commonly in London (Cromwels Speech p▪ 16, 17where they
have a CONSISTORY AND COVNCEL sitting, that Rules all the Affaires of the things of England;) besides fixed officers in every Diocesse) & are all foreacquainted both with the places and times of their several Missions; seeing Cop∣pinger could so certainly predict the time of their Mis∣sion and coming to Bristol; where they have done much harm and assaulted, disturbed the Ministers both in pub∣lique and private. 4. That the Popes and these his Emissaries chief en∣deavours are, to draw the people from our Churches, publique Congregations, ordinances, Ministers, Religion and to See Thomas Campanella de Monarchia Hispanica c. 25 27. divide & trumble us into as many Sects, Separate Conven∣ticles as they have Popish orders; and thereby into as many civill parties, factions, as possibly they can, to ruine us thereby. Math: 12. 25. 27. 5. That by this their New Stratagem and Liberty, they have (under the Disguises of being Quakers, Seekers, Anabaptists, Independents, Ranters, Dippers, Anti-Trinitari∣ans, Anti-Scripturists and the like) gained more Proselytes, Disciples, and done more harme in eight or nine yeares space to the Church and Realm of England, more prejudice, dishonour, scandall to our Religion and Ministers, then ever they did by saying Masse, or preaching, printing any points of grossest Popery in 80. yeares time heretofore. And if not speedily, diligently, restrained, repressed, will soon utterly overturne both our Church, Religion, Ministry, and State too in conclusion, having already brought them to sad confusions and distractions. Now that which gives great cause of suspition, that these Quakers are either disguised Franciscan Fryers, or their seduced Disciples and Emissaries, is 1. Their rambling about from place to place by two and two together, to vent and spread their Errors; as the Franciscan Fryers use by theSee Regula Frairum mino∣rum sub Fran∣ciso Militanti∣um. Ven. 150 Rules of their order are bound to do, and the Queens Franciscans did here of late. 2. Their use of vile and course aray and condemning not only all Pride and Luxury, but lawfull decency in apparell in themselves and their Proselytes▪ in imitation of the See Surius & Ribadeni∣era, in vita & Regula Fratrum Mi∣norum Sancti Francisci. Franciscans.
3. Their perswading people to desert their lawful Cal∣lings, imploiments, and to embrace a kind of idle Monkish lasy life, and ramble about from place to place to vent their pretended Visions, Revlations, Prophecies, Messages, and New Lights; A practise usuall with Franciscan. Fryers and St Francis their Founder. 4. Their rude and uncivill behaviour in refusing to salute, or shew any reverential respect, honor, or humble deportment towards Magistrates or o∣ther persons of what quality so ever, either in words, Jestures, (of which the rude cynicall Franciscans are most guilty of all other Popish orders) contrary to expresse Scripture Precepts and Presidents. Exod. 20. 12. Deutr. 5. 19. Math. 15. 4. Ephes. 6. 2. 5. Rom. 13. 1. 2. 7. Hebr. 12. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. 17. 18. (an observable Text against them) Tit. 3. 1, 2. 1 Tim. 6. v. 1, 2, 3. (a notable Text) Ephes. 5. 33. Gen. 18, 2, 3. c. 19. 1. 2. c. 23. 7. c. 24 v. 31. c. 27. 19. c. 33. 3. 4. 6. 7. c. 37. 9, 10. c. 41. 43. c. 42. 6. c. 43. 26. 28. 29. c. 48. 12. c. 49. 8. Exod. 11. 8. Ruth. 2. 10. 1. Sam. 20. 41. c. 24. 8. c. 25. v. 23. 24. 25. 41. c. 28. 14. 2 Sam. 9. 8. c. 14. 22. 33. 1 King. 1. 16. 23. 31. 47. c. 2. 19. 2 Kin. 2. 15. c. 4. 26. 27. 37. 1 Chro. 21. 21. Est. 3. 2. which compared with Math. 10. 12. c. 5. 4. Mar. 9. 15. Lu. 1. 40. Acts. 18. 22. c. 21. 7. c. 25. 13. 1 Cor. 16. 21. 2 Cor. 13. 13. Phil. 4. 21. 22. Col. 4. 10. 12. 15. 18. Rom. 16. 15. 7. 9. to. 17. 2. Thess. 3. 17. may teach these rude Quakers and their Di∣sciples far better manners and civility, both in their ge∣stures, behaviours, and words, then now they exercise. 5. Their Doctrines, That the Saints are perfectly holy in this life, and do not sin, being able to stand perfect in their owne power: That they are as equally holy, iust, good, and Free from sin, as Christ and God himself: maintained by The Perfect Pharis p, 1, 2, 11, 14. Fox, Naylor affirmed of St Francis, the Father of the Franciscans, and justified by them, in their writings: as you may read in Surius and Ribadeniera in the life of St Francis, and the blasphemous Book Conformitatum Beai Francisci ad vitam Jesu Christi, lib. 3. cum addition. Heir. Bucchii. Bon. 1590. first writ by Bartholomaeus de Pisa, and approved by a Ge∣nerall Chapter of the Franciscans held at Assise. Aug. 2. 1389.
and ratified by their Popes. Antonini Chronicon. Tit. 24. c. 1. 2. Vincentius Belvacensis. Speculum Hist. l. 3. c. 97. and Mornay his Mystery of Iniquity. London. 1612. p. 347, 348. It is the observation of many learned intelligent And of G. Em a late reclaimed Quaker in his Northen Blast. Pro∣testants, who have pried into the opinions and Practises of all our late New Sects, That in their Books, Writings, Speakings, Preachments, Witnesse Extreme uction, used by many sepa∣rate Congre∣gations, and their recusancy to heare our Ministers, or come to our publique Or∣dinances and the like. Practises, are interlarded, and mixed with some Jesuiticall and Popish Tenents, opinions, Ceremonies and Practises; by which we may as visibly di∣scover a Jesuit, a Popish Priest or Fryer in them, as we may a Lion by his paw. And nothing (in my judgement) more clearly detects the Popish Fryers, Priests, Jesuites, to be the principal inventers, erectors of, Actors, Rulers, Speakers amongst our Quakers, and other New sects; then their preten∣ded, See G. Em∣mot his Nor∣thern Blast. with Gilpins Book, both relenting Quakers. extraordinary sudden extravagant Agonies, Trances, Qua∣kings, Shaking, Raptures, Visons, Apparitions, Conflicts with Satan, Revelations, Illuminations, instructions in new divine Mysteries and Seraphicall Divinity, where of they pretend they were wholly ignorant before, being illiterate persons; their inti∣mate familiarity and immediate communion with God & Jesus Christ, in, and after their agonies and extasies; their extraordi∣nary callings, Missions, Messages to such and such particular or∣ders, sects, places, persons; their sudden speaking, understanding of severall languages which they pretend they never learned, but got by inspiration: all which are the very same in form and substance with those ridiculous lying Enthusiasms, Impo∣stures, Cheats, Agonies, See VVierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. c. 01. &. 17. in J: Gerson de Probatione Spirituum. Revelations, Visions, Raptures, Illuminations, Inspirations, Apparitions &c. of Popish Saints, Fryers, Priests, Jesuites, Nunnes, recorded in the lving Le∣gends and lives of their Romish Canonized SAINTS, by Capgrave, Surius, Lippomanes, Ribadeniera, Mafeus, and other of their fraternity, especially in the Lives of St. Francis, Ignatius Loyola (the Founders of the Franciscans and Je∣suites orders, the principall actors, speakers amongst the Quakers, and other late Enthusiasts, if fully examined) and of St Dominick, for men: and of St Katherine of Sienna, and St Imitated by some women Quakers. Briget of Sweden, for women. Out of this St Briget
Life and Revelations, printed in Folio at Nrembrg, An. 1524. most of our Male and Female Quaker Extravagant new Revelations and Impostures are extracted, as those who will but compare them may at first discern. And though they conceal their Jesuitisme and grossest points of Popery from their Disciples at first, baiting their hookes only with pleasing Novelties, shewes of Superlative Sanctity, and Se G. Emmt his Northen Blast. p. 1. 13. 14. The per∣fect Pharise. p. 9. 10. 11. 14. 29. 35. &c. invectives against our Ministers, Ordinances, Church, Tithes, Presbyterian Government, and the like; that so they may more easily catch the silly people; yet they discover their Jesuiticall Positions and Popish Doctrines, more openly by degrees; at last, (as Evangelicall perfection, Justification by our own inherent righteousnes and holinesse, &c. crying them up for new Gospel Light amongst the ignorant vulgar; and crying down our Protestant Ministers, ordinances, sacre∣ments, the Articles of our Creed, Church Liturgies, Gods Ten Commandements, the Lords Prayer, our Churches, and sometimes the Leter of the old and New Testament as Popish and The Je∣suites, Popish Priests and Fryers con∣demned our Minister shere∣tofore as un∣lawfull Mini∣sters, because they derived not their or∣dination from the Church of Rome: now they turne the scales and af∣firm them to be no lawfull Ministrs but Antichristian and popish upon this false pretext, That they derive their ordina∣tion and Mini∣stery from the Pope and Church of Rome. Antichristian: as the Fryers and Jesuites did heretofore in their Books and Discourses in their very language. And it is evident by some late in∣stances, that they are Anti-magistratical as well as Anti-mi∣nisteriall. Yea that these Sec John Gilpins, and others printed Relations con∣cerning the Quakers in the North. Quakers use inchanted Potions, Bra∣clets, Ribons, Sorcery and witch craft, to intoxicate their Novices and draw them to their party; As Simon Magus bewitiched, the people of Samaria with his Sorceries, Acts. 6. 9 11. and other seducing false teachers, bewitched the foolish Galatians, that they should not obey the truth Gal. 3. 1. which Enchantments, Sorceries, Charmes, Fascinations and Exorci∣smes are very frequent amongst Popes, and Popish Priests, Monkes, Fryers, Jesuites, as you may read at large in Jo∣annes, Wierus de Prestigiis Daemonum & Incantationibus. Ba∣sile. 1568. especially l. 2. c. 7. l. 5. c. 2, 3. &c. Platina, Benno Cordinalis, Baleus, and others in the lives of Popes Silvester, 2. Benedict the 9. John. 20 and 21. and other Popes, who were all most infamous Magicians, Sorcerers, and Inchanters, by which black arts they got the Papacy. And Del Rio his Disquisitio Magie, and John Jee his Foot out of the
Snare, London, 1624. will prove the Jesuites and Priests in England are still accustomed to them, to win and se∣duce their Proselytes. Whence we finde this Scripture expression concerning Romish Babylon Revel: 18. 23. By thy SORCERIES were ALL THE NATIONS DECEI∣VED. Now for our Quakers & others better instruction, I shall inform them by way of Caution of these consi∣derable particulars, relating to their Agonies, Inspirations and Revelations. 1. That the Joannes Wierus de Prae∣stigiis Daemo∣num. l. 1. c. 11. Ptrus Thy∣araeus de De∣moniacis et ob∣sessis. pars. 1. c. 3. to. 9. pars. 2. c. 25. 27. Geor∣gius Pistorius de Demonum ortu, Officiis, Illusionibus &c. Isagoge. Basiliae. 1563. Devil by Gods permissions frequently doth cause and produce, by his owne immediate power, extraordinary strang Convulsions, Contractions, Distortions, Agonies, Trem∣blings, Quakings, Shakings, Motions, Jestures of the Bodies, Members, Joints, Nerves Muscels both of Men and women, when, where, and in what manner he pleaseth; as we see by common experience in such persons as are either possessed by the Devill himselfe, or bewitched by his Instruments; and by the Convulsions, Trances, Quakings, Shakings, gestures of Witches, Sorcerers and other, acted or possessed by the Devil; of which we have many examples in History & experience; & one recorded in the Gospel it self. Mar. 9. 17. to. 28. 2. That it was the usual practise and custom of Devils here∣tofore by their Idolatrous Pagan Priests & prophets to give an∣swers in their temples, & oracles to their worshippers in Greece & other places, which of later times and at this day is likewise fre∣quent amongst the Pagan Idolatrous Indians, by human voyces, Nods, antique Gestures; affictis sub inde gestibus FUREN∣TIUM, nonnunquam EBRIORUM, alias TREMEN∣TIUM, aut RIDICVLAE GESTICVIANTIBUS, as De Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1 c. 1. p. 63. Joannis Wierus, relates out of Strapo Geogr: lib. 16. Their Priests (who were and are See Purchas Pilg. l. 8. c. 6. l. 9. c. 6. Wierus de praestigiis Daem: l. 2. c. 3. usually Witches and Sorcerers) when they prophecied and gave answers to the people, being cast into strang reall or feigned Extasies, Trances and Quaking fits, using sometimes the Gestures of Mad-men, somtimes of Drun∣kerds, other times of QUAKERS, TREMBLERS, and of ri¦diculous Antiques; oft times Howling, SHAKINGS THEIR BRESTS, foaming at the mouth, and falling downe in a swown (as some of our Quakers do now) as if they had the fal∣ling
sicknesse, the Devil in seeming entring into and acting in them; as you may read at leisure in Wierus, and Mr Samuel Purchas his Pilgrimage. l. 9. cap. 5. l. 8. cap. 6. and elswhere in his Voyages. Whether our Quakers Shaking Fits, Convul∣sions, Trnees, Agonies, running As William Strickland and other did at Kendall. See the perfect Pharise Lon∣don 1654, p. 0, 42. 43. about naked into the open Streets sometimes, and to particular Persons, Townes, Ministers, Magistrates with pretended Messages, Prophe∣cies and oracles from God, (but realy from the Devil himselfe) like so many distracted Bedlams, Drunkards, Antiques, Furies and Enthusiasts are not exactly paral∣leld with, and originally derived from these Idolatrous Pagan Idol-Priests, and the very Devil himself; I referre you to Iohn Gilpin (a reclaimed Quaker) his late printed Relation, touching his owne Shaking Fits, and Actions, (proceeding from the Devils possessing of, and acting in him, as he and others believed) and to those who have seen them in their Fits and Raptures; the wisest whereof, are of that opinion, and many of the vulgar people too. These Quaking Fits and Trances were really and feighned∣ly taken up, and imitated of late times by many Popish, Priests, Monkes, Nts and female Saints, as you may read at leisure in Surius, Ribadeniera and other Collectors of their Lives and Legends: and which verified Coppingers relation, and Cowlishow his oath; Mr Tillam the Admini∣strator of the Anabaptisticall new-dipped Congregation at Hexam, near New-Castle (a See a False Jew discovered An. 1653, p, 6, 1▪ 1, Papist or Popish Priest of late though now a zealous Anabaptist and Dipper) in his Banners. p. 24. professeth; That these Shakings, Tremblings and Exta∣sies (now used by the Quakers) were derived FROM THE FRANCISCAN FRYERS, as Mr Tho: Weld, Richard Pri∣derux, Sam: Hammond, William Cole, Willian Durant (5 reverend Ministers in & near New Castle) assure us in their Perfect Pharisee, under Monkish Holinesse, manifesting it self in the generation of Men called QUAKERS. London, 1654. p. 13. who by their Emissaries first infected the Northern parts about Kendall and Lancaster with this Sect, and now the westerne parts, by George Fox, John Audland, James Nayler and other of their Disciples sent from thence,
whose Hereticall, Erronious, Blasphemous opinions, and unchristian Practises, are solidly and fully refuted in this their Treatise. 3. That as Heretickes, Schismatickes and seducers, do derive their Heresies, Doctrines, Practises, from the very Devil himselfe, the Father of Lyes, Lying Prophecies, Heresies, Errors, as the Scripture attests in positive termes: 1 King. 22. 21. 22. 23. 2 Chron: 18. 21. 22. Zech: 13. 2. 3. Rev: 18. 2 John 8. 44. 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2. 2 Thess. 2. 9. 10, 11. Rev. 16. 13. 14. Acts. 13. 10. 1 John. 3. 8. who frequently (to delude and seduce men with more facility) transformes himself and his Ministers into Angels of light, and Apostles of Christ, as if they were the only Saints and Ministers of righteousnes; when as in truth they are still but Devils, false Apostles, and deceitfull workers or Impostors, as the Scripture expresly defines them; 2 Cor: 11. 13, 14, 15: as that Devil who tem∣pted our Saviour to cast him selfe downe from the pinnacle of the Temple, with a Scripture misapplied, and mutilated, was still a Devil, though he alleaged Scripture to accomplish his designes (as his seducing Instruments now do) Math: 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Lu. 4. 9. to. 13. So some Heretickes and Seducers of old, as Simon Magus, Marcion, Menander, Theda∣tus, Carpocrates, Eulyches, and others have actually traded with, received their Hereticall Tenents from, and been possessed by the Devil himselfe; as Lib. 3 de Excid: Hei: Egesippus, De Anima, li Tertullian, Hist: l. 5. c. 16 33 Eusebius, Lib. 1, & 4. Fab: Theodorel, Heres: 22. l. 3. c. 3. Epiphanius, De Daemo∣niaels. pars 2. c. 21. p. 55. Petrus Thyareus, with others record: yea, Many Popish Monkes, Friers, Priests, Nunnes, Papists, specially Females, have likewise been actually possessed, seduced, cast into strange, reall, or feigned Extasies, Agonies, Shakings, Convulsion Fits, Trances, and inspired with strang Revelations, Ʋisions, Dreames, Fancies, opinions, Prophecies and Enthusiasms by the very Devil himselfe, as you may read at large in Joannis Wierus De Praestigiis Daemonum; in Petrus Thyareus (a Jesuit) his Daemoniaci: hoc est, De obsessis à Spiritibus Demoniorum Hominibus. Coloniae Agrip: 1598. and in Sr. Edwin Sands his Europe Speculum. 1629. p. 169 where thus he writes. That the multitude of Indemo∣niati; (or persons possessed with the Devil) WHEREOF
MOST ARE WOMEN, is so hugh in Italy, even as of Witches in Savoy: of which some are dayly cured in shew, by their Exer∣cismes (being most of them Impostors to cheat the peo∣ple) but for one that is hlpen, almost twenty are either past their curing, or otherwise (as in Counterfeit) unwilling to be cured. 4. That William Lindan. Dialog▪ 3. Dubitantii & Petrus Thyreus De Daemoniatis pars. 2. c. 21. p. 56. 57. 58. write expresly; That some of the Ring-leaders and Ca∣ptaines of the Anabaptists, and some of their new Con∣verts, have not only communion and familiarity with the Devil, but in all probability, are likwise actually possessed by him, though they be not raging mad, and furious: Because some of them have (not only such ra∣ptures, Agonies, Fits and Quakings as persons actually possessed by the Devil use to have) so soone as they have deserted the Catholickes Religion, and adhered to that Sect: but Mox, post hauum poculum, aut sumptam cellam no∣rant Sacras liters legere, &c. Presently after the drinking of some potion, or eating of a Sop, which their theife Apostles give them, they know how to read the sacred Scriptures without any teaching, though they could not read before; to dispute of divine things they knew not before which they alleage to oppn the true faith and Religion; and forget so soone as they rem to the true Religion; of which Thyreus gives two instances on his owne knowledge; one of a Taylor; the other of a Country peasant. Now who (writes he) can doubt, that this proceeds from the evil spirit dwelling in em. For it is apparent that neither the Sp, Meat, nor drink they to,  any such vir∣tue as to instil the knowledge of the Sacred Scriptures into them. Neither is it God who conferrs this learning on them, seing they re enemies to his true faith and Religion, and lead (usually) a most impure life. Therefore since they get it no by study, nor the instruction of any man, from whence should they have it, but from the Evill Spirit that dwell within them? Besides, what is the cause, that so soone as they return to the Tents of the  again, they forget all or most of the things they re∣membred before, and know not how to read, though they could read as well as most, whiles they continued in their Heresy: but
that the Devil, their Tutor for sakes & leaves them to themselves? Ʋpon which grounds, some men justly suspect and conceive, THAT IT IS NOT THE ANABAPTISTS PROPERLY WHO SPEAKE SCRIPTURES THUS BY THEM∣SELVES, sad Daemones in Anabtptistis loqui; BUT THAT THE DEVILS SPEAKE IN THE ANABAP¦TISTS: even as when persons possessed by the Devil speake strang Languages they knew not before, See Tostatus Abulensis in 8 Math: qu: 114 it is not themselves but the Devil in them who forme the voyces and the sounds. which he proues more largly. pars: 1. c. 17. p. 44. 45. From all these particulars, I refer it to the most serious consideration of all our Quakers, Shakers and other An∣abaptisticall Enthusiasts, as likewise of those who are ad∣dicred to their wayes, or tolerate their coures without opposition; whether all their Shakings, Quakings, Extasies, Relvelations, Inspirations, Prophecies, and New Illuminations, which are real and not counterfeit (as many of them are) proceed not from the very See the per∣fect Pharisee p. 41. &c. Delusions and Inspirations of the Devil himselfe, and his Instruments, Ministers sent over from Jesuiticall and Popish Seminaries, Cells, Monasters, to seduce them by such Sorceries and Impostures as these from our Reformed Church and Religion, rather then from the Impulses, Dictates, Illuminations, Revelations of Gods holy Spirit? And so much the rather because many of their Doctrines, Positions, Practises are not only meer Monkish and Popish, but also directly contrary and destructive to the two Great ordinances of God in the world, Magistracy and Ministry, so much commended by Gods Spirit in the Gospel; yea some of them most Atheisticall, irreligious, Blasphemous, Diabolicall, unchristians Ʋn evangelicall, diametrically contrary to the Scripture and Fundamentall Principles of the Gospel, dictated by Gods Spirit; as you may read at large, in The perfect Pharise under Monkish Holinesse &c. in the Generation of men called QUAKERS; to which I shall refer the Reader, where in the Blasphemies, Heresies, Popish Tenents of John Autland, George Fox and James Nayler (three of the prin∣ciple Quakers sent to Bristol) are so sully detected and
solidly refuted, that it made them a shamed to continue in their former Quarters, and to pretend a New divine Mission from God, to spread their Heresies & Blasphemies in the West (though not so fit for Quakers as that Northern colder Climate of England and Scotland, where many Shake and Quake for cold alone, without the Spirits motion) whether they deserve to be sent packing gain, or into some sorraign Franciscan Cells or Jesuits Seminaries, from whence their Sect was immediately propagated, by Jesuites and Fryers sent from thence, to act the parts of Independents and Sectaries, to blow up differences and Conten∣tions amongst us; as you may read at large in Mr Edwards his Gangrena; part third. p. 99. and in a Grandees printed Speech in the painted Chamber. 4. Sept: 1654. p. 16. 17. to which I shall referre you for fuller Conviction. Let all our Rulers, Ministers and people therefore, who have any care of their owne or others Soules; or our Churches, Kingdomes, sasty and settlement, now seriously consider that speech of our Saviour Christ himself, John 10. 1. 10. 11. 12 Ʋerily verily, I say unto you; He that entreth not by the Door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, (as these new Romish Apostles and wandring Predi∣cants do) THE SAME IS ATHEEF and A ROBBER The theef cometh not BUT FOR TO STEAL, AND TO KILL, DESTROY. The good Shepherd giveth his life for the Sheep: But he that is an hireling, and not the Shepherd, whose own the Sheep are not, seeth the woolf coming, and leaveth the Sheep and fleeth, and the woolf catcheth them, and scattereth the Sheep. And such false Shepherds and hirelings (whether Ecclesiasticall or Temporall) who through negligence, cowardize, or any other design, shall See my Sword of Christian Magistracy supported: and r Thomas Edwards trea∣tise against Toleration. suffer such Romish Woolves, Theeves and Robbers as these, to scatter and devour their sheep in St Bernards verdict are PASTORES NON OVIUM, SED LUPORUM: Pastors only of the Woolves, not Sheep; and in the opinion of Christ, and all reall Christians likewise. Fredericus Broeckrous in his Epistle Dedicatory to the States of Holland and WestFrizland, before his, Antidotum Errorum
prcipurum i Tractatu de Deo &c. D. Conrad Vorstii; observes and proves at large; that no thing is more dishonest; or more pernicious to mankinde and humane society then the to∣leratio and propagation of false religious, contrary to the Do∣ctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. 1. Because men are here∣by 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11 compared with John 17. 3 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, &c. 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11. Gal. . 20, 21. Rom. 16. 17, 18. 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Tim. 3. 1. to 9. 2 Pet. . 1. to the end. Jude 4. to 20. with drawn from the true God, the fountaine of all hap∣pines. 2. Because truly they are deprived of the possession of Eternall life. 3. Because false religions are the most deadly poisons to mens Souls, which being a speedy, and infal∣lible death: & damnation to all Eternity i persisted in. 4. Because by them men are made twofold more the children of hell than they were before. Mat. 23. 16. 5. Because thereby all Piety is undermined, abolished; and to christian States all Wickedness, Impiety Cruelty, Folly and Wretchednesse, instilled into the hearts of men. 6. Because by differences and multi∣plicity of opinions and controversies in Religion; the greatest of people are brought. 1 To doubt of the truth of Christian Relgion. 2 To sleight and neglect it, toge∣ther with the Ministry & Publick Ordinances. 3. To give over prayer, and private family Duties. 4. To oppose Religion, and resist the propogation of the Gospel. 5. In conclusion, to renounce all Religion; and turn professed Scepticks, Seekers, Atheists (as we finde by sad experiences.) 6. Because Pagans, Infidels, and others, are discouraged from embracing the doctrin of Christia∣nity; when they find so many controversies and desputes ever amongst Christians themselves: And the com∣mon Enemies of the true reformed Religion, and Romish Emissaries hereby take occasion to calumniate that true Religion we professe, and to seduce the ignorant people from it, to embrace their damnable and superstitious practises, upon wch considerations, Eusebius de vita Constan∣tini Socrates. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 9. Theodore Hist. Eccles: l. 5. c. 6. Constantius the great, In my Sword of Christian Magistracy supported, and Truth Trium∣phing over fal∣shood. Theodosius, and all zealous Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Governors truly fearing God; in all ages, have made it their principle care and study to maintain peace and unity, concurred in the purity and principles of Religion; to suppresse all Heresies, Errors Scismes, repugnant thereunto, both by Laws and penalties, as I have elswhere largely, evinced against all oppugners of the
civil Magistrates coercive power, and  in mat∣ters of Religion, who never yet returned the least reply thereunto in sundry yeares, though challenged to do it. We shall conclude all with this word to Magistrates, Cant: 2. 15. Take for us the Foxes, little Foxes that spoyle the Vines, for our Vines have tender grapes. Search after, restrain, secure, prosecute, punish all Romish Foxes, Wolves, Con∣spirators, Enemies, Traytors to our Church, and Religion (according to our Lawes and Statutes yet in force against them) with as great diligence, care, zeal, as you no search after; restrain, secure, prosecute any reall, or imaginary Plotters, Conspirators, Enemies, Traytors to the Kingdome, Nation, or to your selves: And e as vigilant, as industrious to secure Gods and our Churches cause, interest, a your own; that so you may turn away Gods wrath, and inherit Phineas his praise and benediction for his zeal in this kind, Numb: 25. 11. 12. 23. with these four A∣postolicall Admonitions and Cautions to the people, recorded in the Gospel, as the best Preservatives against Seducers, Rom. 16. 17. 18. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause DIVISIONS and OFFENCES, contrary to the Do∣ctrine which you have received and AVOID THEM▪ For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. But evill men and seducers shall wax worse and2 Tim. 3. 13. . worse deceiving & being deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou hast heard and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them. Ephes: 4. 14. Henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftinesse whereby they lie in wait to deceive. And 2. John 10. 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Do∣ctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him bid speed, for he that biddeth him God speed: IS PAR∣TAKER OF HIS EVILL DEEDS, with this sad Memento to such who are seduced by these Impostors. 2. Thess. 2. 9 10. 11. 12 whose coming is after the working of Satan
with all power, and Signes, and lying wonders; and with all deciblens of unrighteousnes, in them that perish, be∣cause they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lye; That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth▪ but had pleasure in unrighteousnesse: and like the unjust Judge, Luke. 18▪ 2 4. Neither fear God, no Regard or Reverence Men▪ 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14 15. For such are false Apostles, deceitfull workers, trans∣forming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no arvel▪ for Satan himselfe is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righ∣teousnes▪ whose nd shal be according to their works. With the Sacred Scriptures to these New quaking male Prophets whom God never sent a broad to seduce the people of England, but the Very Father of Lies. er. 14. 14▪ 15, 16▪ ch▪ 23. 21. to 33. ch. 27. 15. ch. 29. 31. These Prophets prophesie Lies in my name, I SENT THEM NOT, NEI∣THER HAVE I COMMANDED THEM, NEITHER SPAKE VNTO THEM: They prophesie unto you a fals vision & diination, and a thing of nought, and the de∣ceit of their heart. I have not sent these Prophets yet they run, I have not spoken to them yet they prophecied▪ I have heard what the Prophets said, that prophicied Lyes in my name; saying, I have deceived, I have deceived; How long shall this be in the hearts of the Prophets that prophicie Lyes? yea they are Prophets of the de∣ceit of their own heart; which think to cause my people to for∣get my name by THEIR DREAMES which they TELL EVERY MAN TO HIS NEIGHBOR. Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets saith the Lord, that steal my word e∣very one from his Neighbor; that use their Tongues and say, he* See Alfonsi de Vargas. Re∣latio. p. 317. to 330. saith: Against them that doe prophecie false dreams, and do tell them, and cause my people to erre by their Eyes; yet I sent them not▪ nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all saith, the Lord▪ FOR THEY PROPHICIE A LYE vnto you; for I have not sent them saith the Lord, yet they
prophesie a Lye in my name, that I might  yo, and that ye might perish; ye, and the prophes that pro∣phecie unto you; for I will pow their wickednesse upon them. With these Gospel texts to our New Qua∣king Female Prophetesses, who now (in imitation of the New Order of Jesuitisses, who out of a Pretended zeal of propagating the Gospel, and converting Soules to God, presumed to nder abroad, and preach publickly in England and swhere to wo∣men and others, about the imbeeility, and beyond the Modesty of their sex for sundry years, to the great scandal of Religion, till at last they were excommunicated and totally sup∣pressed by Pope Vrban the third, his Bull Anno Dom. 1631. printed at Rome 1632. ) presume to speak pub∣lickly to the people in some of their Congregations as well as to deliver personal pretended Messages from the Lord (who never sent them) to private Ministers and others. 1 Cor. 14. 33. 34. 35. 37. Let your Women keep silence in your Churches (or Assemblies) FOR IT IS NOT PER∣MITTED UNTO THEM TO SPEAKE; but, they are commanded to be under obedience; as also saith the Law. And if they will learn any thing let them ask their Hus∣bands (if maried) at home. For it is a shame for wo∣men to speak in the Church: For God is not the Author of confusion, (or tumult) but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. If any man thinks himselfe to be a Prophet, or Spiritual; let him acknowledge that the things that I write un∣to you (and this against women speaking publickly in the Church) Are the Commandments of the Lord: There∣fore their speaking against Gods Commandments in this sort; is onely by the instinct; mission, and command, of the very Devill, in opposition to these Gospel precepts: thus seconded again by the Holy Ghost. 1 Tim. 2. v. 11. 12. 13. 14. Let the Women learn in silence with all sub∣jection: For I suffer not a woman to teach, to Vsup Au∣thority over the Man; but TO BE IN SILENCE, for Adam was first framed, then Eve: and Adam was not deceived but the Woman being deceived, was in the Transgression. And let those who run after and listen to these Feminine Pre∣dicants
remember that, of Isay 27. v. 11. The Women come and set them on fire; for it is a people of no understanding; therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour. And with this complaint and prayer to God himselfe, Psal. 60. 1. 2. O God thou hast cast us off, thou hast broken us, thou hast been displeased: O turn thy slfe to us again: Thou hast made the land to tremble; thou hast broken (and So the old Translation renders it. divided it) O heal the breaches thereof FOR IT SHAKETH. FINIS.
A Post-Script. THat the Jesuites (The See Ludovi∣cus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, p. 297, 325, 328, 336, 447 52, 624. Pests and Perturbers of all Republikes, who domineer by discords, tu∣mults, sects and schs) have (as well as Fran∣ciscans Fryers) have a principle hand in erecting, promo∣ting the new sect of Quakers or Shakers lately sprung up, and much increased amongst us, and that by Diabolicall delusions, sorceries, enchantments, practises, to divide us as much as possible, and extirpate our Ministers and Religion; these particulars superadded to the premises, may more than probably perswade, if not satisfactorily con∣vince all intelligent English Protestants, and our Qua∣kers likewise; for whose information I have made them publick, being unknown to most, who are utterly Ig∣norant of the stratagems of these Imps of Satan, to se∣duce them, to their eternal ruine. 1. That Ignatius Loyola, the Father of the Jesuites, and first Founder Generall of their Order (at first a Souldier by profession) when he began to play the Impostor, Se∣ducer, and institute his New Sect, pretended a divine Cal from God, and Jesus Christ; appearing to him, where∣upon he left his former Profession, House, Habitation, cast of his costly apparell, (which he gave away to the
poor) cloathed himself in course Sackcloth and ragged beggarly cloathes, lying upon the bare ground with∣out a bed, wandred up and downe in them from place to place, like a pilgrim, professing the study of poverty, penance, Mortification and contempt of the world, leading a most austere life for a time, mostly eating little else but course bread, drinking nothing but cold water, fasting the greatest part of the week, except on the Lords-day; conversing with the poorest and meanest sort, teaching and preaching to them often gratis in the open streets and woods, and all other places where he came without any Ordination or licence at all from the Bishops or Clergy, exhorting them to repentance ansterity of life and contempt of all earthly things, whereby he got great estimation amongst the rude peo∣ple, (especially for his pains in instructing their chil∣dren and them without any Reward) gained many followers and some Schollers likwise to be his Com∣panions: as Massaeus Vegius, Ribadeniera, Joais Eusebius Niremberger, Hasenmullerus (all Jesuies) record as large in his Life, with Hospinian, and Ludovis Lucius in their Historia Jesuitica. And is not this the very pra∣ctise of our Quakers and Shakers now, who exactly imitate him herein. 2. That Ignatius upon his first resolution to enter into this New strict kinde of Life, and erect his New Jesuiticall Order, fell into a fit of Quaking and Trembling, as Ribadeniera (his Disciple) and other record in his Life: Yea, Hasenmullerus (who was a Jesuite sundry yeares, and lived in divers Jesuites Colledges) in the end of his Jesuitical History, with Ludovicus Lucius Histori Jesuitiae .l. 1. c. 1. p. 8. record in expresse terms, from the Testimony of Terrianus the Jesuite. That Ignatius ITA A DAEMONIBUS EXAGITATUM, was So vexed and SHAKEN BY DEVILS (not God or his spirit) both in his Dinner, Supper, MASSES; and likewise in his Recreations, that he powereth forth the most cold sweat of death in great plenty; tandem ver CƲM TRE∣MORE
ipsum objisse, and that at last he died Quaking, or with a TREMBLING, having a most black counte∣nance. Yea, See Specu∣lum Jesuiti∣um, p. 3, 4. 26. Ribadeniera himself, in the life of Ignatius l. 1 c. 5. 17. records; That Ignatius had many conflicts with the Devil, who frequently appeared to him in the form of a Serpent, and that he whipped his companion Xavier whiles he was praying. And l. 5. c. 9. That the Devill painted Ignatius so lively and exactly in his co∣lours, that Lugnes his companion much admired at it: And yet cap. 8. and 10. he relates. That Ignatius cured one possessed with a Devill with one word: that the Devill in another possessed one, was cast out by the Je∣suites only naming Ignatius to him; saying, name not Ignatius to me, whom I most hate of all: And another Devill, in a Maid possessed, said; That Ignatius his greatest enemy, was in heaven after his death among other Founders of holy Religious Orders. Let our Quakers and their Disciples hereupon seriously consider and examine, whether their Quaking fits, be not derived from this Father of the Jesuites; and proceed not origi∣nally from the very Devils themselves, as his fits did? Yea, let them take heed they be not vexed and shaken by Devils as he was, and dye Quaking and Trembling as he did, with a most black countenance, as if he had been strangled by the Devils, which made him a Quaker first, and then a seducer; whose Disciples have made most Christian Kingdomes, Churches (especially our owne of late yeares) both to Quake and Tremble and Shake them in Pieces. It is the observation of learned Gulielmus Rdelatius. Methordus cu∣randi Morbos c. 23. 39. See VVierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. . 1. Phisitians; That Shaking Palsies, Quakings, Tremblings of the Mem∣bers and Joints, are very dangerous diseases, proceeding from the coldnes and weaknesse of the Brain or Nerves, cold flegme, extraordinary cold weather: (which makes most shake without any divine influences of Gods Spirit) sudden fears or frights, extraordinary Venury, Drunkennesse, frequent handling of Quicksil∣ver, Poysonous sumes of Henbane, white Poppy or the
like: And some times from Sorcery and the Devil himself contracting, shaking the Nerves and Muscles of the body in a violent manner: That if they grow inveterate they are hardly curable, and bring certain Death. Let our Quakers and new Trembling Paraliticks, examine, whether their Quakings and Tremblings (if reall, not feigned, as some of them doutlesse are) be not rather Diseases and Infirmities, then the motions of Gods Spirit in them, proceeding from some of these naturall causes (especially overmuch Ʋenery some of them having been late∣ly taken shaking with their female Proselites between the Sheets in a warme bed, as I am credibly informed) or from the Devils or his Instruments Sorceries, Enchant∣ments; and let them speedily seek out for cure, least they prove deadly to their Bodies and Soules too, in conclu∣sion as Ignatius his Quaking fits did. That many Jesuites and their Schollers study the art of Sorcery and Magick, and are Arch-Magitians; affir∣ming blasphemously, that Paul himself received so great Revelations from Heaven by being instructed in the Art of Magick: that St John had skill in this Art; yea that Christ himselfe, was the most absolute Magition of all others; as Johanis Cambilbonus (once a Jesuite in Syria) in his Relatio de abstructoribus Jesuitarum Artibus, & Studiis, Printed. 1608. & Ludovicus Luci∣us Hist. Jesuitica lib. 1. cap. .8. p. 172. 173. record. Yea these two Authors, together with the See Ludovi∣cus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica p. 172, 396, 432. Vniversity of Paris, in their Answer to Peere Cotton the Jesuite (Confessor to King Henry the 4. of France) Thuanus Hist. l. 132. phisiogmonia Jesuitica, printed Lugduni 1610. & Speculum Jesuiticum p. 106. and all attest; That this Father Cotton was an Arch-Magitian, and the best skilled in this black art of any of their Society: That the Jesuites themselves affirmed, he had a Magycal Glasse, wherein he would plainly represent to the King what ever he desired to know; and that there was no thing done or consulted so secretly in the most Private Cabi∣nets of other Monarches, which he could not disclose
and reveel by the help of that constellated, or rather condiabolated Glasse. That by the help of this Magi∣tian, the Jesuites hoped to convert one of the greatest Protestant Princes of the Empire to their Religion and Party: That he consulted with the Devil many times, and demanded his resolution of sundry quessions and doubts; which he entred into his Magicke booke, which Devil possessed one Adrian Fresna a Mayd at Saint Victors in France, which he used as his instrument to predict many strange things: particularly, he demanded of the Devil that possessed her these Questions. What should be the issue of the Conversion of the Lord Lavalife, and of the Counsellors of the Citty of Genua? How long Herely should con∣tinue? What hopes there were of the Conversion of such and such particular Persons? How Heretickes might be most easily seclu∣ded from the Court? What was most profitable for the Conver∣sion of all Heretickes? By what Sermons, Bookes, Meanes, the people might be most benefited? What danger might be created by the Devils against the Jesuites Society? Whether God would permit him to know by him, the time wherein the Heresy of Cal∣vin should be extinguished? And (that which most concer∣ned England) Qua ratione converti Rex Anglicae, e∣gina & Regnum maxime & facile quaeant? By what meanes THE KING, QUEEN AND REALME OF ENGLAND, MIGHT MOST OF ALL AND EASI∣LY BE CONVERTED TO THE ROMAN RELI∣GION? Whether our Jesuiticall Impostors, Quakers, and Enthusiasts do not now study, practise the selfe same Art of Magicke, Sorcery, and consult with the very De∣vil himselfe in their Diabolically inspired, possessed Prophets and Prophesies, demand not the like Que∣stions, Resolutions from them, and the Devil acting, speaking, Prophecying in them, as this Jesuit Cotton did from this possessed Girle, and the Devil in her, let their owne practises and consciences resolve them and others? And how truly they act the Jesuites parts in these particulars? See Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 59. 60, 62, 63. Hasenmullerus (a reclaimed Jesuit) in his Histori Jesuitied cap. 8. records. That John the
Jesuite in his Sermon. 15 October. 1583. publikely  elieve me, the Devils follow us Jesuites every where. That the Monks of Uldarie would have cast out a Devil out of one possessed, but he would not depart: Being interrogated, why he would not? He answered, I will not depart before my three Sonnes (so he termed the Jesuites) who are passing from Delinga hither, are come, who no sooner entred the house; but the Devil de∣parted out of the person possessed: most likely to en∣ter into these Sonnes of his, whom the Devils every where follow. Yet the Hasen mulle∣rus Hist. Je∣suitica c. 8. Speculum Je∣suiticum p. 62, 63. Petrus Thyraeus de Dmoniacis. Jesuits boast of many Devil e∣jected by them, out of their seminine proselytes and o∣thers: particularly, the Rector of the Jesuites at Vienna records; that a Mayd possessed with Devils, who could not be dispossessed by any Eorcismes, coming at length to their Jesuits Church was there freed, and no lesse then 15615: Devils (if the Jesuite computed a right) were there cast out of her; the last of them seeming to him to be Luthers Tutr, because after the manner of the Luthe∣rans, he spake many things against their Society and Re∣ligion. Surely this Jesuiticall Rector, had very intimate familiarity with these Devils, who knew both their Number (being so incredulous) and could so accu∣rately distinguish between them. Yet some Devils there were in women, whom they could not dispossesse, and derided all their Jesuiticall Exorcismes. Let all Christi∣ans then beware these incarnate Devils and their Emissa∣ries, lest they be really possessed by the Devil with whom they are so familiar and who accompanies them every where. 4. That the Jesuites send forth their Emissaries and A∣gents into Protestant Kingdomes, Churches, States, un∣der the disguises of Souldiers, Merchants, Mechanicks, Physitians, Chyrurgions, Travellers, Exiles for Religi∣on, and pretended Converts to the Protestant Religi∣on, in all sorts of habits, disguises, the better to con∣ceal their persons, the easier to intimate themselves in∣to Courts, Company of all Protestant Princes, Nobles,
Ministers, and persons of all rankes, to fish out their Secrets, insinuate themselves into their favours, poy∣son them with their Errors, divide them in their Judg∣ments, excite them to warre upon and distroy each o∣ther by their mutuall discords, and accomplish their Treasonable designes against them, to their ruine: Per∣mitting & dispensing with them freely, to resort openly to the Sermons, Churches, & Assemblies of Protestants, to dispute and speak against Popery, to eat flesh on fast∣ing-dayes, and allowing their perverted Disciples to do the like, to feign themselves the most Zealous Protestants, to be present in the Senates, Parliaments and Councils of those of the Reformed Religion; to consent to the ap∣prehension and dissipation of Papists by severe Lawes a∣gainst them, together with the rest, that so they may the better conceal themselves, discover, divert or hin∣der the Consultations against the Papists, promote the Popes and Papists affaires with more facility, propagate the Popish Religion upon all occasions, and give them time∣ly notice of any intentions against them upon any ur∣gent necessity: provided alwayes that they be secretly Catholicks, and submit themselves wholy to the beck and counsels of the Jesuits, as their Instruments and Intelligencers: as you may read at large, in Jesuitica per Vnitas Belgii Provincias Negocitaio, printed Ano. 1616 (containing the Instructions in this kinde given to Je∣suits by their Superiors sent into the Netherlands to im∣broyl, divide, ruine them) in Joannis Cambilbonus de Abstructiorbus Jesuitarum Artibus & Studiis: printed 1608. & Ludovicus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica p. 170. 175. 676. 677. 678. Therefore it is no wonder, that their Emissa∣ries, and Disciples to effect the utter ruine of our Pro∣testant Kingdomes, Churches, Religion, now thus dis∣guise themselves amongst us, to promote their most dangerous defignes against them, by the selfe same means and stratagems now:
5. That the Jesuites make and professe it, one of their prin∣ciple designes, to withdraw, alinate the peoples affections from, stirre them up against the true Protestant Ministers and Prea∣chers of the Gospel, and to cast them out and take them quite out of their way, that so they may with more facility and speed se∣duce, devoure their Flocks, domineer and set up Popery in all places without opposition. Witnesse See Ludovi∣cus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, l. 1. c. 1. p. 2. Gregorius Baderus Pro∣vinciall of the Jesuites in Bavaria, his words at Landsperge. We and ours shall have no peace in Augusta (or Germany) unlesse we take care, Evangelicos Concionatores ejici ac tolli; that the Preachers of the Gospel be ejected and removed out of the way. By our Councils THE EVANGELICAL PREACHERS WERE CAST OUT OF VIENNA: Whereupon Society do now there teach in peace, and rule all things according to their hearts desire. Seconded with their * practises, in ejecting, imprisoning, banishing, suppressing, per∣secutingHospinian & Ludovicus Lu∣cius Hist. Jesu∣itical. 4. Grimstons Im∣periall History. p. 821. Romes Master piece. Speculum Ie∣suiticum: p. 175 176. all the Protestant Ministers in Bohemia, in the years of our Lord, 1602. 1607. 1621, and 1652. to the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and Protestants there: and their ejecting, suppressing above thirty of the Protestant Prea∣chers, and shutting up their Churches in the Dukedomes of Ju∣lius, Cleve, and Bergen; Anno 1628. To omit other la∣ter presidents in Austria and elswhere. And is not this the Quakers and their disciples principle designe, endea∣vour, labour now, to withdraw the people wholy from, and excite them against, and stir them up to reject, suppresse, renounce all our lawfull Orthodox Ministers, and evangelicall Preachers, as false guides, dumbe Dogs, Seducers of the People, Deceivers, Antichrists? &c. Their railing Pamphets, preachments, and pretended messages to them from heaven; enjoyning them to come downe out of their Pulpits, to Preach no more hereafter &c. contrary to Christ owne expresse commands unto them. Math: 28. 19. 20. Mar: 16. 15. Acts. 10. 42. c. 16. 10. Rom. 10. 15. 1. Cor. 1. 17. Phil. 1. 16. 17. 18. 2. Tim. 4. 17. 1. Tim. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 12. especially. 1. Cor. 9. 16. Though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for NECESSITY IS LAYD UPON ME; and wo is me if I preach not the Gospel. and 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quicke and the dead at his ap∣pearance and his Kingdom. PREACH THE WORD BE INSTANT IN SEASON & OUT OF SEASON, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrin (Marke the reason, suitable to our times and Quakers) FOR THE TIME WILL COME (and now is the time) that they WILL NOT ENDURE SOUND DOCTRINE, but after their own lust shall they heap to themselves teachers, ha∣ving itching ears: And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shalbe turned unto Fables. But watch thou in all things, endure affliction, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry. Certainly then those Quakers, and their seduced Disciples; who say unto the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets prophesie not, prophesie not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesie deceit: Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the Path, cause the holy one to cease from before us; are like those Jews of old, Isay 30. 10, 11. Wherefore let them there read their Doome, Character, and what spirit they are of, v. 8, 9. (and I be∣seech them, with all others to observe it well) from Gods own mouth. Now go, write it before them in a Tabernacle, and not in a Book, that it may be for the time to come, for ever and ever; that this is a rebellious people, lying children, chil∣dren that will not bear the Law of the Lord: But is this all? No, there is a judgement with a witnesse, pursuing all such: Verse 12, 13. 14. Wherefore thus saith the holy one of Israel: Because ye dispise this word and trust in fraud and perversnesse and stay thereon; therefore this iniquity shal be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking of a potters vessel, that is bro∣ken in pieces: He shall not spare; so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sheard to take fire from the hearth, or to take water out of the Pit: (Let those States∣men or Magistrates, who out of designe, or self interest, tolerate or secretly countenance such dangerous Rebels against God, his Word or Ministers, remember it as well as these Seducers and their followers, least God break them
thus to powder suddenly and irrepairably together, and our whole three Kingdomes too) And if this Text be not sufficient to convince them of and deter them from this their Sin; let them read at leasure, Mich. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. Amos 7. 10, to the end: and quake and tremble at the reading of them. But if they hold these to be obso∣lete and Old Testament onely; Let them then consider, who they were, and what transcendent sin it was in those, who prohibited (not seducing false Apostles and Jesuitical Emissaries, as these Vagrant Quakers are) but Christs commissioned, Math. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mar. 3. 14. c. 16. 15. Acts 10. 42. c. 1 22, &c. c. 14. 23. c. 13. 2, 3. Rom. 1. 1. Rom. 10. 15. John 15. 16. 1 Tim. 2. 7. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Tim. 4. 14. c. 5. 22. Heb. 5. 1. to 6. lawfully called, instituted, Apostles and Ministers, to preach any more in the name of Jesus, and dispence his Gospell: Acts 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. cap. 5. v. 17. to 42. compared with 1 Thess. 2. 15, 16. Even those, who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have chased us out, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, FORBIDDING US TO SPEAK TO THE GENTILES THAT THEY MIGHT BE SAVED, TO FILL UP THEIR SINS ALWAY: for THE WRATH IS COME VPON THEM TO THE UTTERMOST. 6. That the Jesuites professed doctrine and practice is, that if they cannot suppresse, destroy, extirpate, prote∣stant Ministers, Kings, Princes, Churches, States and all professors of the protestant Religion, by raysing Schisms Seditions, Divisions, Civill Wars and Commotions a∣mongst them, and dividing them one from and against another to their mutuall ruine; which hath been their great designe of late years, whereof we have felt the sad effects: As you may read at large in Hospinian, and Ludovicus Lucius, their most excellent Historia Jesuita, Speculum, sive Jubilaeum Jesuiticum, and the Epistle to my VINDICATION, &c. of the good old Fundamentall Liber∣ties and Laws of England; which if they cannot effect by these means, then to excite all Christian Kings and Princes to accomplish in conclusion, BY FIRE, SWORD, WARRE, and THE POWER OF AN ARMY; as you may there be satisfied by undeniable
Testimonies of Jesuites themselves, and presidents of former and later times: More particularly by the Words and Writings of Jacobus Crucius, the Jesuite, in his Explication of the Rules of the Jesuites, and his Sermon. Anno 1584. Thomas Stapleton; his Speculum pravitatis Haereticae. Duaci 1580. Thom, Capian: his Concer∣tatio Ecclesiae Catholicae Treviris. 1583. page 22. Pau∣lus Windeck: De Extirpandis Haereticis. Antid. 10. and 11. Franciscus Verona, his Apologia pro Joanne Castle, part. 5. cap. 13. Cunradus Brunus de Haereticis lib. 3. cap. ult. Cornelius Cornelii, his Praesacio ad S. Trini∣tatem increatam, Commentariis in Minores Prophetas praefix. Wherein, Blesleth the Trinity, for opening the eyes of Christian Kings, and stirring them up all a∣gainst Calvinisme, as the plague of their Realms: For inabling the King of France, Spain, and Emperour in a short time to overthrow, conquer, expell and destroy the Arch-hereticks; the See Hasen∣mulerus Hist. Jesuitica l. 5. Speculum Je∣suiticum p. 61. Hussites and Calvinists in France, Austria, Bohemia, Morvia, Silesia, Hungary, and both the Palatinates, as the fire-brands of Rebel∣lion, to their eternal glogy: concluding thus. Agite Principes generost, pergitis animis, opus flicibus adeo auspiciis caeptum CONFICITE; paribus studiis REBELLEM CAL∣VINI HAERESIN, pene evulsam, STIRPITƲS ƲBILI∣BET ERADICATE, &c. And by Antonius Possevinus the Jesuite (to omit See Ludovi∣cus Lucius Hist. Jesuitica l. 1. c. 1, 2. all others) in his Miles Christianus (published when Pope Paul the fifth, sent an Army into France against the Enemies of the Church, wherein he asserts. That all Christians are bound of right, to defend the Roman Religion against the doctrine of the Gospellers (or Pro∣testants) with all their forces; and the effusion of their blood. That neither Peace nor the publique good can be preserved in the Roman Church unlesse these her enemies BE QUITE EX∣TIRPATED. Exhorting the Captains of the Army, to permit nothing at all to these Heretick; not to keep their plighted faith with them; to suborn secret Inqui∣sitors against them; We may see by this, who were the ray∣sers and origi∣nall contrivers of our late in∣restine wars, &c. DOMESTICA ET INTE∣STINA BELLA INTER ILLOS EXCITARI CURENT: To take care to stirre up Domestick and
Intestine warres betweene themselves: Proditores ac Si∣carios, omnibus locis, contra illos instituant: and to institute Traytors and Murderers against them in all places: Asserting, that the Captaines who did otherwise, sinned against the Roman Church, and were rendered inexcusable and damned. Now see∣ing Barisonius the Jesuit, in his Letter to See Ludoui∣cus Lutius Hist. Jesuitica. l. . c. 8 p. 164. 166. a Noble Venetian (who deserted their order,) dated at Bononia 21. April 1608. printed 1609. amongst other things thus boasts of the excellency, power and perfection of their Jesuiti∣call Order, PRO LIBITƲ NOSTRO, ET BELLƲM ET PACEM MƲNDO APPORTAMƲS. That they can at their pleasure bring both Warre and Peace to the World, as the cheife Authors of both. That they lawfully may and do sow discords and divisions between King and Subject, Man and Wife, Father and Children, Brothers and Kin∣dred, and usurp absolute Dominion and Tyranny over any private men, Citties, or whole Kingdoms they suspect, for the benefit of the Church and See of Rome, in whose Service and Greatnesse true piety and the highest Poynt of Religion consists; and that for this end they may in their of which read Ludovi∣cus Lucius. p. 129. 199. 200. Chamber of meditation, animane their Assisi∣nates to murder Heretickes, Enemies and Rebels to the Church of Rome, not only though private Persons, but though the greatest of princes and Kings, by repre∣senting to them the heroicall fact of Ehud, recorded in sacred Scripture, and promising them a seat in heaven amongst the Saints and martyrs for such an heroicke deed. And seeing the Jesuits (dispersed like Locusts over the world) are increased in few years to so great a Number, that they boasted long since, Ludovicus Lucius. l. 1. c. 7. p. 156. 172. that they had no lesse then two hundred thousand Schollers in Europe: and Claudius Aquaviva, their late Generall, vaunted; that he could bring into the feild, and that in a shorter time, more souldiers, then any one christian king: and profered Pope Paul the 5th. (during the interdict of Venice, when they and he were in some danger) to ayde him with forty thousand men, so as those of them slain in the warres, might be reputed Martyrs; so infinite are the
Numbers of their Society, Novices, Disciples, Trea∣sures, Revenues; yea all their Colleges in foreign parts, so many strong Castles, Forts and Magazines of Armes, Ammunition, Powder, and all military provisions (as they bost, and Speculum Jesuiticum. p. 207. to. 213. Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesui∣tica. l. 1. c. 6. p. 156. 157. 238. 171. others write) And seeing these Jesuits, who make it their Masterpiece to weaken and destroy all others by divisions, Schismes, Factions, Tumults, pre∣scribe it as the principle part of their owne Policy, Safety, Power, Successes and Growth, to maintain Unity, Peace, Amity, and prevent all Schismes and Divisions amongst themselves, Regulae Jesui∣tarum. printed 1627. and Lu∣dovicus Luci∣us. Hist. l. 1. c. 3. p. 18. 19. 21. 24. 26. 31. prescribing sundry Rules and Orders for this end, to which they are all sworn to yeild exact Obedience; I referre it to the con∣sideration of all prudent, Zealous Protestants and States∣men in our whole 3. Natios; How dangerous a Plot and 1. Kings. 12. 26. to the end. c. 13. 2. &c. Jeroboam like desperate Policy it may in a short time prove, to all our Churches, zealous Ministers and Professors of the Protestant Religion (yea to our pre∣sent Governors, swordmen, and their Posterities like∣wise) any longer to tolerate these Jesuiticall, fiery, treacherous Agents, with other Romish Emissaries, freely to vent their Errors, Blasphemies, Heresies, Fancies, and set up Separat Congregations in all places, to multiply our divisions, dis-unite us all one from another, and augment their strength and party, predominating in most Counsels, Places; the better to secure any in actu∣all Power for the present; though to hasten their, with our whole Kingdoms, Churches, Ministers, and reformedMat. 12. 25. Religions ruine by it in conclusion, even by force of Arms, and Tumults, when they see their opportunity, as we have all just cause to fear? I shall therfore close up all, with the words of De vera & Falsa Religione cap. De Ma∣gistratu. printed, 1525. Huldrycus Zwinglius against those Dip∣pers and Anabaptists in his age, who denyed the Office and Coercive Power of christian Magistrates (specially in matters of Religion) as most of our Anabaptists, Quakers, disguised Jesuits and Franciscans now do. Propter istos ipsos qui negant, Christanum posse gerere Magistratum, maxime egemus magistratu; quum vitam omnium talem esse videatis, ut rigidis∣simo
magistratu opus habeat. Quod si 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. propacato statu orare licet; licet et nimirum orare, ut Deus pium magistratum con∣cedat, quo cōmodius pax et concordia concilientur, Quin omnes hoc agimus, ut vitam innocentissimam ducamus, et nibil nos premet magistratus: Rom. 13. 3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evill; wilt thou not then be afraid of the pow∣ers do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. Hoc ipsum Oro, ut diligenter expendant, qui Ma∣gistratum detrectant. Si potestatem odio habent aut timent; quod rectum est faciant. Expendant simul Principes nè rectè factis timori sint. Qui ergo jam NOVIS EXACTIONIBƲS, TRI∣BƲTIS, VECTIGALIBƲS, non modò expilant miseram plebem, sed onerant, excarnificant, excindunt, ut videantur esse in communem nati perniciem; Qui malis delectantur, & bonis mi∣naciter imminent, Principes non sunt; sed Tyranni, sed Torto∣res, sed Lanii. Qui ergò omnium malo praesunt, videant quo pa∣cto Christi nomine glorientur; qui non modò ut Praedones & Furts in omnium bona, sed ut Pestes quoque in omnium corpora grassantur. Sunt autem & isti Ministri Dei, sed quomodo Satan Minister Dei est, qui ubique adversatur, circumvenit, perdit. Omnia in manibus sunt cupidissimorum hominum, u jam non u∣num Tyrannum habeant, qui sub talibus Imperiis degunt, sed sexcentos. A Character of our times. Friget omnis justitia, fervet cupiditas imò dominatur, putant enim si Tributa sint quacunque ratione amplissima, jam rectò administraci Imperium. Ne ergò tenurè summam rerum imprudentibus, pueris, stupidis, CƲPIDISVE nedamus, sed iis quorum probitas, fides, prudentia, longo usu perspectae sint, alio∣qui frustrà nos aliquando queremur, quod dicitur, non putavisse: Tribuat nobis omnipotens Pater, Magistratus tales, qui nullum a∣liud exemplum spectent, quam ejus, cujus, ordinatione ad hoc co∣cuneris inautorati sunt, ut ad modum Creatoris nostri sese gerant quo Patres nos multos habere gloriari possimus: Nec queri coga∣mur, quod Propheta Mic. 7. (ver. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6,) queritur. Vae mihi. &c. Amen.
A breif Reply to Iohn Audlands Rayling Paper. Christian Reader, MEeting (since the premises sent to the Presse) with a printed Pamphlet lately published, intitu∣led: The Innocent delivered out of the Snare, &c. full of unchristian Raylings against our Ministers, Magistrates in generall, and my self, with others in particular; writen by John Audland, an Arch-Quaker (who cannot write six lines of true English together;) and finding in the Title-page and p. 36. &c. thereof, this inscription. An An∣swer to a Scandalous Paper put forth by William Prynne; in∣tituled: The Quakers unmasked and clearly detected: wherein his Slanders are made to appeare; and he is clearly unmasked and plainly detected, being taken with A LYE in his mouth: I thought meet, by way of Reply, to so much only as concerns my Paper, to give thee this breife accompt thereof, in the close of this Enlarged Edition. 1. That his cheife Exception is against Cowlishaw his Oath, as untrue; only upon this slender ground: p. 37. Two of us whom the world reproachfully calls Quakers, came from the North (being moved of the Lord,) in the Month of June; we came into the City of Bristol the 12. day of the Month called July; and on the morrow being the 13. day, we were at two meetings; the one with the people called Anabaptists; the other with the people called Independents; and we were moved by the Lord; to speak at both their meetings, which we did: as severall of those people can bear witnesse. Thou saith; in September, George Cowlishaw being asked by Cop∣pinger; if there had been none of those people called Quakers in Bristol? He answered, NO. Now this is fals. For Some of us who Two verbes singular are coupled with us, a plurall; and so tho∣rowout the Book. is so called (marke his English) was then at Bristol: For we had meetings at the Fort and Redde-Lodge in Bristol. the 10. and 13 of September: at which was
severall hundreds of people; which will all witnesse, That THY Oath IS FALSE. But doth this convince the Oath to be false? No verily: but rather confirms it for truth: For though two of you went to two private meetings of Ana∣baptists and Independents in Bristol, and spake there to them on July 13. yet that was unknown to Cowlishaw and most others: and you spake to those people then, not under the name or notion of Quakers, but only of VVhose Opi∣nions they ju∣stifie against Infant Baptism in this new Pamphet. p. 20. 31. 32. Ana∣baptists & Independents: And your speaking to sundry after in and about Bristol on the 10. 13. 15. 17. 19. of September (at which time you began to take upon you the name of Quakers, and to be known in Bristol by that Title) was after Cowlishaws conference with Coppinger: who addes; that about 18. dayes after, there came to this City two that were named Quaker: Now severall of you coming thither (like the Franciscan Fryers two by two after each other) just about that time he deposeth, by your owne relation; convinceth Audland of an apparant slander, and double Lye. First, in accusing Cowlishaw (known to be a person of truth and honesty,) for making a false Oath, which his own Answer to it justifieth to be true. 2. In averring, *That he and his Companions were moved by the Lord and his eternall Spirit, to leave their owne habitation and callings in the North, to come to seduce the people of Bristol (to beleive their new Revelations) That they are the Messengers, and MinistersSee. p. 6. 7. 26. 37. 44. 45. at the end. of the Everlasting Gosple of God, sent and moved by the Lord to speake to the City of Bristol, &c. When as in truth, they are those that trouble that City, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ therein Gal. 1. 7. yea the very false lying Prophets prophecied of and described. Zech. 13. 3. 4. 5. 2. He excepts against Cowlishaw: That he accused not Coppinger to the Magistrate, confessing himselfe to be ap. 38. Franciscan Fryer; but concealed, and let him go. Whereupon he taxeth the Magistrates of Bristol for injustice, in not punishing Cowlishaw, and yet making out warrants against the Quakers. But this is very frivilous. 1. Because his printed oath, is no concealment, but a clear discovery of him, and all his conference with him, to the Magistrates, deserving
praise, not punishment. 2. Coppingers hasty departure the very next day into Ireland, disabled him and the Magistrates to seise him. 3. The suspension of the Lawes by some in Superiour power against such Romish Vermin at that season, will excuse both him and the Magistrates from any pu∣nishment or blame, in not seising on him; could they have conveniently done it. 4. Their graunting out war∣rants against the Quakers, for disturbing both the Peace, Ministers, and Government of the Citty, was just, legall. And their publicke abuse both of the Mayor and Governors of the City in print, in the two last pages of this Pamphlet, stiling them Brethren and Companions, but it is in iniquity; who have confederated themselves against Christ and his anoynt∣ed. &c. deserves a sharper Censure, then a small fine, tem∣porary imprisonment and an obligation to the good behaviour, though not yet inflicted on them. 3. His exceptions against me; are, for averring. 1. That the Quakers are but the Spawne of Romish Frogs, Jesuites, and Franciscan Fryers; To refute which he alleageth only: That theyIt is but his own testimony; and none can tell what abod or profession he or Fox formerly had there, after diligent enquiry made concern∣ning it? all came from the North, that their birth and beeing was in Westmoreland neer Kendal, where they lived and walked, none of them having ever been out of England. To which I answer. 1. That their coming out of the North; is a shrewd argument of their badnesse. The Scripture in∣formes us Jer. 1. 14. chap. 4. 6. chap. 6. 1. 22. That out of THE NORTH AN EVILL SHALL BREAK FORTH ƲPON ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE LAND. That EVILL APPEARETH OƲT OF THE NORTH AND GREAT DESTRƲCTION shall be brought from THE NORTH. Which the Latin Proverb Omne malum ab Aquilone; with the English Adagy; All evill comes from the North, seconding, we have just cause to conclude; That these Quakers coming from thence, are fit Instruments, only to bring evill and destruction upon all the Inhabitants of the Land; not Gods Messengers, Mi∣nisters, sent thence to save mens Soules. 2. Westmorland is well known, to have abounded with Jesuites, Popish Priests Fryers, Recusants, and persons Popishly affected, ever since the
Reformation: Witnesse the See Speeds, History, Cam∣dens Eliza∣beth, Stow, How, and others in Ann. 1569. Rebellion of the Earle of West∣morland and the Northern Papists under him, to advance the po∣pish Religion and destroy Queen Elizabeth and the protestant Reformation. Anno 1569. with the late power of the Lord William Howard, Ducket, Leyborn, Fleming, and o∣ther Popish Families in that County. And therefore we may justly fear an emanation of Jesuitical, Franciscan Frogs and Emissaries from thence now. 3. Mr Tillam (late, or still a Popish Priest) Administrator of the Anabaptisticall Congregation at Hexam, not far from Kendal, avers in print; See the per∣fect Pharisee. p. 13. That these Quaking Agonies were derived from the Fran∣ciscan Fryers; and the premises sufficiently prove, that they were derived to us from them and the Jesuites, who took their Pattern from the Idolatrous pagan priests quaking Transcies and Agonies. Therefore his own bare verball ne∣gation thereof, will no way disprove my Assertion. The rather, because the Jesuites, Franciscans, Benedictines, and others have their private Coledges, Societies, and Generall of their Orders in England, and may secretly admit their Disciples into their Orders here, with out going beyond the Seas; as I have proved at large in my Romes Master∣peece; The Popish Royall Favourite, Hidden works of Darknesse brought to publique Light, and my Epistle to a (late) Seasonable Legal and Historicall Vindication; to which I shall referre the Reader, and our Quakers forNow in Bat gaol for distur∣bing the Mini∣ster there in the midest of his Sermon the 27. of May last. fuller Satisfaction. 4. Some of them, wearing rough Hair-cloth and Cords about their bodies, like the Franciscan Cor∣diliers; is a very probable Evidence, that they were spaw∣ned from them, and that they are the persons prophecied of Zech. 13. 3. 4. 5. Which prophecy Lyes in the name of the Lord, and wear a garment of haire to Ly and deceive the people, which Murford and others of them use. 2. For affirming, that they use inchanedpotions, Bracelets, Ribands, Sorcery, and Wicheraft, to intoxicate their Disciples. Which being sufficiently evidenced in the premises, and See John Gil∣pins printed re∣lation of him∣self. apparent by many instances, in most places where they ramble, I shall no further insist to prove it. But close up all with these two Scripture Exhortations to the people of England.
1. Cor. 16. 13. Phil. 1. 27. Watchye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong; in one Spirit with one minde, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil walketh about (in his Instruments as well as Person) like a roar∣ing Lyon, seeking whome he may devoure, whom resist stedfast in the faith. And with that of Gal. 1. 7. 8. 9. But there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospell of Christ: But though they, we, or an Angell from Heaven preach any As two Qua∣kers did lately in Westminster-Hall May 14. denied the scri∣ptures to be the Word of God &c. Heaven, Hell, and the Resurrection of the dead &c. as the Diurals print. other Gospel unto you, LET HIM BE ACCURSED. As we said before, so say I now again: IF ANY MAN PREACH A∣NY OTHER GOSPEL UNTO YOU, THEN THAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED, LET HIM BE ACCURSED. And let all sincere Lovers, Professors of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, through out our Nation and the Christian world, adde a zealous Amen Zech. 5. 13. cap. 8. 6. Ps. 41. 13. Psal. 72. 19. Psal. 89. 52. Psal. 106. 48. and Amen thereto. Math. 15. 19.They be blind leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. Rev. 12. 12. Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for THE DEVIL IS COME DOWN UNTO YOU having great wrath, because he knoweth he hath but ashort time. FINIS.
ERRATA. Kinde Reader, I pray correct these Errours at the Presse, occasion∣ed by the Authors absence. PAge 2. line 30. read 69. p. 3. l. 36. Religion, p. 5. l. 12. crum∣ble, p. 6. l. 10. or gestures, p. 7. l. 7. del. in, l. 39. Brigets, p. 8. l. 2 Quakers, l. 38. Magiae: Gee: p. 9. l. 19. others, l. 30. Strabo, l. 36. Shaking, p. 10. l. 25. verifies, l. 32. Prideaux, p. 11. l. 22. Theodotus, p. 12. l. 8. Daemoniacis, l. 17. Catholick, p. 13. l. 5. Anabaptistis, l. 20 Monasteries, p. 14. l. 7. again, l. 37. Broeckerous, p. 15. l. 7. truly; therby, l. 9. being, bring, l. 13. and to in, l. 27. ever, even; l. 32. Con∣stantine, l. 35. concurred, concord; p. 17. l. 16. the these, l. 27. deceived (theirs) r. dreamed, p. 18. l. 9. about, above, p. 20. l. 3. del. have, l. 4. Franciscan, p. 21. l. 1. Maffaeus, l. 23. Ludovicus, l. 29. others, l. 34. Tunianus, p. 22. l. 9. Lugnes, Laynes, l. 28. shaken, p. 23. l. 17. 3. That, l. 24. Styria, l. 31. and do all, p. 24. l. 12. La∣valii, l. 13. Gema Geneva, l. 21. Anglae, p. 25. l. 37. intimate, in∣trude, l. 38. the Courts, p. 27. l. 9. or in, l. 21. Juliers, p. 28. l. 21. Tabernacle, r. Table, l. 22. not in, note it in, p. 29 l. 23. cannot can, to l. 36. accomplish it, p. 30. l. 22. pergitis pergite magnis. In the Margin, p. 5. l. 8. Francisco, p. 22. l. 5, 6. Rondeletius, Me∣thodus.
