P522 669.f.6[67] 99871070 160928
The Parliaments praise, reforming our bad wayes. IACOBS wrastling for a Blessing. LOrd, shew thy might, Maugre the spight Of all thy foes, Which thee oppose: Leave not thy Church Now in the lurch, But let us have What we doe crave; For what we stand Here in this Land, A full reformation Throughout the Nation: Now to effect this thing God blesse our gracious King; Let Him with Peeres, and Commons, Obey Gods Royall summons, And joyne with full consent In this blest Parliament, His chiefest instrument (Wherewith he's well content.) Of such a reformation, Intended in this Nation; In Church and Common weale, As his word shall reveale; By learned, and2 Pet. 1. 4. Partakers of the Di∣vin na¦tue. divinenon tan∣tum Theo∣logi sicut elati Pre∣lati) no proud tal∣kers onely of Gd, but hum∣ble wal∣ker with God, Mi∣cah 6. 6. Divines, Whose lustre in our Kingdome shines. Whom (in these dayes, though many call them Round-heads. Yet future times may truly stile them Sound-heads. When they for us shall fully bring to passe, What God shall shew them in the Looking-glasse Of his most Sacred writ, to be his will, And we the same shall faithfully fulfill, Reform us, Lord, conforme us to thy Law, Give us the grace of thee to stand in awe, And to prevent great Judgements now at hand, To love thy Truth and for it stoutly stand Let us not spare money, plate, horse, nor Armes, For to resist approaching ghostly harmes. Yea to preserve the meanes of saving grace, Let us not feare to looke death in the face; Let's keep our Vows and Protestations new And bid all Babels baubles quite adiew. Renew our hearts, o God▪ make us true Saints, And rid us from our feares and sad complaints; Then make us thankfull all in word, and deed. For thy great helpe in this our greatest need; Thy grace, Lord, grant us for our chief reliefe, In these most sad, and heavie times of griefe. Thus still praies William Will-peace, what ere sayes William Nill-peace, &c. Bellum Episcopole Cedant arma togae Bellum papale. Ne procedant arma togae. Lest bloudy Prelates bloudy wars proceed, Lord, make our hearts for griefe of sin to bleed; Our bloody sins have caus'd these bloody times, Yet, Lord, forgive us all our hainous crimes, Give us repentance true, for all our sins, Which removes thy wrath, and thy favour wins; Purge thou our hearts by a true faith in thee That (quick or dead) our soules fll safe may be: Grant us the grace to fast from sin alway, That thou maist heare us when we fast, and pray, For Ireland, (now the Land of thy just ire) That thou wouldst daigne timely to quench that ire Of wrath, and furie, which is flaming there, And unto England doth approach so neare: Arise, arise, do thou maintain thy cause. Thy harmlesse Sheep defend from wolvish jawes. Who thirst for blood, and side with bloody Rome, Let such, ô God, receive a bloody doome: Performe thy promise, Lord, and come with spee To help thy Churches in their greatest need; For which great mercy w will give thee prayse So long as thou shalt here prolong our days. The Scottish Puritans. WHo seriously against new Rome protest, Who in themselves and others sin detest; Who shunning alwaies all ill-worship vaine, Would have Christ onely by his Word to reigne, Who doe refuse to quaffe whole Cups, and Cans, Such are good Scotlands honest Puritans. The sottish Anti-Puritans. WHo do against oldRom. 1. 7. Roman Saints protest Who hate no sin, but there at make a jest; Who will not have Christ by his Word to reigne, But still embrace humane inventions vaine: Who doe delight to quaffe whole bowles, & Cans, These are theIer. 4. 22. 5. 4. sottish Anti-Puritans. Orandum est, ut sit cor mundum in mundo immundo. Psal. 51. 10. LOrd, doe thou make mePurussa∣ncti in cola montis. pure in heart, and then Let me be call'd a Puritane by men; So ta'ne in Christ for such an one indeed, This grace will helpe in these sad times of need. O Comitia faelicia. O Happy Parliament From Gods great mercy sent. To worke a reformation In this most sinfull Nation, Of Church and Common-weale, All maladies to heale, To purge the sonnes of Levi, A taske most hard and heavy: Dejicere Saulos, Erigere Paulos; To detect, and deject the Sauls, To protect, and erect the Pauls. Laetificare bonos, Tristificare malos, To make glad the sad, To make sad the bad. Securis pro securis. To cut off the Brambles, bryers and thornes, Chiefly, the pushing rammish Romish hornes: All knowne delinquents, and malignant foes. Who much our Kings and Kingdomes good oppose. Summum pro jure tribunal. To give to each oppressed wight What is by Law his due, and right: To make good Lawes for Church, and Common-weale, In both all breaches to repaire, and heale: That peace, and truth continue all our daies, And God for both may have the laud, and praise. Laus tibi magne Deus. Thy God, O England, now is purging thee, And woe to thee, if thou not purged be; Most justly then may he to thee thus say, Expect no purging till thy dying day: What heart-griefe is it that God doth appeate, And with so great a blessing draw so neare, To tend to us in this sinfull Nation A true, and perfect forme of reformation; Agreeing wholly to his Holy Word, Yet to receive it we will not accord: Vouchsafe, O Christ, according to thy Word, (Which will great joy and gladnesse us afford) To pluck up by the rootes out of this Land All Plants not planted by thy fathers hand: Thy Kingdome come in spite of all thy foes, Who still thy Kingly Office much oppose; And fearing losse of worldly pompe, and gaine, Will not endure thee over them to reigne. Forgive us Lord, give us repentance true, Our stubborne wills unto thy will subdue; And let us all thy Scepter now embrace. That thou maist shew the brightnesse of thy face On us, and ours, and our posterity, When we thee worship in true purity Of heart, and life; and use that Discipline Which is contained in thy Word divine: So righteousnesse and peace shall kisse each other, And wee still live in godly love together; And with new hearts, & tongues true praises sing To thee our Lord; and our Caelestiall King. Nuncia laeta piis. Welcome this news so good, and true, Old England is becomming new * * In fieri, utinam in facto esse, Mira facit Dominus, sua facta stupenda colamus, Gens renovata colat, mens renovata colet: Laudet ob ista Deum. England and Scotland truly united. Faciam eos in gentem unam, olim dixit rex no∣ster magnus Iacobus. Faciam eos in mentem unam jam dicat Rex no∣ster Carolus Magnus. This Union will be a most precious Union, it shall be the chief Union, and the chiefe Union of the Union. For this unanimous union to be made by a Par∣liamentary agreement touching Doctrine, and Di∣scipline truly Christian, both truly agreeable to the word of Christ, to be received, and for ever esta∣blished in both Nations; together with a firme, & durable peace betweene these united Kingdomes, let England pray, and say amen; let Scotland pray, and say amen, amen, let Ireland pray, and say a∣men; and least all the prayers of these three Nati∣ons take no effect, let the AMEN himselfe say a∣men. AMEN dixit Amen. Fecit miranda Iehovah. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we rejoyce. The true Protestants Iubile for peace, and unitie between England and Scotland, Laudamus Domin Magni magnalia nostri, Qui nos Romanis eripit insidiis. WEe laud, and praise the goodnesse of our God, Who hath not scourg'd us with a Romish Rod Slily conveighd into a Scottish hand, By Lordly Bishops; who by their command (Abusing regall power) the good estate, Of two great Kingdomes sought to ruinate, By forcing on the Scots inventions vaine, Which did Gods publike worship much distaine: But thanks be to our God who now hath brought Their craftie vile endeavours unto nought, And turn'd their plots which would have cost much blood, Into a firme peace for both Kingdomes good: Then let us with our Scottish brethren true, Render unto our God all prayses due; By holy lives, and reall reformation, Of things offensive in each sinfull nation; First in the Church, and then in Common weale, That God in mercy may the Nations heale; Let's keep our Vows and Protestations new, And now bid Rome, and all Romes trash adiew. So Righteousnesse, and Peace shall kisse each other, And we still live in godly love together; And with new hearts, & tongues true prayses sing. To God our Lord, and our Caelestiall King. Printed at London, for Thomas Bankes, and William Ley. 1642. FINIS.
