S2023 E422_35 R204815 99864278 161401
THE SCOTS Beaten with their own WEAPONS, AND Their playing fast and loose with KING and PARLIAMENT clearly discovered. Which may serve also for a full (and briefe) Answer to the SCOTS last large Papers. Published for the satisfaction both of City and Countrey, concerning the King and the Scots. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot, LONDON, Pinted by I.C. for H.C. in Popes-head Alley, 1647.
The Scots beaten with their own Weapons. SIR, WHereas you desire my opinion of the Scottish Papers, lately presented to the Parliament of England, I judge them to be slight, and un∣satisfying, stuffed more with malitious in∣victives, then with solid Argumens; more modesty and lesse bitternesse, might have been expected from men that make a fane profession; but whether will not passion and envy transport them? They have in these last papers discovered much pride and equivocation, which is apparent to every impartiall and unbyassed Reader, (as for their Creatures who Idolize their Presbytery, a just censure cannot be expected for them) 1. Pride, in taxing an English Parliament in such high and imperious language, and endeavouring to tye them up to a tittle to the Scottish formes, both eclesiastick all and civill, (save in the matter of the King) as if they had monopolized an infalibility of judgment to themselves, whereof they tra∣duce the poore Sectaries; or as if our Kingdom and theirs, were not distinct governed by distinct Lawes, and inriched with distinct priviledges, though I say not there is such a great distance betwixt us and them, as betwixt us and other Nations more remote, yet I conceive it may be of dange∣rous consequence to the English Nation, to confound our and their priviledges together; surely though we be united to them in some snce, yet we have not lost the rights of Eng∣lishmen, by confounding them with the Scots, if they be the genuine sence of the Covenant and Treaty, I think it is our duty to be humbled for entring into such inflaving and di∣structive ingagements. 2. Equivocation, in pleading so high
for the Kings interest, here (of purpose to regaine their lost credit) and not induring it on the other side Tweed. Is the Kings Negative voice a wholsome hearbe here, and poyson there? or is it treason and disloyalty to deprive him of it here, and loyalty to exclude him from it there? they would be freemen themselves, and make us slaves, and this is farre from the love of Brethren; That they grsly equivocate in this it plainly appeares. 1. by their selling the King for 400000.l. 2. by that expression of a noble Covenanter to the King at Newcastle, That if he would not take the Cove∣nant, and signe to the Presbytery, he should be disposed, ac∣cording to the laudable Custom of Scotland, and the princi∣ples of Knox and Brichanan, but you must conceive this is one of the finest baites they so insnare the people, who for the most part are Royalists, and it will much advance their designe of crushing the Parliament and Army, whom they hate with a perfect hatted, Flectere si nequeo superos, acceronta mve bo. I wonder they and their Creatures are not asha∣med to make so often mention of the Covenant and Treaty which they have treacherously violately in many perticu∣lars, as 1. in entertaining corespondency with Hs Majesty, & receiving him into their quarters at Kellum, without the Parliaments knowledge. 2. in caarying him to Southwell, and marched with him from thence to Newcastle, without the consent of the Parliament, and contrary to the Scots ingage∣ment to our Commissioners at Newark. 3. in laying intol∣lerable sesments and burthens on the Northern parts, & ex∣acting free quarter from them, to their great impoverish∣ment, nay I may say, to the utter undoing of many Families, contrary to the sence of the Parliament, and that clause of the Covenant which they sildom or never mention in reference to England. That they will maintain the liberty of the Sub∣ject, I might likewise instance in their detayning Mr. Ash∣burnam, against the Parliaments Order, and in many other particulars, but these may satisfie any rationall man. As they have broken the Treaty, and violated the Covenant; so they have grosly falsyfied their word to the King, who was promised by them at Newcastle, That he should not be deli∣vered
untill he was setled in his Rights, and the Lord Low∣den in one of his printed Speeches, hath these or the like words, that it would be base and dishonourable in them to deliver up the meanest subject fled to them for refuge, much more their royall Soveraign, and yet you know how basely they sold the King at Newcastle, when they had made as much use of him as they could for the payment of their Ar∣reares, but they can break their Faith and keep their Cove∣nant, which to me, and other hoest men is a Paradox, nay, I have been informed from good hands, that they will dis∣pence with their Covenant in relation to the King, contrary to their professions, if he will but contribute his assistance to destroy this Army and their partakers, so that the Cove∣nant is onely made a stalking horse to their dangerous de∣signes in England, and they can dispence with it at their pleasure, for an advantage against Independents, and if this be faithfulnesse in them, I know not what is dissimulation, it must needes grieve the heart of every true Englishman, that the Scots should intermeddle so much in our affaires, and make themselves and a few violent men of their faction in England, the onely competent Judges of our priviledges, without the Concurrence of the English Parliament, whom they chide in their papers, for sending the 4 Bils to the King without their consent, because the same forsooth tended to the setling of Peace in this Kingdom, which it seemes must not be setled, till the Scottish interest be provided for, though their demands be never so unreasonable, and prejudiciall to the rights of Englishmen. The leavying of Religion out of the Bills is a great terrour in their apprehension, for as much as it ought to be handled in the first place, which is easily granted, so it be contested for by spirituall weapons, and set∣led by spirituall meanes, but it is not compelling the out∣ward man, and imposing civill mulcts and penalties that will make men Religious, and obedient to the Gospell, nei∣ther doth the power of Religion consist in a rigid persecu∣ting Presbytery, which is the Reformation these men would have, and the grand Idoll which they adore, as appeares by these and other their papers. If a man cry u their Presbyte∣ry
to be jure divino, though he be but a formalist, yet he is ipso facto, truly Religious in their Books, and hence it is, they have so many Religion, Covenants, and so few spirituall men in Scotland. I can scarce forbeare smiting when I use that expression of them, viz. That the Presbyteriall Govern∣ment as it is setled by Ordinance of Parliament in England, is but a dead form without life or power, why Brethren, can there be life in a dead forme, or can a dead form especialy such an one, as your Presbytery is convey, life without the spirit of God, but their meaning is, & tht it is without l fe power be∣cause the Classical Elders have not a coercive power dispensed to them by the civil Magistrate to make everyman conform to their practice, and submit to their censures under payn of confiscation of goods: banishment, imprisonment, death. Lee this is the life and power, of their Presbytery in Scotland, which they wuld have established in England, that so the Scottish interest may be promoted here as much as there. Nor should it seeme strange to us, that these men are vio∣lently bent against a Toleration of these of dfferent Judge∣ments, and more light in the mysterie of the Gospell, then themselves; seeing they are so setled upon the Lets of unifor∣mity, (their great Diana) that they will admit of no other way or practise in this Kingdom but their own, and besides it would hinder, (as they know by sad experience) the car∣rying on of the Scottish designe, of making themselves our e∣qualls, or rather superiours in the transactions of State mat∣ters, and the enjoyment of civill priviledges in our own Na∣tion. They have other expressions in their papers, very redi∣culous and unsutable to Commissions of State, as those a∣bout Tub-preachers and Seekers, a Sect which I am confi∣dent they are not acquainted with being no friends (you may be sure) to private meetings; but they have heard of such from the men of Smais Colledge, and therefore they rank them among the other Sectaries. One thing I cannot omit, without speaking a word in an∣swer to it, and that is their taxing the Parl. with breach of promise, and proceeding, contrary to their former Declara∣tions, which yet they themselves are guilty of insomuch
that if God shoul enter into Judgment with them & their party for their unfaithfulnes & breach of promis, they would be ut erly consumed; now admit the Parliament have in some things of late proceded contrarie to their former Declaration, must it be presently imputed to their unfath∣fulnesse; I hope they may now and then see cause to alter their resolutions for the good of the Kingdom, that appearing to be for safety now which woud have en di∣structive then, or distructive now, which would have been for saety then, and hereof they being the supream Court of judicature, are the most competent Judges and not the Scott [with whose Lawes and Statute policy we do not inter∣medle] as Austin said in another cas, so may I say in thi, distinguish the times and we shall see a good agrement & harmony against the Parliaments further actings, and their present proceedings. In my judgement our Brethren shew themselves none of the wisest States men, having spent so much Blood and Treasure in opposition to the Bishops, by urging a speedy disbanding of the English Army; for is it not very probable that the Episcopal party being the grea∣test number, will prevaile upon the disbanding of the Ar∣my, seeing they are so bold as to raise commotions in the Countrey now whilst the Army have their Swords in their hands, [witnesse the late rising in London, Kent, Ipswitch, and the Isle of Wygh:] what may we or our Brethren expect in case of the Army were disbanded but it seemes they will hazard their Presbitery in Scotland rather then this in Eng∣land shall be without life and power namely Persccution which being seperated from it, it is but an empty forme a cead Carcase, alas poore Army thou art but ill rewarded for all thy good services especially from thy Neighbours in Scotland; but the reasons why thou art so contemptible in their eyes, are plain and evident. 1. Because the Army have been more faithfull, and their endeavours crowned with greater successe, which hath bred ill blood in the Presby∣terian faction. 2. The Members of the Army are true English∣men, faithfull to the English interest, and will not be blinded
with a Scottish mist, God having opened their eyes, whilst others are shut. 3. they are convinced that moderate peace∣able men who have ingaged with them in this cause, though they differ somewhat from the Presbyterians ought to have civill liberty in their Native Countrey, and this Evangelicall Principle of theirs, is that which renders them odious to all bitter persecuting spirits, that would force their brethren by fire and Sword. The Lord of glory bring the hidden workes of darknesse to light, & cleare up the innocency of his poore disposed people that according to his promise they may have a name and a prayer in the places, where they have been re∣proached and put ro shame. And so I bid you farwell. Jmprimatur Gilbert Mabbott: Jan. 14. 1647. FINIS.
