S2794 E117_17 R212776 99871347 156075
September 16. 1642. SEVERALL PASSAGES Of the late proceedings in IRELAND. Being taken out of certaine Letters newly received from thence, which were sent to a Merchant here in Coleanstreet LONDON. LONDON, Printed for Henry Overtrn. 1642.
Severall passages in Ireland. OUr Army yet keeps the field at Donerayle or there a∣bouts, where, as I have heard, we cannot make a thousand fighting men; and they have lying about them or very neere them fifteene thousand at least. About six daies since Sir John Pau∣let came from thence with seven or eight Collours some of them had but fifteene men, none of them passing fiftie, and most of them sicke and weake, the intent as I understand was to Garrison in Corke, and to carry the sound men into the field. A∣bout halfe way from Mallow they were set upon by the Rebels, who were many in number had 500. Fire-lockes and abun∣dance of Horse set upon ours about breake
of day, where they had been incamped all night; Sir John Panlet bestirred himselfe with judgement and valour, and the rest of the Commanders did their parts, made a daring shew of a weake substance; and al∣though most of our men by reason of the excessive raine all that night could not light their Matches, but it pleased God after the first encounter, the Rebels like themselves runne away; we lost three men, Sir John Paulet was shot into the thigh, but we hope there is no danger of his life; but of this Sir Willam Oagle whom I heare is gone for England, can give the best relation. It is a lamentable thing that in all this time we should not have Forces nor meanes to be masters of the Field; one fix or eight thou∣sand men, well ordered, and one thousand or fifteene hundred Horse, with Money to keepe them in good order, and provide necessaries to keep them in health, would drive this rebellious crew headlong into the sea: but it seemes it is not Gods will, his worke is not yet finished, we are not yet suf∣ficiently humbled.
I had almost forgotten to advise you, that since my last, the Rebels besieged Sir Richard Osborne in his Castle neere Donger∣van: the Lord Broughall with his owne and part of the Lord Barrymores Forces went to relieve them, removed the siege, and kild at least two hundred of them, without the losse of above one or two at most. Likewise one Williams that married a si∣ster of Mr. Jonas Stowels, and in these late times was one of my Lord Presidents Troop, was taken prisoner and condemned to suffer, was sent with seven of their Soul∣diers to the next Tree to be hanged, and having brought him to the place they stript him starke mother-naked, and serching his cloathes for monies, found about 18. shil∣lings, but disagreed upon the division; whereupon it pleased God to direct and encourage him, fastned upon one of their Swords, wounded and killed most of them, and made an escape, he lay hidden by day and travelled by night, found three or foure sheeps-skins to hide part of his nakednesse, and was three daies before he could recover the Army, he was tired and almost famished,
but the worst is past, and in short time he will recover. Thus doth God daily manifest his goodnesse among us. Minhead  9 Septemb. 1642. What we have this weeke heard from Munster followes: My Lord of Dungarvan, with a small company of Horse and Foot on Tuesday last was sevennight, laid siege to Armoore Castle neere Youghall, which the Rebels possessed; where, after he had slaine sixty of the rogues, the Castle was yeelded; the company that he found living there be∣ing 116. men, he caused them all presently to be hanged, and set 300. women and chil∣dren at liberty; this is very true. By the same Ship we heare, that news was brought to Youghall at the very instant, that she came to saile, that my Lord of Barrimore was taken prisoner in journying without a cosiderable company for his guard, between Corke and Bandon, but how true it is, we know not. I forbeare to say any thing of our Sher∣born newes, because I thinke you have daily intelligence from thence to London, and ely contradicted.
From Sherborne. WE have been this weeke much sad∣ded with the Earle of Bedfords ri∣sing from before Sherborn, yet not the least fault can be imputed to him, whom we con∣ceive hath beene very cordiall in the busi∣nesse, this disgrace hath beene in part obli∣terated by a passage lately; Lunsford on Wednesday afternoone came with two Troopes of Horse and a Company of Foot to Eivill, where the Leaguer then was, and at the Townes end shot off a case of Pistols, and brandished his Sword, by way of chal∣lenge, which Captaine Balfore, and Cap∣taine Ascough not enduring craved leave to goe out to them, who obtaining it, tooke their two Troopes, and set on them in the Front and in the Reare, kild them 27 men, and tooke 14 prisoners, made the valiant Lunsford to trust his Horse heels, & had not the night covered these sonnes of darknesse few would have beene left to carry tidings to Sherborne. Thus doth God cheere up his peoples sad hearts sometimes after stormy passages, this hath much worst their cause. I rest yours. FINIS.
