S3900 E447_1 99863570 161796
Sir THOMAS PAYTON Lieutenant Generall for the KING VVith divers others, taken Prisones by Sir Tho: Barnardiston, and sent to the PARLIAMENT. A Letter from the Navy of the names of the Ships come in to the Earl of Warwick. Also the cruell and bloody murthering of Mr. Lloyd High Sheriffe of Merionithshire. And a great Victory obtained by Col∣lonell Carter against the said Cavaliers. Major Generall Sir John Owen, taken prisoner, with Collonell Floyd, and 10 Officers more, 400 killed, taken, and routed. And a List of the Particulars. With a discovery of a barbarous design against Liverpoole in Lancashire, to put men, women, and Children to the Sword. London Printed for Richard Smithurst, and are to be sold neer Hosier▪Lane, 1648▪
A LETTER from PORTSMOVTH Concerning The comming in of the Ships to the Earle of WARWICK. Right Honourable, THe Lord Admirall arrived here June 4. The Mary Rose, the Swiftsure, the Phoenix and the Robert, received his Lordship with great respect: The Non-such came in to his Lordship June 5. The Fellowship, the Hector, and two more at Chattum, have sent their re∣solutions to his Lordship to comply with him. The Reare-Admirall, the Lion, the Bo∣naventure, and the Antelope, desire his Lord∣ships
Orders. The Warwick-Frigon is gone already into the Channell, and the rest have their wives gone to them (with leave) who, upon Indempnity, upon any tearmes, will no doubt, speedily come in. Portsmouth, June 9. 1648. The Copy of a Letter from Bury in Suffolk, of the taking of Sir Thomas Peyton and others, by Sir Thomas Barnardiston. SIR, HEre was some private Listings in ths parts, and rumous spread by Malignants, that the Kentish Officers would come hither to command them. And accordingly Sir Thomas Peyton who was Lieu∣tenant Generall to the Cavaliers in Kent, came hither with Captain Swan, the Lady Swans Son, and others, (as it is said) to gather an Army in these parts, for the King, as they pretend, but without Commission from his Majesty. Sir Thomas Barnardiston having notice hereof, with some Inhabitants here, which joyned with him, for that purpose, came and suppressed them, and hath ta∣ken prisoners, Sir Thomas Peyton, Captain Swan, (and others) and hath sent them to the Parliament. And hereby the peace of this County is much se∣cured, and the hopes of those who thought to have lived upon our ruines, thwarted. Bury 9 June, 1648.
A Letter from Chester, of the great Victory a∣gainst Major Generall Sir John Owen. Noble Sir, THere, began a new insurrection in North Wales, Sir John Owen, the Kings old Major Generall, with Collonell Floyd and others were joyned, to the number of 200 besides 200 Country-men which they had raised in those parts, and were daily in∣creasing in Merionith-shire. Major Generall Mitton, with Mr. Lloyd High-Sheriffe of that County joyned and sent to the Committee of North-Wales to assist them with what Forces they could. We had informations here that they were resolved to give no quarter to any that served the Parliament, And by Letters from Li∣verpool it was said that they have discovered, that had the Cavaliers had power in their Design against that Town, they had not on∣ly killed all that have joyned with the Parli∣ament, but to put their wives and children to the Sword. There need not much to perswade a rea∣dinesse
to joyn in the suppressing of Sir John Owen; And a messenger was dispatched to Major Generall Mitton and the Sheriffe, to assure them of speedy supplyes, and the time and place appointed. But before they could come up Major Generall Mitton and Mr. Lloyd the Sheriffe had ingaged with them, And had a very hot fight, routed the forlorne, and did good ex∣ecution. But Reserves comming up and overpow∣ering us, Major Generall Mitton was wor∣sted, And the Sheriffe with some others ta∣ken. Mr. Lloyd the Sheriffe had seven wounds, And Owen promised him upon his Honour that he should have care taken of him for curing his wounds, yet neverthelesse a guard was set upon him, and hee was carried up and down from place to place, his wounds bleeding about the streets, and no Chirurgion admitted to dresse him, and at last stript and throwne upon the ground, where he lay till he bled to death. Collonell Carter and Collonell Twisleton
with a party of Horse and Foot comming up had notice of that unhappy ingagement with the enemy before they came, and were sorry for the losse of that gallant man, yet they (af∣ter debate amongst the Officers) resolved to ingage Sir John Owen if they could. And accordingly (marched up to them) faced each other, And their Forlornes met, and fought furiously, But Col. Carters men had the worst then. Relief being come up from both, (after an∣other dispute) both sides were at a stand, But after some charges the Parliaments Souldiers worsted them, and brak in upon them, do∣ing execution, which they followed so close that they put them to a totall rout, so that there is now no visible sight in the field. I have sent you (here inclosed) a List of the particulars, and doubt not but the Par∣liament will proceed to execute Justice a∣gainst them for murthering the High-Sheriffe of that County, doing his Office. Chester 8 Iune, 1648.
A List of those particulars that were killed and taken by Collonell Carter, and Col. Twisleton in North-VVales▪ Taken Prisoners. Major Generall Sir John Owen taken prisoner, and wounded with three cuts on his head by Captaine Taylor who hath his Buffe-coate▪ and pulled him off his Horse. Collonell Floyd a notorious Cavalier, that formerly ser∣ved the King. 10 other considerable Officers. 60 Prisoners taken. Most of the Horse. 200 Armes. 30 Slaine of the Cavaliers. 4 slaine of Col. Carters men. Many wounded on both sides. Good Pillage taken which they plundered from the Country. FINIS. June 10. 1648. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbot.
