S4263 E843_3 99866321 168197
The humble Petition of the Prisoners in the FLEET: As it was presented to his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and his Honourable COUNCELL. The 18th. day of MAY, 1655. Remonstrating the Illegality of Outlaries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, in Civill and Personall Actions. With an Expedient for the satisfaction of all Debts for ever, without Arrests or Imprison∣ment. June. 18 royal emblem of Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose Printed by T. FORCET. 1655.
TO His Highness, OLIVER Lord Protector of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Do∣minions thereunto belonging, and to his High∣ness most Honourable COUNCELL. The humble Petition of the Prisoners in the Fleet, in behalfe of themselves and all Honest men, that are willing to pay their Debts. Remonstrating the Ille∣galitie of Outlaries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, in Civill and personall Actions. With an Expedient for the satisfaction of all Debts for ever, without Ar∣rests or Imprisonment. SHEWETH: Sir William Norberts case. That at the Com∣mon Law (unlesse in speciall Cases) neither Lands nor Bodie, were sub∣ject to Arrest or Execution in Debt, or damages recovered, but the seve∣ral proceedings was by Summons and distress Infinite, and after Judgment, a Fieri facias & Levari facies, up∣on the Goods and Chattels,Cooks Instit. 2. par. fol. 394. and the profits growing upon the Lands were the remedies, and writs of Executions the Law being so tender & savouring of Liberty, that all had freedome not only to follow their own affaires but also to serve their Country when need required,53. Hen. 3, cp. 23. neither did it per∣mit the taking away the Possession of any Lands, least the following of Husbandry and Tillage; which is so beneficiall to the Common-wealth should bee thereby hindred.
That the first Innovation upon this Law,Westm 2. cap. 18. was upon the Statute of Marlebridge, which gave a Monstravit de Compote, against fugitive Accomptants, only to attach their Bodies, to bring them to accompt, and afterwards by the Statute of Westm. the 2. Chap. 11. Process of Outlary was given in accompt, and if the Accomptant was found in Arreares by the Auditors assigned, then hee was to be committed to the next Gaole, and their to live of his owne. That afterwards, by the Statute of Westm. 2 cap. 18. an Elegit was given for the recovery of Debt or dammage to extend halfe of such Lands,25. Edw. 3. cap. 17. as the Debtors had at the time of the Iudgement obtained, if the Chattels were not sufficient to pay the Debt, (and of all the Chat∣tels) except the Oxen, and the Horses belonging to the Plough, which was the first Statute that subjected Lands to Execution. That by the Statute of 25.42. Edw 3. cap. 1. Edw. 3. chap. 17. such Process was given in Debt and detinue as in Accompt, but by the Statute of 42.th of the same King, Cap. 1. all Lawes made contrary to the great Charter were repealed,Cooks Instit. 2. part. as appeares by the Lord Cooke in his Proeme to the 2d. part of his Institutes, and by his Comment▪ upon the 29. th Chap. of Magna Carta. So as in good construction that Statute of 25. Edw. 3. which first gave the Capias in debt and detinue was repealed, as being con∣trary to the Great Charter, though the contrary Practice hath beene since used, to the destruction of Millions of Prisoners and their families. That afterward by the Statute of Hen.19 Hen 7. cap. 9. 7. like Process was given in Actions upon the Case, as in Action of trespasse and Debt, and by the Statute of Hen.23. Hen 8. cap 14. 8. like Process was given in a Writ of Anuity, as in an action of Debt; all which Statutes are as Voyd, as that of the 25.Magna Carta, Cap 24. of Edw. 3. to which they have relation, in right construction of Law;11. Edw. 1. for they are not positive Lawes, but relative to those former Statutes repealed by that Generall law of 42.13. Edw. 1. of Ed. 3. as being con∣trary to the Great Charter,27 Ed. 3 cap 9. and how can that Law stand whose Foundation faileth.23 Hen. 8 cap. 6. Now concerning the Arrests and Imprisonment of the Body, and Extent of all the debtors Lands and goods for Satisfaction of debt; acknowledged according to the Statute of Acton Burnell, and the o∣ther Statute de Mercatoribus made only between Marchant and Mar∣chant; as also the Statute of Hen. 8.th of the penalty of such as shall acknowledge a Recognizance, in the nature of the Statute Staple for Marchandize; It is true, that they who doe Enter into such Recogni∣zance, doe grant that the penalty in that Case provided, shall runne
upon them; and give away their Liberty, by their owne consent, and are willing to be Enslaved and ruined by the Creditor, in which case the Maxime of Volenti non fit Injuria, is a proper answer. But for such as at this day are Out-lawed, Arrested, and Impriso∣ned for Debt by Capias Vtlegatum; the Capias in corporate Cities, and Boroughs, or by Bill of Midalesex, or Latitat, before any Debt or Damage is recovered, there being no positive Law now Extant, to warrant the same; seemes to be utterly against the Common Law, and an incroachment upon the Liberty of the Free-born people of England by ill Custome and use, which ought to be abolished. And although it be regulary true; that where a Capias lyes in Process, there a Capias ad Satisfaciendum lyes in Execution; yet that is intended in Actions, Vi et armis only; for there a Capias did lye at the Common Law, before and after Judgment, but not in Debt and detinue, before the Statute of Edw. 3. So as it is manifest, that the Capias ad Satisfacien∣dum in Debt, was never given by any Statute-Law to take the Body in Execution, upon a recovery in any meer Personall action, contrary to the Common-Law. That the Statute of Bankrupts were made against Marchants, and such as got their living by Buying and Selling only, as may appeare by all Cases adjudged upon those Statutes; yet of late times, there was a particular Temporary-law intituled an Act for reliefe of Creditors and poore Prisoners; that subjected all Debtors that were in Prison, at or before the 20th of October, 1653. and should not pay their Debts before the first of Aprill following, to be Bankrupts, and their Lands and Estates were to be sold by the Judges, in the said Act nominated for the satisfaction of their Creditors; which Act for weighty Reasons moving your Highness, was seasonably suspended by your Highness and your Councell, and since by the late Parliament, to the great com∣fort of all Prisoners; For the proceedings of the late Judges therein, were so arbitrary and destructive to the Prisoners & their Estates; that if the said Act should have continued, or if any Ordinance of the like nature should hereafter be Established (as some projecting Creditors are now busie and active to obtaine) it would bee of such sad conse∣quence, that all Prisoners now being, and all Debtors which hereafter may be Prisoners, would be utterly ruined with their Posterity also? For the particular Aime and Ends, of some cruell and implacable Creditors only (who have gone as farre as the Common practice will permit, and that against their owne Election; for after the Body is
charged in Execution, the Creditor cannot resort to the Goods or Lands of the Debtor (while he liveth) but the Prisoner is to enjoy what Estate hee hath without farther molestation of the Creditor, at whose sute he is Im∣prisoned, and as it is of sad consequence to the Prisoner, so it may in time prove to all the Free people of the Nation; for that which befalls one may happen to all, and the course of Out-lawing, and Arresting, being conti∣nued for Debt and detinue, and other personall Actions against the Com∣mon Law, and personall Liberry of the people; there is scarce any that lives but may be brought to the same condition and Catigorie, who yet (though free) upon a bare pretence of Debt, may be Out-lawed, Arrested, and un∣done (as too many of us now are) upon meer vexatious and feyned Acti∣ons; for which abuse hee can have no reparation, although hee remaines three Termes in prison, unlesse he can find sufficient Baile beyond Excepti∣on of the adverse party. Now if that long Expected yeare of Jubile to the oppressd Captives be come, that they may be at last Delivered out of their more then Aegyptian slavery and bondage, and restored to their ancient Lawes, and precious Liberty; wee humbly hope your Highness will manifest your Selfe the Vindicator of the ancient Lawes and Liberties of the people in generall, and Conservator of the Great Charter; and will be pleased to Answer all and whatsoever Innovators, with that memorable Negative, of A nolumus mutáre Leges Angliae; and restore the ancient Law and proceedings for Recovery of Debts, and take away the Capias in all Civill causes, which will be a most Honourable and just Ordinance, and prejudiciall to none; for the Ancient and laudable proceedings were more remediall to Creditors then that barbarous Imprisonment of the Debtor is or can bee; for if the Debtor be worth nothing, it is against the Law of GOD, Nature, and Na∣tions, that he should live all his dayes in the grave of a Prison; whereby he is deprived of Friends, and disabled for ever by any Industry in his Cal∣ling to attaine to any Estate, wherewith to make satisfaction to his Credi∣tors or prosecute for his owne, but is forced to spend his time most unprofi∣tably in Prison, and waste what ever he hath or can come by for his neces∣sary subsistance (in a very Wofull condition) which is well hoped, will not only be pittied but remedied by the Mercy and Justice of your Highness. And for a further Expedient, to take away this publique Grievance oc∣casioned by the moderne practice of Outlawries, Arrests, and Imprisonment of the Body, in Civill causes, and to prevent the vast Expence of Debtors under the custody of Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Serjeants at Mace, and Prison-Kee∣pers, by excessive Fees, usually extorted from poor prisoners in Gaoles and
places (anciently provided for Malefactors and criminous persons, and not for Debtors) many times amounting to more then would pay the Debt, for which the prisoner is Arrested; as also for a more speedy, safe and legall way, for the recovery of all just debts and damages for the future, without Outlary, Arrest, Baile, or Imprisonment of the Body; as also, to ease the Creditors of those vast Charges and Expences they are forced unto, before they can have their Debtors person Arrested, their Lands extended, or their Goods levied in Execution, and their Monies raised by the same out of the Sheriffs hands. May it please your Highness, and Honorable Councell, to reflect upon these Proposals humbly offered to your Honorable and prudent Considerations, in order to the restoration of the Ancient Law, and proceedings for re∣covery of Debt and damages, only aimed at by Your Petitioners. 1. IN the first place to take away Outlawries, and the Capias, both be∣fore and after Judgment in civill causes, and to discharge all such Prisoners from their present Imprisonment; except such as shall be justly indebted to the Common-wealth, and have wherewith to pay. 2. And to indemnifie all Sheriffs, the Warden of the Fleet, the Martiall of the Vpper-Bench, and other Officers and Keepers of Prisons from any Escapes in that behalfe. 3. That all Benevolenees, Pensions, and Annuities, formerly given to∣wards the reliefe of any Prisoners for debt, may be disposed of towards the reliefe of maimed Souldiers. 4. That in case the great circumspection of your Highness and Coun∣cell shall thinke fit, to alter the course in the point of Meum & Tuum; then to Impower the learned and reverend Iudges of the foure Courts of Westminster, both in Terme-time, and Vacation; and also all Iustices of Assise, and Nisi prius in their severall Circuits; and all Iudges of Courts of Record within their severall Corporations. And that for the ease of the said Judges, and more speedy execution of their said Commissions, That in every County, City, and Corporation, there may be some persons of Fi∣delity, Honour, and Quality nominated, to bee ayding and assisting unto them, to heare and determine all differences between all Creditors, and Debtors in a Summary way, within their severall Jurisdictions. 5. That the said Iudges upon all Petitions to them presented, either for Debt or other personall Actions whatsoever, may have power to call all parties before them by Summons, and upon due proofe made of any
Debt or damage, and of the debtors Estate, to order payment and satisfa∣ction, within some reasonable time after; and in default therof to sell either all or so much of the personall Estate of the Debtor, as shall pay the same; and if that prove short, then to lease two Thirds of the Reall estate of the Debtor at the uttermost value (except the Mansion house) as will satisfie the debt, for any tearme at such a rate as is ordinary for the time being, between Buyer and Seller; so it exceed not XXI. yeares, which may be granted upon the estate of all Debtors, who have any estates for life in Fee, Fee-taile, or by Coppy-hold; as also of all Estates past in trust, or to uses, wherein the debtor hath any equitable Right, or otherwise; which Lease may be good against him and his heyres; unless he pay his debt, or agree with his Creditor within Six moneths after the making of any such Lease, and that this course be universall in all causes, without Circuit of action or respect of Infants; and the like power for such Damages, as by a Iury of twelve men shall be given before the said Iudge, in all other personall actions whatsoever. 6. That these Judges may be also impowred to Examine and review the obtaining of all Decrees, Judgments, Recognizances, Statutes, and Morgages, and the originall debt or contracts upon the same, and to Vacat and reverse the same, upon payment of what shall appeare to be justly due thereupon in Law or Equity, unto the parties Interessed therein. And also to try any fradulent settlement of any Lands or Goods made to defeat the Creditor, by a Iury of Twelve men, and may be directed (if your Highness and Councell think fit) to satisfie Creditors their principall debt, with inte| rest according to the priority of their debts, and of their securities; which by Law are to be first satisfied, and also to have power to qualifie or take off Interest (with respect had to the late Warre) as occasion shall require, and to give Damages to such who have been wrongfully Imprisoned, or unlawfully vexed, either for Debts formerly satisfied, or where men have layne in Prison three Termes, and no Declaration filed against them. 7. That it may be ordained, that every Petitioner (except Paupers) doe pay in every Cause 6. s. 8. d. to the chiefe Clerk of every Court where any suite is exhibited against the Debtor, before he have the Summons of the Court against the Defendant, in full of all Fees and salaries to the end of the Causes, to be devided amongst the Judges and Officers of the said Court, in recompence of the Fees usually taken by them upon Tryals of personall Actions.
By this course the Creditor will be sure of his just Debt in a short time, with little Expence; also the Debtors Wife, and Children, of a House, and some subsistance out of the Third part, the Debtors themselves of their Liberty, to follow their businesse and to serve the Common-wealth in their severall stations, as occasion shall require; so shall Peace and much quiet redound to the Publique, when the power of Oppressi∣on, and the sting of the Law, which is the Capias shall be taken away; so may the Sheriffes serve the Common-wealth with much safety, being not subject to pay for Escapes of Prisoners, Blood-shed, and Murther avoyded; which often happens by Ar∣resting of Debtors, who many times rather hazard their Lives upon a rescue, then they will loose their precious Liberty, and indure the miseries of a Prison. Also much Mo∣ney will be saved, which is commonly wasted in unnecessary and vexatious Outlawries, Arrests, and Imprisonments, by malicious and male volent Creditors; and every man will have their due from each other. Also by this course, Iustice can be no looser, when there is a generall and equitable Law, for the mutuall good of Creditor and Debtor, now and hereafter. And the memoriall of this Ordinance, under your High∣ness Government in a Case of such Publique concerment, will be Honourable to future Ages. And the Petitioners shall pray, &c. The Names of such Prisoners in the Fleet as subscribed the Petition. William Smith. Walter Roberts▪ William Roberts. William Rudyerd. Edward Rumsey, Robert Rowe, William Gregory, Robert Whitwell, Morris Tuke, Thomas Stevenson, Walter Salmon, Ambrose Fulsham, Thomas Nash, Henry Carverth, William Carverth Robert Becket, Thomas Buck, Thomas Tracy, Edmund Hastings, Francis Eure, Thomas Hyghton, William Bowyer, Iohn Littlebury, William Pitts, William Peacock, Richard Niclets, William Coles, Thomas Iohnson, Roger Raven, Thomas Walton, William Browne, Lystr Blue. M. Mary Rogers. Dorothy Arundell. Cum multis aliis.
