S6246 669.f.11[3] 99869207 162654
Deare Friends: IT is now about sixe yeares since I was most unfortunately taken by a Turkes man of Warre, on the Coasts of Barbary captive into Argiere; since which time I have written oft to Lon∣don to Master Southwood of the upperground, to Richard Barnard of Dukes place, Richard Coole of the Bank-side, to Master Linger an Haberdasher in crooked Lane, and in that to Master Southwood I sent an inclosed to my Father, ifliving, and other Letters to my Bro∣ther and friends, if not dead; I could never heare whether any of you were alive or dead, which makes me thinke the Letters are either miscarried, or all of you deceased, or gone to other places, or else I know you are so much Christians and friends, that you would have looked upon me in such a condition. O my friends, once more I tell you, I am a miserable Captive in Argiere, taken by a Flemish Vessell, two yeares after I left the Warres in Gilder∣land; my Patroone is one Baron a French Renegado that lives in the Country, but hires me and another Protestant Captive (one Master Robinson a Norfolke man) out into Argiere for this time, and if we goe up to the Country you may never heare of us againe; our misery is, that the price of our redemption will be no lesse then 250. 1. because we are thought to have good friends in England, and we must both goe off together. Master Robinson hath written to his friends, and we have deeply bound our selves to each other, that we will ingage our friends to us both equally; Ah, Father, Brother, friends and acquaintance, use some speedy meanes for our Redemption, many hun∣dred Slaves have been redeemed from their misery since we came hither, which makes us hope still we may be the next, and then the next, but still our hopes are deceived. We doe pray you therefore for the Lords Christs sake that redeemed you, that you would use all possible meanes for our redemption. There is now a part in England renowned over the Christian world for their Piety this way, O make your addresse to those noble worthies in the name of Christ, for whose sake we suffer; we did never so well understand the meaning of that Psalme, penned by those captive Jewes held in Babi∣lonish captivity as now, By the waters of Babilon we sate down and wept, vvhen vve remembred thee, O Sion, when we remem∣bred thee, O England. O good friends, we hope these our sighs will come to your eares, and move pitty and compassion. We are told there is a Merchant in London, one Mr. Stanner of St. Mary-Axe, that hath a Factor in Legorne, and one Mr. Hodges, and Mr. Mico, Londoners, that are dealers there, who are able to direct you in the readiest way for our redemption; deny us not your prayers if you can doe nothing else, it will be some comfort to heare from friends. There is a Post in London that conveyes Letters into all parts, and you may have an opportunity of letting us heare from you, if you please within a month or six weeks. The Lord direct your thoughts with waies of love, and strengthen us with faith and pa∣tience. Your sorrowfull friend, and brother in Christ, Thomas Sweet. There subscribes to these besides, Richard Robinson. From Barbary, Septemb. 29. 1646. Another Copy of a Letter since. SIthence our last sent you in September, Master Cason the Parliaments Agent, and the Basha have concluded a Peace, and it is agreed, that all English Captives (not turn'd Renegadoes) shall be redeemed at the price they were first sold in the Market for; which our Patroon understanding before the Agreement, made us over by Bill to a Moore in Tunis, being a Merchant of his acquaintance, the place being under another Government, and swore we should not be redeemed till the last man there, unlesse we could procure the summe first demanded, which is, 250. li. I doe keepe his bookes of Ac∣compts and Merchandize, and that keepes me here in misery, when others that are illiterate goe off upon easie tearmes for Cloath, so that my breeding is my undoing unlesse pitty be shewne. November 26. Thomas Sweet. THe long and lamentable bondage of Thomas Sweet, and Richard Robinson, our Neigh∣bour-Englishmen (and good Protestants) being cleered unto us by the Testimony and recommendation of divers godly Ministers of the Assembly, and of this City of Lon∣don, upon the desire of their friends, we can doe no lesse then recommend the sad condi∣tion of those men to your godly consideration and Christian Charity, heartily wishing and desiring, you would yeeld your utmost, and most speedy furtherance, that they may be redeemed with the first. Richard Prise, Baronet. Robert Nedham, Knight. Tanfeild. Vachell, Esquire. Arthur Owen, Esquire. John Meyrick, Knight. Cl Waker, Esquire. Simon Thellwall, Esquire. William Davis, Esquire. Members of the Honourable House of Commons. Published by Authority.
