t2083 43077698 151809
TREASONS ANATOMJE Or The Duty of a Loyall SUBJECT In Vindicating His gracious Soveraigne, against those horrid Aspertions, cast upon Him, conser∣ning His Fathers Death, The reliefe of the Rochellers, and The Rebellion in Ireland, and in way of Answer to a Declaration, published by the House of Commons, Feb. 15. Psal. 89. Ver. 48. Lord where are Thy old loving kind∣nesses: which Thou swarest unto David in Thy truth? Ver. 49. Remember (O Lord) the rebuke that thy Servants have: and how I doe beare in my bosome the rebuke of many People. Ver. 50. Wherewith thine Enemies have blasphemed Thee, and slandered the Foot-steps of thine Anoynted: Praysed be the Lord for evermore. Psal. 7. Ver. 8. The Lord shall Iudge the People, give sentence with mee O Lord: according to Thy righte∣ounesse, and according to the innocencie that is in mee. Pro. 19. ver. 9. A false witnesse shall not be unpunished: but Hee that speaketh lies shall perish. Ps. 125. This I had: because I kept thy Commandements. Proverbs 20. ver. 2. The feare of a King is like the roa∣ring of a Lyon; Hee that provoketh Him to anger, sin∣neth against His owne Soule. Psal. 26. ver. 1. Bee thou my Iudge O God, for I have walked innocently: My trust hath beene also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall. Perspice finem. Printed in the yeare. Anno Dom. 1647.
The Preface To all his Majesties Subiects. Deare Countrymen, HEaring of a Poysonous and till now) unheard of peece of treason lately hatched, wherein is con∣teyned by the way of Articles) hellish and scan∣dalous imputations of his sacred Majesty, by in∣citing him to be the Author of his Fathers death, Opugnant to the Reliefe of Rochell. And the Causer or Abetter of the Rebelion in Ireland. &c. I thought it very meet (being both bound in conscience by my allegeance and also for the referrence) every religious Man ought to have the truth violated against any person, more especially, and in an un∣speakeable measure, when he; so gracious a Prince, is brought upon the Stage of opprobrious calumnie, false-witnesse, or rather ac∣cusers (for witnesses, Maugre all their perjury they can, produce none) raising up and laying to his Charge, things that he knew not. Let any man that hath but common sence, Judge how their other Arguments do hang together, and thereby he may the easier discerne of these last Superlatively, trayterous and most inhumane
accusations, being by no other meanes able to disturbe his Christi∣an Patience [admired of all the World] think at last by these Hel∣spude suggestions to overcome the smooth [and as neere as a man could be] immaculate current of his passions to such a vehemencie and vigour of Spirit as shall some way prejudice him in the main∣taining and supporting of so righteous a cause as he now in his royall and religious person suffereth for being debarred the liber∣ty that the very meanest of his Subjects enjoy; See their Horrid'st plots, pry into the sinke of their Diverlish, intentions, and thou shalt plainly find that their maine designe, is to render our Sacred Soveraignee odious to the Ignorant Communalty, whereby their Arbitrary Government may creep in; and then [how many Parli∣ament men, so many monstrous Kings, How many Monsters. so many Tyrants] I'le keepe thee no longer at the Gate, Enter, and view their Infernall Stratagem within doores. Blush oh Heavens at the divelish, Impudency of this forlorne wretches O Earth why cannot thy mouth open, swallowing their Dathans, and covering the Abiriums of theis catiffe tymes? O Wa∣ters how stands it, you rageing waters orewhelme not these ten thousand more then Egyptian cruelty? how long will it bee ere these Iulianists cry vicisti Nazarene, or Iesus thou hast over∣commend? shall the Enemy blaspheme thy glorious name, O God for ever unpunished, or the presumption of them that hate thee increase thus ever more and more? Shall thy dearest servant, and our dread soveraigne be thus intollorably slandered, and not their names perish? Shall not all the loyall blood that was shed from the blood of Noble Stratford to the blood of that worthy Mar∣tyre Burleigh be required of this viperous generation of cruel and inhumaine Canniballs? How currishly doe these cinnicall dogges barke and houle at the splendor (though clouded by inhumaine Treason) of our Rroyall and unstained starre, and be right stee∣rer of justice. The comfort (though now the Corazive) of all that have the least glimpse of Knowledg, or sence of the feare of God. But to the intended Subject, and first to that Hellish West. minsterian lye, of his Majesties having a hand in the death of his re∣nowned Father, who (as it is knowne to all of any capacity, es∣pecially
of this City) dyed in a good old age, having finished his course, and left his royall House in order, his disease being an Ague and further to convince these hellish vipers, there have been divers Chiurgions and others (by the House examined) who were at the embalming, and encoffening of that generally lamented Prince, who have Iustified his corps to be as free from any the least imper∣fection, or change of colour as could be, 'twould make the ruth∣lesest and most Tiger spirited man in the world repine, except the drove at Westminster. What Marble heart could but molifie to hear so vertuous a Prince thus caluminated. For my part I quiver and tremble in the carriage of my quill through this bloody and villeinous Scandall, and were it not for the Vulgar satisfaction, could think my selfe in no other predica∣ment then a Traytor, for presuming to recterate over such cursed and palpable yea most diabolicall Surmises, which is done by mee to indeavour the Subversion or nipping in the bud of this In attoneable and most haynous peece of treason, and may that hand perish that is endued with the least ability, in writing that doth not stir in the defence of his righteous Soveraigne against these Hell littered Slanders, be it ever so little, set out thy good will in the defence of thy wrongfully defamed Prince, and that drone that doth not, deserves not the benefit of breathing. Plead Oh England in the behalfe of thy best and justest of Kings, examine thine owne conscience, whether ever any King hath governed more righteously, or any people lived in more happinesse and tranquillity, every Man enjoying the labor of his owne hands, and every one drinking of his owne Vineyard. No Ahab-like tiranny exercised by him, no leading into Captivity, or complayning in thy Streets, til their wicked Rebellion burst forth, and since thy more impartiall conscience may informe thee, how hee hath ever beene a labourer for peace, but when hee spake un∣to them thereof, they made themselves ready to battle, who sate there to no other purpose, but to carouse on the blood of Loyall Subjects, and to the extirpation of Monarchy root and branch, as that Pock rotten fire brand of Hell, the Parliaments Sardanapu∣lus)
not long since motioned to his Brethren of the same mould. Can thy understanding give way? were there an Ideom or forme shuffled for these unnaturall and in the highest nature ungodly invention to take the least impression on thy professed Christian beleefe? will not thy owne Genius tell thee, be thou never so igno∣rant, that hee who was next in succession to the Crowne, his Fa∣ther being as it were by reason of his Age on the brink of the Grave, (betweene whome there was such mutuall and reci∣procall love) should harbour a thought, much lesse act, any thing that might either shorten his dayes by the course of nature so neerely come to a period, or if thou lay a side all thoughts of his Clemency (which were the greatest point of inhumane unchari∣tablenesse that might be lodged in the cancaredst minde.) What would it availe a man to indeavour the distruction or death of an already dying man (the Lord of Heaven and Earth judge be∣tweene him and those suggesting Traytors, according to the righ∣teousnesse that is in him, according to the clearenesse of his hands in thy eye sight. A few words more concerning that damnable lye, they say his di∣sease was an Ague, and say they it was resolved for his recovery, that nothing should be given, or applyed to his Highnesse by the way of Physick or Dyet, but by, and upon their generall advice and consents. They say the Duke of Buckingham (a Mortall E∣nimy to such rebellious villaines as they are) after his inhibition, procured certain Plaisters, and a certaine drink to be provided for his Majesty, [surely of a contrary Nature, to that their Predecess∣ors presented King John with) and they say that he againe provi∣ded the like drinke and plaister for the King [strong poyson that must be so often used to carry away a dying Man] His Majestie dies, and within two yeares a Parliament is called [or which this is the very spawne] wherein many envious Machivilians [emula∣ting the dignities, and honours conferred on the Duke and him for them] ransaked the innocent ashes of the deceased King, and deepely taxing him of the former act amongst themselves, questi∣onlesse, thought to murther him for his Heroick merrrits, as they did the Earle of Strafford for feare of a Scourge for their Trea∣son,
so they too soon after procured the death of that Anti. Rebel by a desperat and fatal hand, Our gracious K. that now is [they say] cleered him of that envious aspersion, and they say themselves that the former charge [or lye] was answered on the Dukes be∣halfe, and least they should murther that English Hero. The King dissolved that Parliament. I would to God he had done the like now to prevent this, the Kingdomes meerely destructions, Now I pray you consider whether it stands with reason, that the Duke being preferred to such honours, that as beyond Hercules his Pillars. he could go no further, or be any greater unlesse a King, which if thought of, was very contrarily contempted by cuting off the Aged King, having an heire of such hopes I have before spoken of, the well known affection between our King and his Father, and who he was neerely come by the course of nature to his longest home. Also of the Chirurgions, and not only they but many more are now living of that profession, then embalming the King, besides inumerable proofes by Spectators. As for the rotten frame of that stinking lie concerning the plaister and drink, let al Loyall and Impartiall Phisitians Judg, and againe, yea cursed forgers, God in a specially manner threatens the disobe∣dient with the like children, yea infallibly punisheth them so, but the World never veilded more dutifull (and beyond expres∣sion) affectionate yssue, then the royall branches of his sacred Maj∣are, but they have forgotten. Lex tallionis, Hammond, alias Ham∣man the jaylor; lately came to his Majesty, and told him that if he had known what was in agutation, he would not have been so jo∣cond, his Majesty demanded of him what, he answered they were drawing up a Bill to question him for his life, a thing never heard of before, his Majesty answered to this effect, that let them rake Hell, from whence their actions are derived, it should not disturbe him, being cleare in conscience, Hammond then told the King, that if he had signed the last (trayterous) Bills, these last lies had not been published, If true? which the God of Heaven knowes to the contrary, then for their own ends they intended to con∣ceale that incredible paricide, which, as I have shewed, he is as free from as the child unborne.
Compare their cunninger and more seeming pretences being [as thou seest] the worst, but this off scumme of Hellish plotts, with their proceedings ever since and left thine and the 3 King∣domes wofull experience dictate, whether any thing then profes∣sed, hath been since performed; what was it that they taught which either by corruption of inferiours, or their owne [if any] negligence had caused but was as soone granted as proposed; was the protestant religion the cause? you see how that is most Athiesticallie renown'd and the most zealous professors thereof persecuted beyond hethenish cruelty. Was it the Kings Royal Prerogative? you know and all the world, that to be the worst the Father of lyes and fountaine of Rebellion could invent, the King being Indungeoned, his vertuous Queene basely traduced and banished, a thing irksome to the meanest Subject, the Royall object of our expectation exposed, either to the cruell mercy of the Rebell, to be in his Fathers condition, or to leave his Crownes in Revertion, and so throw himselfe to the wide world, which last resolution hee took hold on, knowing the inevitable danger of comming into their crimson cursed clawes, the rest of the Royall issue unfortunatly falling into their clut∣ches, meerly daunce attendance on their Worships as Hospitall, or the meaner sort of Almes people doe on their bene so do they on their Malefactors; then the liberty of the Subject you feele to your generall woe, is converted to the neverheard of before, cruill bondage, yea such as was not knowne in any civill or do∣mestick Warres. The last mentioned but first and farthest performed and pur∣sued, were your priviledges of Parliament, but it is a legall one, when neither Towne or County, hath the free Election of Par∣liament men? who are to negotiate every man for his Country, as faithfull servants of the Common wealth ought to do (and not instead of serving them) to Tyranize over them like Ægiptian Masters as they have don ever since the ungodly beginning of their 7. yeares Raigne, Judge Oh Judge impartially what a consump∣tion hath poore England been in ever since, and how these states
Paracelsians who with their desperate drugges or dregges have oc∣casioned the disease of a Nation (now most wofully languishing of it) would prescribe a medicine worse then the disease, by converting of that heavenly ordained government of Monarchie, into that De∣monaicall and most unchristian like arbitray rule. Corasives in stead of Cordials to a languishing Common wealth: Take an occasion to peruse all their passages and pause seriously upon them; and if thou findest not their former actions to bee in all respects disagreeable to their professions; then Ile give thee free dispensation (as I well may) to conceive and apprehend of these viperous aspersions, according to thy owne judgement, no man (I thinke) opposing: Till when, or Calendas Graecas, I shall desire all those that professe the name of Christ, to beware from such scandalous doctrine of Devils, of which, never was heard the like: You (doubtlesse) know how that the calling together, exercising and conducting of Land or Sea forces, solely belongs to the King, being the supreame head and governour of all such his Kingdomes and Dominions. Tradition sheweth this to everie of the meanest and ignorant men; and that he is the preserver and protector of his Subjects, whether against oppression or invasi∣on, and therefore know that he beareth not the sword in vaine, as the saying hath it, Regum est parcere Subjectos & debellare superbos. Kings are for the ncouragement of the good and the terrour of wick∣ednesse. But see the fomenters of this unnaturall and bloody Warre, unmasked and set out or presented to the view of the World in their proper colours; some troubled spirits both of the Parliament and Citie first mentioned the extirpation of Episcopacie, roote and branch. Others of the like cut, in the same manner preferred a Bill for the transferring of the Militia of Sea and Land, out of his hands, whom God himselfe had placed them in (our Soveraigne Lord the King) into the hands of such Sectaries or other temporising Com∣otters, who (questionlesse) were to part stakes with them, where∣by their. Rebellion might the easier take effect. And although the full convention of Parliament unanimously rejected these trayterous Bils, the main  Agents in the businesse revive and promote them by tumults and insurrections. I shall desire you to judge of the cause by the intended effect; and as a perjured villaine is never to have his Oath again, so I pray thee take not their tongues or pens for slanders,
who have beene so often perjured: yea, would solemnly sweare to the world (were it not for shame more then conscience) that the sun never shined. Never did that famous Oratour Cicero pronounce an Oration with more confidence and audacitie then their squeakers and other such as Martin will babble Treason impudence, I should say of them: But to the former discourse, After this dissertion, then began upon the House of Peeres by the name of Bishops, and Popish Lords, who (as they sayde) hindred a free passage to their Reforma∣tion: And gathering to an head of the rabble rout of the Countrey, with a factious partie of the Citie, forced the Parliament as farre as they could; crying downe of Bishops, and intollerably abusing them as they past, with the same barbarous demeanour towards the Mem∣bers of the House, that would not assent to their treason; neither would these now reciding at Westminster, joyne to suppresse these tu∣mults, being underhand not onely permitters but promoters of those horrid designes. Not long after, were by their meanes, opprobrious words, yea most dangerous, spoken against his Majestie by the meanest that passed, saying (as it is well gathered by a Gentleman) that they would have no more Porters lodges; but would speake with the King when they pleased: Judge whether the same spirit hath not had a powerfull influence n this last more horrid device. His Ma∣jestie finding the danger that might ensue, accuseth the chiefe pro∣moters to the Parliament, of high treason, being the Lord Kymbol∣ton and the five Members, the Articles are instanced in a Booke called Comparatis Comparandis; which Articles they have ever since en∣deavoured to prove, and indeed effectually performed, till it plea∣sed God to stay their furie. The Houses being by this time corrupted, would not obey the King in sequestring their Members; but rather encouraged them in their treason. Having sent them to the Citie where they were not onely harboured, but in short time the Com∣mon Councell at London being illegally altered and unlawfull and unaccustomed watches kept in the Citie, under the command of Ma∣jor — Skippon, pretended for the safetie of the Citie; the Trayned Bands guard those Members from the Citie to Westminster, with many lights and long boats were sent out loaden with Saker, murdering peeces, and other ammunition, drest up with waste cloaths and streamers, as ready to fight; the Marriners by water, the Soldiers
by land, as they past by White hall asked what was become of the King, where was hee? And for all his Majesties accusation of the Members of high Treason, the prementioned revive their former treason for transferring the power by Sea and Land into other hands; withall the Commons desiring the Lords concurrence in petitioning to the King that the Militia of the Kingdome might be transferred into such hands as they would confide in, which was twice carryed negatively, by the voyces of much the major part of Lords; hereupon they (by the incensed) meaner sort, petition the House of Commons, against the Lords as Malignants, and desire to know their names, and threaten to remove them: and Hollis made a speech to the Lords, in∣forcing that Petition at a Conference, whereupon diverse Lords went away, and then that trayterous vote passed, being rejected twice be∣fore, when neither popish Lords or Bishops were present, twelve of the Bishops being in the Tower: Since which time the lower House carry what they will (Stat pro ratione voluntas) being gui∣ded by the former impeached Members, having the rude multitude at their commands, wholy commanded the House of Peeres to what they list, who dared not but submit to any thing brought to them, for their concurrence: Judge whether it was safe reciding for a King, where his greatest enemies were so prevalent, and he in dan∣ger of his life daily, had even any King more reason to desert enemies more dangerous? Now I leave it to any intelligible, and impartiall Christian to discerne and judge of these viperous scandals; being for∣ced to publish this as an Antidote, while stronger lynes are in the Mint, the time permitting not a larger answer, yet the World may see them here beaten with their owne weapons: As they Allegeance bindeth thee, pray and cease not for thy righteous Soveraigne, so mayst thou and all true Subjects prosper. The next lye of any consequence is that of Rochell, which by the loyall intelligence of a never failing Champion of the truth, I have obtained; (being gathered from no Westminster like for∣ger) but such as shall make it appeare to be the very truth of the proceeding then agitated, which are thus. His Majesties pious care in the sufficient number of men, and shipping, his choice of the most experienced Souldiers of the three Kingdomes of Eng∣land,
Burrowes, Rich, Hawley, Sant-Leager, Fryar, &c. of Ireland, Willbughby, Crosly, Sir Ralph Bingley, &c. of Scotland, Sir An∣drew Gray, Conningham, &c. The hot and bloody fight at their lan∣ding argues no want of Commission: At their landing there was much galantry shewed as might be in any action, where (at length) the French were forced to retreat, the English losing many a gallant man, as Sir William Heydon, Johnson the En∣gineer, Sir George Blundell, and others, and comming before the Fort, although there were many great Commanders, who I pre∣sume experienced in all feates of Warre, and would have beene much offended to be otherwise esteemed; yet when they came to entrench and raise batteries, whether out or wilfullnesse, or igno∣rance, who can judge? None could be found to undertake it, on∣ly John Tradskine was made use of as chiefe workeman, and this is conceived to be one great cause of the miscariage, & long lying before the Fort, prevailing no further; and had not the sea-men bravely performed their part, they would not have stayed so long. for the enemies were both skilfull and dilligent in keeping them from releiving, but surely God alone as is conceived they being no other but Sectaries though then professed Protestants, wee were frustrated of our designes, which was this; intelligence being gi∣ven that reliefe was comming, they drew their squadrons of ships, so that part as the wind then sate, to be ready to receive them, the French accordingly set forth, and came on, but fell to the Lee∣ward, the Fort then was upon Articles of surrender, when sud∣dainly the winde chopt about, and so advantagious it was for the French, and contrary to the English, that is was not in the art of man to hinder, that advantage or rather providence: the French making use of their victory, neglected not in the pursuit, the mis∣carriage in the retreat, was either by the mistake, or too much care to secure themselves or some Officers, if not contrary, yet farre from the command of the Generall, and the Councell of Warre, and yet men esteemed full of honour and long experience: and looke then on the King, then but yong, acting by his Councell, choosing such Officers of severall Kingdomes, generally esteemed of for honour, valour, and knowledge, sparing no expences; Oh then judge equally taking your charity of a Loyall Subject along, whether thy pious Soveraigne, is not intollerably, yea most unde∣servedly
slandred; Let every true Christian shed a teare for these most opprobious callumnies, and God will (if he weepes with him that weepes) comfort him also in the day of his distresse. As concerning Rochell, after the Duke was slaine by Felton, when ready to put to sea, did he not with all expedition make choice of the Earle of Lyndsey, a man full of honour, gallantry, and beloved of the Souldiery both by Sea and Land, his gallantry in Denmarke being fresh in memory, furnished with all sorts of Ammunition, ships, and all other necessaries; and what doe their miraculous expectations extend unto? But they would have Mo∣ses, Joshua, Sampson, David or Judas Maccabeus, and yet all could not mussell the mouthes of these slanderous Lyars: as for their ob∣servations on his letters, suppose there be any overtures to or with that French King, they doe not suite with these actions, what use can be made of what is not understood; how frequent is it with Princes and Potentates to treate of Peace, and prepare for warre, and to write and to speake of peace only to make their Adversaries secure; yea even in the heate of warre to make over∣tures of Treaties, and to act quite contrary, this is shewed by all Histories; but admit as is objected, that his Majesty did only make a shew of warre, without any intention, and that he did at last leave the Rochellers to themselves, and the Duke De Roane also, although his Kinsman, and questionlesse not without a just cause, when he was informed that whatsoever pretences of the Protestant Religion were obtruded upon him, the interest of the King of Spaine was advanced, and it was discovered that his gold payd de Roanes friends: How great a Lover of Protestants he hath over beene is as well knowne, as his just desire of Soveraignty over whom God apoynted him, in all Christendome (if this were as indeed it was) the true cause, who can blame his Majestie to withdraw himselfe, that his first intentions were reall, his Exche∣quer Records will testifie, his large expences, great gratuities to, and his Pensions to Mouseir Sabeeze, and others, to encourage them; certainely he could (at first with good words) have kept his money, the Dukes Officers, and others are able to give more ample satisfaction; but it seemes strange to me if this suffice not the King being satisfied how that their Religion was not as preten∣ded
(any thing) agreeing with the Protestant, but were, and are most that goe under the notion of Protestants in France, of the Hugonists Sect, as far from a Protestant, as God and Mammon, light and darkenesse, vertue and vice, so pernitious a Sect is that of the Hugonists, which Sect, (as I said before) the Rochellers were of; neverthelesse all the while the King was not satisfied of their Religion, his actions then in that behalfe as I have layd downe before, will apparently manifest his forwardnesse to relieve Protestants. Concerning the Irish insurrection, I wonder those grand Ones at Westminster dare pronounce the word Rebell, they being the most impudent and inhumane that ever I read or heard of. How dare they tax the King as a countenancer or any way, encourager of those discontented people in Ireland? surely his so gracious and frequent both Procl. and Declarations in that behalfe, cannot but in the highest nature both cleare and justifie him against these surmises. Read all his Declarations concerning the Irish, and therein finde his tender care of healing the sores of the distressed Protestants there: Yea, offered to goe in his owne Person on that designe against the I rish; but within a little these Rebells tooke occasion to rise in armes, and hindered all the proceedings against the Irish; yea (as all the Kingdome may know) have converted most part of men and money raised for the Irish service, to main∣taine this unnaturall and most bloody Rebellion in England. Men may be guided by their fancies, and as the deafe Adder that stops her eares at the voice of the Charmer, charme he never so wisely, refuse truth offered unto them; I can but leave such (as they are questionlesly left to a reprobate sence) to their owne selfe-willed constructions. There cannot be more innocency both pretended, and mani∣festly proved then I have heerein set downe, though in few words; hath not that glorious Lampe of Gods glory, the Prophet Elias beene taxed for a troubler of Israell; Paul factious, Joseph by his incontinent Mistris, chaste Hippolitus, religious and civill Susanna, Eugenius, Athanasius his name converted to Sathancthius; yea often taxed a murtherer of Cato and Scipio, and traduced before the Senate at Rome, as our gracious Soveraigne is before and by
his trayterous Servants at Westminster. Was not that splendifferous object of the Gospels advancement Saint Jerome, slandered by the Romish Priests for his pious confe∣rence with Eustochium, Paula, Demetriades, Paulina, with such chaste and devout women? Was not Christ himselfe said to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devill, with other odious as blasphe∣mous as reprooffes? Then in immitation of our blessed Saviour; Let our gracious Soveraign be barked at by all the intestine Zoy∣louses of the world, while they with aspiring Phaeton, or too much confiding Icarus, trust to fallicids, and God doubtlesse pre∣pares a lanthorne for his Anoynted. I see the time drawes on, and that I can no longer passe the picturing of these antipodized times: Let the Loyall daigne the view of me, and the infected take though sharpe to cure their ma∣lady, and this is the ultimum of my honest and loyall endeavours: God Almighty blesse them that blesse him, and curse them that curse him. FINIS.
