W1082 E2_14 99872216 154655
A more Exact RELATION Of the late BATTELL Neer YORK; Fought by the English and Scotch Forces, against Prince RUPERT and the Marquess of Newcastle. Wherein the Passages thereof are more particularly set down, presented to the view of those who desire better satisfaction therein. Published for the more inlargement of our hearts to Almighty God on our day of Thanksgiving, comman∣ded by Authority for the great Victory obtained. Allowed to be Printed according to Order. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for H. Overton, 1644.
A more exact Relation of the late BATTAILE neere Yorke, fought by the English and Scottish Forces, against Prince Rupert, and the Earle of New-Castle. SIR; Be pleased to take notice of Gods wonderfull and almost miraculous goodness to us, and in us to this whole Na∣tion, and to all the Churches of God in Europe, upon Monday last being the second of July, upon notice that Prince Rupert was advancing on the North-side Owse, with twentie-five thousand men, to raise our Siege before Yorke, wee conceiving our selves unable to keepe the Siege, and fight with him also, and supposing it the safest to fight with him with our whole strength united, we drew off all our For∣ces, both horse and foot and artillery, without the losse of a man, and put our selves into Battalia upon Owse-moore, within three miles of Yorke. That night the Prince came into Yorke, with about two thousand horse, his foote and Ordinance quartering in the Forrest of Gortrey, within five miles of Yorke; Wee quartered at Long Mar∣ston, and in the Townes adjacent, with an intention the next day to march to Cawood, and so to Selby, partly to possesse the River in∣tirely, so to hinder him for furnishing Yorke with provisions, out of the East-Riding; As also to interpose between him and his march Southwards, he having no other way to march, (the Earle of Den∣bigh and the Lancashire Forces interposing between him and his march West-wards, the way he came:) Accordingly early in the morn∣ing, wee began our march towards Cawood, with all our Armie, leaving three thousand Horse and Dragooneers to bring up the Reare of our Foote and Ordnance. The Enemy thinking wee dislodged, because wee would avoyd
fighting, and being resolved to fight with us, they drew out five thousand Horse and Dragooneers, the Vanne of their Armie, and with them tooke the Moore neare Marston, about nine of the clocke on Tuesday, and came up close to the Reare of our Carriages. Wee seeing that they were in earnest to fight, and wee as much as they desiring it, presently commanded all our foote and Ord∣nance to come back with all speed, the Vanne of which was gone some five miles towards Cawood, and was with much difficultie to be brought backe. The enemy in the meane while, drawing up with part of their foote close to our noses, so neare that we had not li∣bertie to take the Moore, and to put our selves into Battalia, so that wee were put to draw our men into a Corne-field close to the Moore, making way by our Pioners to get ground to extend the wings of our army to such a distance, that wee might conveniently fight; which was very difficult for us to attain, The right wing of our army being placed just by Merston Town side, the town on our right hand, fronting on the East, and as our foot and horse came up, we formed our battalia and the left wing, still desiring to gain as much of the left point as we could, so that at last wee came with the utmost point of our left wing, to Topwith; so oru army fronted to the Moore from Marston to Topwith, being a mile and a half in length; the ene∣my being drawn up just under us, the wings of their army extending a little further then ours in length, but the hedges and our Dragooners secured the flanks. About two of the clock we had indifferently well formed our army, as also tht enemy theirs, part of their foot being beyond Owse, that morning, which made them as late as wee in drawing up. About two of the clock, the great Ordnance of both sides began to play, but with small success to either: about five of the clock wee had a generall silence on both sides, each expecting who should begin the charge, there being a small dich and a banck be∣twixt us and the Moor, through which wee must pass, if wee would charge them upon the Moore, or they pass it, if they would charge us in the great corn-field, and closes; so that it was a great disadvantage to him that would begin the charge, seeing the ditch must somewhat disturb their order, and the other would be ready in good ground and order, to charge them before they could recover it. In this posture we stood till seven of the clock, so that it was con∣cluded on our sides, that there would be no ingagement that night, neither of the two Armies agreeing to begin the charge: And
surely had two such Armies (drawn up so close one to the other, be∣ing of both wings within Musket shot, departed without fighting, I think it would have been as great a wonder as hath been seen in England. The enemy had in the Field in all, some fourteen thou∣sand Foot, and nine thousand Horse, and some twenty five pee∣ces of Ordnance. The right Wing of their Horse was commanded by Prince Rupert, who had in it some twelve divisions of Horse, consisting of one hundred Troops, and might be five thousand men. The left Wing of their Horse was commanded by Hurry, with all the remainder of their Horse. The right Wing of our Horse was commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax, consisting of 80. Troops, be∣ing his owne and the Scotch Horse. The left Wing of our Horse was commanded by Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, with all his own Horse, and the Earle of Manchesters, and some of the Scotch Horse, being in all about 70. Troops. Our Foot being twenty eight Regiments, were disposed into twelve Brigades. About half an houre after seven a clock at night, we seeing the enemy would not charge us, we resolved by the help of God, to charge them, and so the signe being given, we marched down to the charge. In which you might have seen the bravest fight in the world; Two such disciplin'd Armies marching to a charge. Wee came downe the Hill in the bravest order, and with the greatest resolution that was ever seen: (I meane the left Wing of our Horse led by Cromwell, which was to charge their right Wing, led by Rupert, in which was all their gallant men: they being resolved, if they could scatter Cromwell, all were their own. All the Earle of Manchesters Foot being three Brigades, began the charge with their bodies against the Marques of Newcastle, and Prince Ruperts bravest Foot. In a moment we were passed the ditch into the Moore, upon equall grounds with the enemy, our men going in a running march. Our front divisions of Horse charged their front, Lieutenant Generall Cromwels division of three hundred Horse, in which himselfe was in person, charged the first division of Prince Ru∣perts in which himselfe was in person. The rest of ours charged other divisions of theirs, but with such admirable valour, as it was to the a∣stonishment of all the old Souldiers of the Army. Cromwels own divi∣sion had a hard pull of it: for they were charged by Ruperts bravest men, both in Front and Flank: they stood at the swords point a pret∣ty while, hacking one another: but at last (it so pleased God) he brake
through them, scattering them before him like a little dust. At the same instant the rest of our horse of that Wing, had wholly broken all Prince Ruperts horse on their right Wing, and were in the class of them beyond their left Wing: our Foot on the right hand of us (being onely the Earle of Manchesters Foot) went on by our side dispersing the enemies Foot almost as fast as they charged them, still going by our side, cutting them down that we carried the whole Field before us, thinking the victory wholly ours, and nothing to be done but to kill and take prisoners: not knowing that the enemies left Wing, led by Hurry had done as much to our right (led by Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, they wholly carrying the Field before them, utterly routing all our Horse and Foot, so that there was not a man left stan∣ding before them, most of the Horse and Foot of that wing, and our main battell recreating in hast towards Todcaster and Cawood, think∣ing the day lost, as the enemies right wing did towards York. The e∣nemy being in pursuit and chase of retreating men, followed them to our Carriages, but had slain few of them: for indeed they ran away before the enemy charged them. Iust then came our Horse and Foot from the chase of their right wing, and seeing the businesse not well in our right, came in a very good order to a second charge with all the enemies Horse and Foot that had disordered our right wing and main battell. And here came the businesse of the day (nay almost of the Kingdome) to be disputed upon this second charge. The enemy seeing us to come in such a gallant posture to charge them, left all thoughts of pursuit, and began to thinke that they must fight again for that victory which they thought had been already got. They marching down the Hill upon us, from our Carriages, so that they fought upon the same ground, and with the same Front that our right wing had before stood to receive their charge; and wee stood in the same ground, and with the same Front which they had when they began the charge. Our three Brigades of Foot of the Earle of Manchesters being on our right hand. On we went with great resolution, charging them so home, one while their Horse, and then again their Foot, and our Foot and Horse seconding each other with such valour, made them flie be∣fore us, that it was hard to say which did the better our Horse or Foot. Major Generall Lesley seeing us thus pluck a victory out of the enemies hands, professed Europe had no better Souldiers. To conclude about nine of the clock we had cleared the Field of
of all enemies, recovered out Ordnance and Carriages, tooke all the enemies Ordnance and Ammunition, and followed the chase of them within a mile of Yorke, cutting them downe so that their dead bodies lay three miles in length. Divers prisoners of note were taken, Lord Gorings son, Colonel Tilsley, Sir Charles Lucas, Major Generall Porter, and about an hundred more Officers, 1500 Souldiers. The number of the dead is uncertaine; but I cannot think, but of all dead in the field, in the woods, and mortally wounded (which would die within a day) there are between three and foure thousand Their whole Army is so broken, that of Foot I am confident they are not able of 13000. to rally 2000. and of eight or nine thousand Horse, not above two thou∣sand, the rest all gone to their own homes, except those that are slain and prisoners. The glory of this, as it onely due to God, as the prime efficient, so must it be acknowledged (as it is by all, and that most just∣ly) thit instrumentally it was done by none but by the Earle of Manchesters Horse and Foot led on by Cromwel, and those Scots which charged in with them, commanded by Major Generall Lesley, who carried himselfe very bravely. Lieutenant Generall Cromwell (the great agent in this victory) hath received a slight wound in the neck. We lost not in all this fight, above two or three hundred men. Sir Thomas Fairfax (wounded in the head or face) caried himself as brave∣ly as as man could doe, was unhorst, lay upon the ground, and was relieved by our horse. The enemy hath lost all their Arms, the field be∣ing full of Pikes and Muskets; This morning we gathered them up within 2 miles of Yorke, not an enemy daring to look upon us. Rupert is on the North side or Yorke with about two thousand Horse. I am Your humble Servant Lion Watson
The Contents of another Letter sent from one in the Earle of Manchesters Army to a friend in London. I Thought good hereby to acquaint you wth that glorious victory which the Lord hath given us over the enemies of Jesus Christ mightily he hath been seen in de∣livering us, and confounding his adversaries. On Munday, July 1. our siege being raised from York, and we quarter∣ing that night in Long Merston Moor, it was reported the next morning, that Prince Rupert had his rendezvous in Brammamoor, whereupon we marched thitherward; when we were advanc'd about half a mile, wee descryed Prince Ruperts horse marching after us, in Long Merston Moore, whom we fac'd at that distance, they drew up in battalia on the Moor, we returned, and did the like in the fields. About one or two of the clock the Cannon began, and plaid till four or five in the afternoon. Afterwards we all marched down to them, both horse and foot; they charged us very fiercely and violently, but by the blessing of God, we routed their horse on the right wing, and one Regiment or body of their foot; but the field went very dangerous in our right wing, for there they were routed, and many ran: So likewise in our main Body, but it pleased God to uphold the spirits of our army, and our foot charged so violenty, that they forced the enemy to run, and our horse pursued them, and routed them totally out of the field. There were killed about 4000. neer 2000. taken; all their foot colours, and many of their horse colours were taken, 25. peeces of Ordance, 8000. arms, and all their waggons and ammunition. Thus the Lord did wondrously for us, blessed be his holy Name. My Cousin Thomas D. is very well, but escaped nar∣rowly, being dismounted by the enemy. Your ever loving Brother, Robert Grifen. FINIS.
