20188.3 54532432 180855
A COM∣pendious forme of Prayer, for the whole es f Christes Chur Necessarye to be vsed of  estates at tyme con∣uenient. Newely collected and set foh, in the yeare of our Lorde. 1565 Seene and allowed according to the order appointed in the Quenes Maiesties Iniunctions IMPRINTED AT LON∣don for Henry Sanderson by Richard Serll. dwellyng in Flete lane at the sygne of the halfe Egle and the Key.
of praier. For inferiors, and Subiectes. VNto vs al that are inferiors and subiectes that we maye willingly & gladly, Loue, honore serue, and o∣bey all superior powers, in the, and for the that we maye ioyfully receaue thy Ghospel, plenteousslye bringe forth the fruites therof. And in all thinges chiefe∣ly applye our selues, to the maintenance of thy true worshippe, and setting forth of thy Honor and glory. Amen For the ingnorant. VNto the ingnorant also that theire eies may be opened, that it woulde please the to shewe thy countenaunce vnto them. That they may knowe thee. and thy Church whiche they condemne as erours? because theyr eyes are closed vp in darkenes, that as theyr zeale is nowe in simplicity without knowledge, so they may haue in stead of it, a godlye zeale, grounded on perfecte knowledge:
so that thy Gospell may fructefy in them also to the glory of thy holy name. Amen ¶ For the malicyous per∣secutors EVen vnto the malitious persecutors also, that they maye eyther at the lengthe, receyue thy grace so often, and so mercifullye profered vnto them, and so acknowledge their malice, and retourne vnto thee, to thy greate honor and glorye, when thou shalte be praysed euen by the mouthe of thy enemies: Or els if they haue vtterlye geuen ouer thē selues, vnto continuall hatred of thee and thy worde, and vtterlye reiected all kynde of discipline. That then thou take them awaye from amonge vs, to thy greate honor and glorye also: when as thy little flocke, beinge deliuered from their tirannye and oppression, shall ioy∣fully singe vnto thee, of thy contynuall goodnesse and wonderfull deliuerance. Amen.
