F2293B R225093 52612521 175888
A Full and True ACCOUNT OF A Great and Signal Victory Gain'd by the Imperialists over the Turks. Dated from Vienna the 8th of september. Licensed and entred according to Order. ON the Sixth of this Month Count Castelli, General of Batalia, and Ba∣ron Smidberg, having been dispatch'd by Prince Lowis of Baden to the Emperour, brought the following Particulars of a great Victory gain'd over the Turks. That the Imperial Army, which he commands in Servia, came on the 21st of August to Konighfelt, notwithstanding the steepness and difficulty of the Mountains, which are interlac'd with Moorasses, so as that they were become impassable by the continual Rains, with which its march had been extreamly incommoded, from the time it had passed the Morava, for the going in pursuit of the Serasquier, who was retreating towards Nissa. That the same day he came in view of the Ottoman Army, which was drawn up in Battle-array upon Hills. That on the 22d the Serasquier retired towards Jagodina, behind the River Morava, which falls into the Danube, where he remain'd Encamp'd till the 26th, for the assembling all his numerous Forces, consisting of Sixty Thousand Men, according to the Report of Spies and Desertets. That the Prince had endeavoured to pass that River, so to attack the Turks: But the ill ways having hinder'd the expeditious bringing up of the Boats, and other ne∣cessary Materials for making a Bridge, he had made semblance of retreating, that so by this seint he might draw the Serasquier out of the advantagious Posts he possessed, and come to some great Action. After this, on the 29th of the same Month, being St. John's Day; which the Turks hold to be happy and fortunat to their Arms, that Prince being return'd with the Imperial Army to the Neighbourhood of Potaschin, or Baraschin, caus'd his Army to be Mar∣shall'd in Battel-array, on the Banks of the Morava. The Night before, the Bridge-master caus'd two Bridges to be laid over that River, with so much Diligence, that to Reward his Pains and Labours, that Prince had given him a Gratification of a Thousand Florins. Ten Thousand Turks that had pass'd that River over their own Bridges, with a design to Charge our Reer, were Encounter'd by one of our Detachments that was sent to view them; and after a slight Skirmish, it returned to joyn our Camp, with a Chiaux and four Tartars they had taken Prisoners, being not strong e∣nough
any longer to make head against them with advantage. The 10000 Turks seeing our Party retreat, pursued it into the very sight of our Camp, whence great Detachments of Cavalry and Dragoons, were made to drive them back; but while they were engag'd, the Prince of Baden caus'd part of his Foot to pass to the other side of the Morava, with design to Attack the main Body of the Turks, since they express'd so much eagerness to Fight upon a be∣lief, it was out of fear that our Army retired: we had no sooner three Bat∣talions, and five Squadrons on the other side, but that the Oltomans came to Charge them most furiously with their Drawn-Sabres; but having met our A Term in Fortification, signifying Posts Armed with Spikes. Chevaux de Frize, who stop'd their Cavalry, the Imperialists kill'd a great number of them in this Action, and they were forc'd to fall back into the De∣filees, where they stood our coming up: Then it was, that our Cavalry that had been Detatched against 10000 Turks, who would have Charg'd our Reer, repuls'd them, and forc'd them to repass the Morava as fast as they could. Our whole Army being pass'd, the Turks reinforc'd themselves in the Defilees, they possessed before the Plain which they covered, and which had a Wood on one side, and Hills on the other. The Entrance into the Plain, into which the Defilees led, was interlac'd with several Moorasses, which rendred the Access to it very difficult. The Prince of Baden caused the Regiments of Seraw and Kissel, who were in the Van of the Army, to drive the Enemies from their De∣filees. There needed no more than to give our Men to understand that they must pursue the Ottomans, and not let the occasion, they had, slip of gain∣ing a great Victory,, to set the Horse and Foot upon passing a-cross those Moo∣rasles in the Water up to the Middle, nay up to their very Shoulders, holding up their Arms and Weapons, to hinder them from being wet; and according as they pass'd, they formed themselves into Squadrons and Battalions, until that at length, all being pass'd, and the Battel drawn up in Battel-array, our Troops march'd directly upon the Enemy, who stood our coming up upon a Hill; and they attack'd the Insidels with so much Courage and Fierceness, that they forc'd their Entrenchments, notwithstanding their Opposition; and after having kill'd a vast Number, forc'd them to betake themselves to Flight. By this Victory we remain'd Masters of the Turks Camp, of all their Bag∣gage, Tents, Carriages, Ammunition and Provisions, as also of a hundred and five Pieces of Cannon, of several Mortar-pieces, of a vast number of Colours and Standards, of the Great Horses Tail (which is the Turks Great Standard), and abundance of other Riches, insomuch that the Soldiers rejoice in a World of Booty. They Attack'd them with that vigor, that after a Fight of about 4 hours, there were 50000 Routed, 20000 killed, and 6000 taken Prisoners. Count Castelli and Baron Smidbergh, who brought the first Account, departed from the Camp immediatly after this great Victory, which we hope to be able shortly to give a more individual Account of. Prince Lowis, after this happy Success, which cost not the Imperialists 1000 Men, continued his March towards Nissa, to destroy the Enemies great Mega∣zines there. Re-Printed in the Year, 1689.
