s1468a 51617447 175364
ACT Of the Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council, In Favours of the BREWARS in EDINBURGH, And Liberties thereof. Edinburgh the 7 day of September, 1693 Years. ANENT the Petition given in to the Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council be the Brewers within the Town of Edinburgh, and Liberties thereof, Shewing, That where over and above the Kings Excise of Two Merks per Boll, The Liquor of Ale and Beer are now furder Burdened per Pynt, with Three Pen∣nies of Additional Excise to Their Majesties, and an Impo∣sition of Two Pennies to the Town of Edinburgh, per Pynt; For which Additional Burden, It is evident that the price of Ale and Beer ought to Rise proportionally, Likewise, De Facto, it is risen almost in all other parts through the Kingdom, except as to the Town of Edinburgh, and Liberties, where the difference that hinders this Rise, which is to Just and Natural, is that in other parts, the Brewer and Ventner are the same, and so hath the Liberty to make and take his price, whereas in Edinburgh, one Brews and another Vents, and both are at the Dis∣cretion of the Drinker, Whereby the Lords of Council may perceive, That their Autho∣rity and Regulation is needfull in this case to be interposed; And seeing, to the Effect that the Petitioners may Brew sufficient Ale, as shall not be returned upon them, and be able to pay the foresaids Burdens: And above all, that the Heretor may have Vent, and a Rea∣sonable and Just price for his Victual: It is necessary that the Petitioners be allowed to take at least a Plack or Four Pennies more on the pynt of Ale, to answer for the Five pennies of Excise, and Imposition which is a moderate Recompence: And therefore humbly suppli∣cating, to the effect after mentioned, as the said petition bears. The Lords of Their Maje∣sties Privy Council, Having considered this petition given in to them be the above Brewers, They, in respect, there are no Answers given in to this petition, as was appointed by a former Deliverance thereon; Do hereby allow the Petitioners to take a plack or Four pennies more for the pynt of Ale, above the ordinary price from the Ventner; And allows the Ventner to take the same Addition over and above his ordinary price. And Recommends to the Magistrates of Edinburgh to punish the Contraveeners of this Act, as they shall find Just. And Ordains thir Presents to be Printed, and publickly Sold.Extracted by me, GILB: ELIOT. Clss: Sti. Cons. EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. MDCXCIII.
