s1554 52529225 178953
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the sixteenth day of No∣vember, 1692, to the seventeenth day of January, 1693. WILLIAM and MARY By the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland Defenders of the Faith, To our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of our Privy Council, Pusevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting, Forasmuch, as We, with Advice of the Lords of our Privy Coun∣cil, did by our Proclamation of the date the twentieth sixth day of July last by∣past, Adjourn the current Parliament of this our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the seventeenth day of August then next, to the sixteenth of November current both in this present year 1692. And now in regard, that the present State of our Affairs in this our said ancient Kingdom, do not require the Meeting of our Parliament so soon, and that the Members of Parliament may not be put to the Trouble or Charge of Meeting upon the said day. We therefore, with the Advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn our said current Parliament until the seventeenth day of January next, One thousand six hundred and ninety three years. Hereby requiring all the Members of our Parliament to give Attendance at Edinburgh on that day, in the accustomed manner, and under the Certificati∣ons contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HERE∣FORE, and we Charge you strictly, and command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-cros∣ses of the whole head Burghs of the several Shyres of this Kingdom, and there in our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the said Adjournment of our current Parliament of this our ancient Kingdom, from the said sixteenth day of November instant, to the said seventeenth day of Janu∣ary next. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of November, and of our Reign the fourth year,1692. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most Excellent Majesties, 1692.
