s1599 52529250 178979
A PROCLAMATION Against Persons returning from France without Passes. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: FORSOMUCH∣AS, several Persons denounced Rebels for High Treason, and others dan∣gerous and dissaffected, who have presumed contrary to the Act of Parlia∣ment, either to stay in, or go to the Kingdom of France, or one or other of the Dominions subject to the French King, during the time of the late War, have since returned, or may be designed to return to this Kingdom without Our Permission, which if not prevented may tend to disturb the Peace and Quiet thereof. Therefore, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit not only to prohibit; Likeas, We hereby expresly prohibit and discharge all such Persons, either Denounced, or who contrary tothe said Act of Parliament have stayed in, or gone to the said Kingdom of France or any of the Dominions subject to the French King, to return to this Kingdom, unless they first obtain Our Passe and Liberty for so doing, un∣der the Certification contained in the said Act; But also have appoint∣ed, and hereby Appoint and Command all Sheriffs of Shires, Lords and Baillies of Regalities, and other Baillies, Stewarts of Stewartries and their De∣puts, and all Magistrats of Burrows and ether Magistrats and Officers whatsomever, furthwith to Search for, Seize and Apprehend within their res∣pective Bounds, such of the foresaids Persons as have already presumed toreturn, or shall hereafter return from France or the Dominions foresaid, without our Pass & Liberty, first obtained for that effect, & to commit them Prisoners, in their respective prison, & immediatly acquaint the Lords of Our Privy Council there∣with, and detain them in sure Firmance till furder Order, as the said Shi∣riffs and other Magistrats and Officers will be answerable on their Highest Per∣ill; And farder We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby peremptorly enjoyn and Charge all Collectors, Survevers, Waiters and other Officers at Sea ports or upon the Borders, that they take careful Nottice of the foresaids Persons lyable as said is their coming in to this Kingdom and that they use their utmost Diligence to discover, and cause Sease and Apprehend them, as is above ap∣pointed. OUR WILL IS HERFORE, And We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance; And ordains these Present to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of December, And of Our Reign the ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.
