S1643 52528937 178992
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Anent Persons Travelling to or from this Kingdom. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Bre∣thren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as several Persons of late have gone from this Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland into the King∣dom of France, and others have come from France into this Kingdom, upon evil Designs against the Government; Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Coun∣cil, Do hereby Inhibite and Discharge all Persons whatsoever, who intend to go out of this Our Antient Kingdom (during this time of War,) to depart furth of the same, until first they apply themselves to, and receive a Pass from any one of the saids Lords of Our Privy Council for the time being, within Twenty Miles of the saids Persons their residence, and in case there be not a Privy Counsellor within that space, then any two of the Commissioners of Supply within the Shire, where the Person or Persons crave∣ing the saids Passes Dwell and Reside, who have Accepted and Qualified themselves by Law to Act as Commissioners. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command all Persons what∣soever, who shall come into this Kingdom, at their Entry into the same, to present their Persons, and shew their Passes, or give a rational account of themselves, and their business, and from whence they came, upon Oath in case of Suspition, to the next Counsellor, Justice of Peace, Magistrat, or Officer of Our Army; with Certification to such Persons as shall presume to go furth of this Kingdom without Passes, or to come into the same, without presenting their Persons and Passes, or giving account of themselves as said is, their Persons shall be sought for, and if apprehended, shall be committed Prisoners, as Per∣sons justly suspect to be coming or going upon evil Designs against the Government. And sicklike, We with Advice fore∣said, Do hereby Prohibite and Discharge all Skippers, and Masters of Ships or Vessels, that they receive no Passengers (be∣sides their Crue, for whom they must be Answerable) aboard their Ships, or Transport them either abroad out of this King∣dom, or from abroad into this Kingdom, except such as shall be provided with Passes in manner foresaid. And We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command the Skippers or Masters of any Ships, who are to go furth of this Kingdom, before they set Sail, to give in a Lift upon Oath, of all the Persons aboard of their Ships, or who are to go abroad with them containing their true names and Designations, to the next Magistrat, or Justice of Peace, in the place from whence they are to Sail: And Requires and Commands the Skippers, or Masters of any Ships who shall come into this Kingdom, before they suffer any of their Passengers to Land, or go out of their Ships, to give in Lists in manner and to the Persons above appointed: With Certification to the saids Masters or Skippers, if they failʒie to give in the foresaid Lists, their Ships and Vessels shall be Arrested, and their Persons secured, until they be proceeded against as Disobeyers of Our Authority and the Law, and Ab∣bettors of Rebels and Suspected Persons: And We hereby Require and Appoint the Persons foresaids, to whom Passes are Appointed to be presented by Passengers who shall come into this Kingdom, with all convenient Diligence, to Transmit to the Clerks of Our Privy Council a particular Accompt of such Passengers with their Passes, as shall be presented to them from time to time, with the foresaids Lists to be given in by the Skippers or Masters of Ships, as said is, as they will be Answerable. And to the effect Our Pleasure in the Premisses may be known, Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly and Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the whole remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there, in ou Name and Authority, by open Procla-mation, make Intimation and Publication of the Premisses, that none may pretend ignorance, as ye will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and severally Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by you, duly execute and indorsed again to the bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of May, And of Our Reign the third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilij. DA. MONCREIF, Cls. Secreti Concilij. GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1691.
