s1753 52528950 179021
PROCLAMATION, Discharging Persons to be brought from the Netherlands without Passes. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, The Merchants and Skippers, and others Trafficking and passing betwixt this Our Antient Kingdom, and the Pro∣vinces of the Netherlands Do presume, to bring into this Kingdom, persons Obnoxius to Our Laws, and notourly Disaffected to Our Government: As also, Deserters from Our Forces in the said Parts, for Remeed whereof, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have thought fit, here∣by strictly to Prohibite and Discharge all Merchants, Masters, Skippers, or Mates and Mariners, and Passengers, in any Ships; Barks, or Vessels; To bring home into this Kingdom, or any of the Poris, or Coasts thereof, any person or per∣sons from the said Netherlands, unless they have Passes in manner following, viz. Every one of the saids persons not be∣ing a Souldier, a Pass from the Secretaries of this Kingdom, or their Deput attending Our Person in the said Netherlands for the time; and every Souldier or other Person who have Served in Our Armies, a Pass from the Colonel of the Regiment wherein they Served, or a Superiour Officer; which Passes are to be presented to the Conservator of the Priviledges of this Our Kingdom, Residing in the said Provinces, or his Deput in his absence, who is to make a List of the saids persons, hav∣ing and producing their Passes, as said is, and to deliver the same Subscribed with his Hand, to the Master or Skipper of the Ship, for his Warrand, to bring home the persons named therein: As also, the said Master or Skipper at his arrival within the River of Forth, or any Port or Creik thereof, shall, before he suffer any of the persons contained in the said List, to go a-shore out of his Vessel, present the foresaid List to Our Advocat or Sollicitor, at Edinburgh for the time, or in their absence, to one or other of the Lords of Our Privy Council, and receive his Order, for setting of the said persons a-shore; And if the Vessel shall arrive at any other Port, or Coast within the Kingdom, then the Skipper shall present his said lst, to a Magistrat of the next Burgh-Royal, who shall be obliged either to take Caution of the persons contained there∣in, that they shall present themselves, when called, by the Lords of Our Privy Council: Or at least, if they cannot find caution, they shall enact themselves, both, under a reasonable Penalty, to present themselves, as said is: Which Bonds and Acts, the said Magistrat, is to Transmit with all diligence, to the Clerks of Our Privy Council, within a fourthnight at farthest, after receiving of the same: And the saids Magistrats having taken the saids Bonds or Subscriptions, are then to give Order for the persons coming a-shore; Certifying the said Merchants, Masters, Skippers, Mates, Mariners, and Pas∣sengers, and Magistrats above-mentioned, that if any of them fail in the Premisses, they shall be lyable in the penalty of five Hundreth Merks Scots, each of them, toties, quoties, to be payed to Our Receiver-General, for Our use: And far∣ther, Requiring Our Solicitor, to use exact Diligence, to see thir Presents execute, and the foresaid Penalties, when incur∣red payed. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom; and also to the several Sea-ports Towns within the same, (and Appoints the Sheriffs of the several Shires, to see thir Presents published at the several Sea-Towns within their respective Jurisdictions) and there, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains thir Presents to be Prin∣ted. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth Day of September. And of Our Reign the sixth Year, 1694. Per actum Deminorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew And, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties. 1694.
