S6113 99887902 183560
The SUCCESS OF THE Two English Travellers, Newly Arrived at LONDON. To an excellent new Irish Tune. AS we was a ranging upon the salt Seas, For France and for Spain, our humours to please; But when we came there, the first News we did hear, Was, You Rebles of England What do you do here: When we was a walking along in the Street, Both Men, Wives, and Children, and all we did meet, They gathered up Stones, and at us did sting, Crying, Rebles of England you murther'd your King. All this being odious unto our own hearts, Then from the French we were forc'd to depart; The French did deride us, with scornful disdain; We hoised up Top-sail, and sailed for Spain. But when we came there, we'd not set soot on Land, But straight they perceiv'd that we were English Men; With their hands on their Rapiers, their Cloaks off did sling, Crying, Rebles of England, you murther'd your King. All this being odious unto our conceits, We hoised and hastned up into the Straits: Next Port unto Venice, intending to go, Not fearing nor dreading I they did of it Know. But when we came there, our Ships they did scan, They saw by our Colours we were English Men; O they laugh'd in their Lingo, and at us did steer, You siebles of England what do you do here? Thus twenty Years wandring from Sea-port to Town, In all parts abused, resolv'd to turn home: We steer'd up for London, but when we came there, The Court all in Mourning, put us in despair, Then great Charles of England, we found was Interr'd, And some known Offenders in Mourning appear'd; Who for same Years together, had design'd and swore, To serve him as they did his Father before. Great James of his Birth-right. they sought to Depose, But now for ten Guinneys you'll find none of those: King James is Established safe in his Throne, And none shall Invade the just sights of the Crown. And now we'r resolved in Emgland to stay, And wait for to serve, and our King to obey; And his Royal Consort, Queen Mary's blest Name; And we'll drive both the French and the Dutch o're the Main. London: Printed for C. Bates, at the Bible and Sun, in Pye-corner.
