T1496A 99890301 182886
TO The Kings most Excellent Majesty, AND THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in this present PARLIAMENT. The most humble SUPPLICATION of all those Commission-Officers, &c. that have faithfully and constantly Served and Suffered for Your Majesty's Royal Father of ever blessed memory, and Your most Sacred Majesty. Humbly sheweth, That NOr Honour, Power, Place, Preheminence We seek above our Sovereign's gratious Sence; But in dishonour to lie down and die Pris'ners, or sterved, is the thing we flye. Now we have spent the prime of all our Youth To serve our Prince, and to adhere to Truth, 'T were hard we should be forc'd to find new Fates, Forsake our Countrey to serve other States For meer Necessity; this, this would touch Your Honours neerly, and our Comforts much. Sirach's wise Son affirms, it was his Grief, To see a Man of War to want Relief. Our blessed Saviours words are very plain, Those shall, that suffer with me, with me Reign. And the same word puts in this perfect barr, At his own private charge none goes to War. We would prevent our Ruine, and no more; We strive not to be rich, not to be poor, A competent subsist for each degree Is all we ask, and that which cannot be We think deni'd us; for our Constancy Did serve as well the Church, and rais'd as high The Kingdom's as the King's Prosperity. Then since it was the whole we lov'd and serv'd, We have in love, and honor, well deserv'd From all, and every part, and humbly hope All Interests will give us such a scope In our Addresses, that without offence, We may Addresse to all, and all dispence Proportionable parts for our relief, To take a way your shame, their scorn, our grief. You see we'ave waited patiently almost As many moneths since God hath blest our Coast; With our dear Sovereigns presence, as before, We suffer'd years in Captiv'd state, nay, more: Nor gentle have our sufferings been, yet we Have borne it all humbly and patiently. Now Royall Majesty, most Noble Lords, And Faithfull Commons we addresse our words, Directly to you, and do Supplicate A rem'dy for our yet unhappy State. You that so nobly have discharged those That proved Civil in the later close, You that have paid the Navy and the Army, (Wisely preventing they no more should harm ye) And have (to preserve peace) declar'd that all (Not after erring) shall become equal. Then make us so, in being at least so blest In your just bounty, as were all the rest. And we shall make our Hemisphere to ring. (In gratefullest resounds) God save the King. LONDON, Printed by R. D. 1661.
