T2692 52529334 179152
The true Effigies of the German Giant, now To be seen at the Swan near Charing-Cross, whose Stature is Nine foot and a half in height, and the Span of his Hand a Cubit compleat. He goes from place to place with his VVife, who is but of an ordinary Stature, and takes Money for the Show of her Husband. depiction of a German Giant IT from Tradition hath of old been se'd, This Isle by Gyants was inhabited, Who with an Oak in hand would walk as free, As once Et tene∣ram ab ra∣dice ferens silvane cu∣pressum. Virg. Geor. 1. Silvanus with a Cypress Tree; And hence 'tis like, that first of all 'twas spoke, This hardy Nation had their hearts of Oak: Arms lent by Nature, and throughout the Land, The Oak complying with the Gyants hand; Fit for their hand, and not without desert, The Oak complying with the Gyants heart; Yet though this Island better fenced stood With walls of Oak, than Gyantean blood, With walls, whose tops and bottoms do disdain All opposition from the Roaring Main, Yet it must not in honor be deny'd Virg. Eneid. 1. That Gyants first did in this Isle reside; Aetnean Brothers whose bold Heads aloft, The tops of Hills, and Clouds beneath them scoft; Such by the Labells both of Fame and Fate, Was by the dread Hand of mighty Askepate; Who neer Southampton, a full mile, had strength To throw a Mill-stone on his foot at length: So vast a Stone, upon his foot below, Seem'd but a Corn upon the Gyants toe. The place to this day to be seen, doth tell Where this was done, and where the Mill-stone fell; And such stout Coronaeus was, from whom Cornwals first Honor, and her Name doth come: For though he sheweth not so great, nor tall. In his Dimentions set forth at Guild-Hall, Know 'tis a Poet onely can define A Gyants posture in a Gyants line, The Art falls short of Nature, and must err, When Rules are given her by the Carpenter, Who ought not Bulks uncircumscrib'd to draw By the small Compass of his own scant Law; And thus attended with his direful Dog, The Gyant was (God bless us) Gogmagog. And He who (fear'd by his prodigious Frame) Not long since kept the gates of Nottingham; And many others who have left to all Succeeding times their proud Memorial. And though that Nature now more spent and old, Doth in such off springs grow more weak and cold, Yet some Remainders to this day are seen, Of what we finde she heretofore hath been: Witness this Gyant who not long ago Was seen in Ipswich at a publick Show, And though no Native, yet his Birth must be Fam'd, as his Countrey is of Germany: Poor Germany who now the Turks do raunt, Many more Gyants like himself doth want. To see him hundreds day by day do throng As he from place to place doth pass along, His Bode's uncertain, for to think 'tis vain One place so tall a Wonder to contain; His whole proportion is upright, and streight, 'Tis nine foot fully, and a half in height: Not much in debt to Age, his Body clean, Up to his Stature, and not fat, nor lean; His Hand exceeds in bigness, and his Span 'Bove twice th'extensions of another man. He no excess of any Wine doth pour Into his Gorge, nor doth he much devour: And though his Stature be admir'd, yet he Doth seem much pleas'd with Mediocritie: But that which makes the wonder seem more rife, This so great Gyant hath a little Wife; By whose Advice he's carryed up and down From Court to Countrey, and from Town to Town, He is her Gain, where ever he doth go, Tis she receives the Money for the Show, A Woman lovely, and in all compleat; And though but little, yet her wit is great: Thus heretofore true Love with Love did dy The faithful Phillis, and the good Sir Guy: But that a Gyant, one so tall in show, Should choose a Wife, and live with one so low, Is more than ever any Age yet knew; And haply more than Age again shall view. FINIS. London, Printed for Matthew Collins at the Three Black Birds in Cannon-street. 1668.
