W1175 99887344 183643
two Lovers who meeting one day: The young-man desired the Maiden to stay: The Maid we was witty her self to defend, And so they concluded the Match in the end. To a pleasent new Tune, or, Musgroves March. Man. O My dearest do not grieve for I will prove ever kind; Say no more, thou mayst believe, nothing but death shall change my mind: O then let nothing grieve thee, For I vow thou mayst believe me; That I do love thee, That I do love thee, Come Sweet-heart and imbrace thine own. Maid. O sweet Sir I cannot stay, my Mistriss sent me out in haste, I pray you chuse some other place, for so much time I dare not waste, Lest that my Mistriss chide; Then Sir what will me betide? I dare not tarry, Lest I miscarry, Farewel I must be gone. Man. Turn not thy fair eyes away, neither leave me here in scorn, To torment me every day, and to leave me quite forlorn; For it is a terrible pain, To love and not be lov'd again. Then take some pitty, Then take some pitty, Sweet-heart for I am thine own. Maid. O good Sir, what think you of this, all that glisters is not Gold? You may believe that true it is, that Maidens must not be so bold. Young men having had their pleasure Leaves them to repent at leisure: Therefore forbear me, Come not near me, Hands off for I must be gone. Man. Thy favour is more sweet to me, far more precious then is Gold, When shall I thy husband be, prethee Sweet-heart say and hold: O that it were to morrow, That it might release my sorrow. Do not Disdain me, Do not Disdain me, Come kiss and imbrace thine own. Maid. If that be all you have to say, I mean to lead a single life, Rome was not builded in a day, nor I so soon am made a Wife. First I mean to try your breeding, Ere I yield to your proceeding: O now forbear me, Do not come near me, Hands off for I must be gone.
Man. Sweet think upon the former Vow, which I to thee did make, I have kept it untill now, and will ever for thy sake: Then let not thy unkindness Dim thine eyes with too much blindness: For I do love thee, For I do love thee, Come Sweet-heart and imbrace thine own. Maid. O good Sir there's none so blind; as those that may, yet will not see; I know which way you are inclin'd, indeed you are to quick for me. Hot love is quickly cooled, Therefore I will dot be fooled. O fie forbear me, Do not come near me, Hands off for I must be gone. Man. I preethee give me leave to touch or to kiss thy milk-white hands, Wer't thy lips thou needst not grtch, for I am at thy command: O do not thou disdain me, For thy sorrows hath almost slain me; So dear I love thee, So dear I love thee, Come kiss and imbrace thine own. Maid. It is not for a kiss or two which so much I do stand upon, If that be all you mean to do, take it quickly and be gone: For a kiss is but a trifle, yet be sure and do not rifle; Left you undo me, Left you undo me, Hands off for I must be gone. Man. O but give me leave to twine both mine arms abort thy waste: And lee the pale lips of mine betwixt thy rubies plac't: Come Sweet-heart and let's be doing, Fie upon this redious wooing: For I do love thee, For I do love thee, Come kiss and imbrace thine own. Maid. O good Sir, your snapping short is that which makes you look so lean; As for your kiss I thank you for't, but now I know not what you mean: To tear my cloaths in sunder, What's your intention I wonder. O fie forbear me, Do not so fear me, Hands off for I must be gone. Man. O Sweet-heart be thou content, for I mean no harm at all, Thou shalt not need for to repent, for whatsoever shall befal: Neither thought I to abuse thee, Onely kiss and kindly use thee. What I did by thee, Was but to try thee, Come Sweet-heart and imbrace thine own. Maid. Then sweet Sir, if this be true which you unto me do say, I'le be constant unto you; O that I durst but longer stay! Come kiss once again and spare not, Though my Mistriss see I care not; For I do love thee, No man above thee, Come Sweet-heart and imbrace thine own. FINIS. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clark.
