W2422 R186683 53299354 180075
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT On Thursday the Sixteenth Day of November, 1699. I Hope you will not think I have called you out of your Countreys too soon, if you consider that Our Common Securitie requires a farther Provision should be made for the Safety of the Kingdom by Sea and Land, before We are at the end of what  Granted for that Purpose the last Session. And when you enter upon this Business I believe you will think it Necessary to take Care of the Repairs of the Ships, and of the Fortifications, without which Our Fleet cannot be Safe when it is in Harbour. I cannot Omit to put you in mind of another Matter, in which so great a Number of My Subjects is concerned and wherein the Honour of the King∣dom and the Faith of Parliaments is so far Engaged, that Our future Securi∣ty seems to Depend upon it; I Mean, the making good the Deficiencies of the Fonds, and the Discharging the Debts contracted by reason of the War. And till We may be so happy to see the publick Debts paid, I shall Hope, that no Session will end without something done towards Lessening them. While I am speaking to you on this Head, I think My Self oblidged to Mention, with a very particular Concern, a Debt which is Owing to the Prince of Denmark, the State whereof I have Ordered to be laid before you. Gentlemen of the House of Commons, These things are of such Importance, that I must earnestly Recommend them to your Consideration, and Desire you to Provide the Necessary Sup∣plies. My Lords and Gentlemen, There is nothing I should more Rejoyce in, than that I were not under the Necessity of so often Asking Aids of My People; but as the reason of it is
evident, because the Fonds formerly applyed to Defray the publick Expense, are now anticipated for Payment of the Debts of the Kingdom; so it is my Satisfaction that you all see, that nothing of what is Demanded is for any Per∣sonal Use of Mine. And I do faithfully Assure you, that no Part of what is given shall be diverted from any Purpose for which it is designed. I believe the Nation is already sensible of the good Effects of Peace, by the manifest Increase of Trade, which I shall make it My Business to Incourage by all means in My Power. Probably it might receive an Advantage, if some good Bill were prepared for the more effectual Preventing and Punishing Un∣lawfull and Clandestine Trading; which does not only tend to Defraud the Publick, but Prejudices the fair Merchant, and Discourages Our Manufactures The Increase of the Poor is become a Burden to the Kingdom, and their loose and idle Life does in some measure contribute to the Depravation of Manners, which is complained of, (I fear with too much Reason) whether the Ground of this Evil be from Defects in the Laws already made, or in the Execution of them, deserves your Consideration. Is it is an indispensable Duty, that the Poor, who are not able to help themselves, should be main∣tain'd, so I cannot but think it extremly Desirable, that such as are able and willing should not want Imployment, and such as are obstinate and unwilling should be compell'd to Labour. My Lords and Gentlemen, I have a full Assurance of the Good Affections of My People, which I shall endeavour to Preserve by a constant Care of their just Rights and Liberties; by Maintaining the Established Religion; by seing the Course of Justice kept steady and equal; the Countenancing Virtue and Discouraging Vice; and by Declining no Difficulties or Dangers where their Welfare and Prosperity may be concerned. These are my Resolutions, and I am perswaded that you are come together with Purposes on your Part suitable to these on Mine. Since then our Aims are only for the General Good, let Us Act with Confidence in one another, which will not fail, by Gods Blessing, to make Me a Happy King, and you a Great and Flourishing People. FINIS Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Prin∣ter to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, anno Dom. 1699.
