W2960 99887147 181860
The Wiltshire Wedding BETWIXT Daniel Doo-well, and Doll the Dairy-Maid. With the Consent of her Old Father Leather-Coat, and her dear and tender Mother Plod-well. To an Excellent North-Country Tune. Licensed according to Order. ALL in a misty morning, cloudy was the weather, I meeting with an old Man, was cloathed all in Leather: With ne'r a Shirt unto his back, but Wool unto his skin; With how do you do, and how do you do, and how do you do agen? The Rustick was a Thresher, and on his way he hy'd; And with a Leather Bottle fast buckled by his side: And with a Cap of Woolen, which covered Cheek and Chin, With how, &c. I went a little further, and there I met a Maid, Was going then a Milking, a Milking Sir, she said: Then I began to Complement, and she began to sing; With how, &c. This Maid her name was Dolly, cloath'd in a Gown of gray, I being somewhat jolly, perswaded her to stay: Then straight I fell to Courting her, in hopes her love to in, With how do you do, an ow do you do; and how do you do ag Then having time and leasure, I spent a vacant hour, Telling of all my Treasure, whilst sitting in the Bower: With many kind Embraces, I stroak'd her double Chin. With how, &c. I told her I would Marry, and she should be my Bride, And long we should not carry, with twenty things beside: I'le Plow & Sow, & Reap and Mow, while thou shat sit and Spin; With how, &c. Did you not know my Father, the Damsel then reply'd, His Ierkin was of Leather, a Bottle by his side: Yes, I did meet him trudging, as fast as he could win, With how, &c. Kind Sir, I have Mother, besides a Father still; Those Friends above all other you must ask their good will: For if I be undutiful to them, it is a Sin; With how, &c. Now there we left the Milk-Pail, and to her Mother went, And when I was come thither, I asking her consent; And doft my Hat and made a Leg, for why, she was within; With how, &c. My Husband is a Thresher, who is her Father dear. He'll give with her his Blessing kind Sir, you need not fear: He is of such good Nature, that he would never lin, With how, &c. For by your Courteous Carria you seem an honest Man, You may have her in Marriag my husband he anon Will bid you very welcome, though he be poor and thin, With how, &c. Her Dad came home full wear alas! he could not chuse; Her Mother being Merry, she told him all the News: Then he was mighty jovial to his Son did soon begin, With how, &c. Her Parents being willing, all Parties was agreed; Her Portion thirty Shilling, they Marry'd were with spee Then Will the Piper he did pla while others Dance and Sin With how, &c. In pleasant Recreation they pass'd away the Night And likewise by relation, with her he takes delight To walk abroad on Holidays, to visit Kiff and Kin; With how, &c. Then lusty Ralph and Robin, with many Damsels gay, Did ride on Roan and Dobbin, to Celebrate the day: When being met together, their Caps they off did fling, With how do you do, and how do and how do you do agen? Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street.
