182 99893274 181621
THE MERCHANT A-la-mode. To the Tune of Which no Body can deny. LONDON: Printed by J. Read in White-Fryers, near Fleet-Street. Price One Penny.
THE MERCHANT A-la-mode, &c. ATtend and prepare for a Cargo from Dover, The Preludes of Peace with Duke d' Aumont's come over, Which will the true Hearts of each Subject discover, Which no Body can deny, deny, which no body can deny. A noble brave Troop rode on Horseback before him, The People Huzza'd and with Shouts did adore him, Whilst the VVhigs were confounded to see such honorem, VVhich, &c. Their Hopes and Designs of a War is all blast; Their Times of Insulting Authority's past, Since depriv'd of all Places of Honour and Trust; VVhich, &c. A Dance by the Allies hand in hand was begun, Till England was tir'd, and wish'd to sit down, The rest being inrag'd, swore the'd Jigg it alone; VVhich, The Musick struck up to the Tune as before, Yet each said they ne'er had such Partner's before, For the Dutch figur'd in, whilst the Germains crost o'er, VVhich, Then strait a Confusion and Uproar was made, All Quondam Alliance and Friendship was void; For the Germans a Farthing to Musick ne'rt paid; Which, &c.
Thus, thus we have carry'd the Jest on too Far, Have paid all the Charge and Expence of the War, Yet Ingratitude find for our Losses and Care; Which, &c. The German's Displeasure we've mourn'd by a Peace, And lost that great Title of Mighty Allies, Yet, thanks be to God, we've open'd our Eyes: VVhich, &c. We thought that the Dutch wou'd keep Touch to our Song But they play'd on the Low Party's Viol so long, The Strings proving false, all the Consort was wrong, VVhich, &c. Thro' mighty Intreatance at last they squeez'd in, And t' enjoy a Peace their Alliance did joyn, Whilst the Emperor's thresht on the Danube and Rhine, VVhich, &c. This greatly distrub'd all the Factions Train, Since all other Projects and Counsels were vaine, And John their Protector crost over the Main. Which, &c. They still had a Prospect, if War had gon on, To Turn all the State and Prefer honest John, But their Ministry chang'd, and their Captains forlorn. Which, &c. Thus, asham'd of their Guilt, with Envy and Hate They burn in Revenge of their Dowfaal and Fate, But their Malice, and Int'rest, and Power's too late; VVhich, &c. Their Secret Designs we have valu'd at nought, For PEACE to a general Finis is brought, And Lewis no more is our Enemy thought; Which, &c. With France open Trade and Commerce declare, Forgetting all Quarrels, and Chances of War, Since Glory in Peace we shall equally share; Which, &c. Thus long we've endanger'd our Fortune and Blood, Yet where's the Ally which to their Text e're stood? Which, &c. Then Health, lasting Peace, and long Life to our QUEEN, The happy Succession of the Protestant Line, And all our Alliance in Union remain; Which, &c. Let Civil and Foreign Dissentions now cease, Great-Britain in Glory and Riches encrease, Still enjoying the Fruits of a Glorious PEACE; Which no Body can deny, &c. FINIS.
