10844.8 S92533 [ocm]72799096 184043
A godly exhortation, by occasion of the late iudge∣ment of God, shewed at Parris-garden, the thirteenth day of IANVARIE: where were assembled by estimation; aboue a thousand persons, whereof some were slaine; & of that number, at the least, as is crediblie reported, the thirde person maimed and hurt. Giuen to all estates for their instruction, con∣cerning the keeping of the Sabboth day. By Iohn Field Minister of the word of God. Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabboth day to keepe it holier. Exodus 31. 14. Yee shall therfore keepe the Sabboth, for it is holy vnto you: he that defileth it, shall die the death: therefore whosoeuer woorketh therein, shall be euen cutoff, from among his people. Published by Authoritie. GOD IS MY HELPE. Psal. 7. 11. GOD IS MY HELPER printer's device of Robert Waldegrave AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre, and Henry Carre in Paules Churchyard. 1583.
TO THE RIGHT honorable, the Lorde MAIOR, OF THE CITIE OF London: & to the worshipfull, M. VVILLIAM FLEETEVVOOD, Esquire, Sergeant at the Law, Re∣corder of the honorable Citie of London; and one of the Queenes Maiesties Iustices of Peace and Quorum, within her highnes said Citie and Counties, of SVRRIE and MIDLESEX: and to the worshipfull Alder∣men of the said City, Iohn Field wisheth increase of grace, and constancie in the blessed truth of God to the end of their liues. Amen. YOu vvill perhaps maruell (right honourable and vvorshipfull in Christ) that I taking occa∣sion to speake somevvhat, by this late and fearefull example of Gods iudgement: do dedi∣cate this pore & suddain labor vnto you, as though it should more concern you then others. I professe that I do it aduisedly, and my reason is, because it most concerneth you, & such as are in authoritie. For vvho are more spe∣cially bounde to looke vnto the obseruation of the lavves of God, then the magistrates, vvho are set vp as conductors and leaders of the peo∣ple, in steede of God? And although you may say that this thing happened out of your iurisdiction
whereby you might seeme to be cleared: yet for∣asmuch as they that resorted, vnto this prophane spectacle (and vvere iustly punished, vvith their ovvn transgression) vvere of your citie, & you did not restraine them being vnder your comman∣dement: this transgression must needs also reach to you Is it not a lamentable thing, that after so long preaching of the Gospell, there should bee so gteat prophanation amongst vs? that Theaters should be full, and churches be emptier that the streetes should be replenished, and the places of holy exercises, left destitute? I vvrite not this sim∣plie but in respect, and by comparison. For I knovv that Churches (thanks be to God) are fre∣quented? But vvhat is this in respect of the mul∣titude? VVhy shoulde not holy places, in respect of their holy exercises be more frequented, then these places of abuse, that vndoubtedly prouoke Gods heauy displeasure? For admit that the thing it selfe vvere a recreation, lavvfull by the vvorde of God: yet vvho vvill graunt it vpon the Lordes Sabboth? vpon that day of rest, vvherein our ex∣ercise should be in spirituall and holy vvorkes. If you say that this thing belongeth, not vnto you: because that Parris garden, is out of your iuris∣diction: yet vvhy are these men suffered to bring their Beares into the citie, that thereby they may gather your company vnto them? It vvere duety in you to hinder these, and to take order, that none of the citie should repaire vnto such places: Nay further, you oughte to prouide that at the time, when by the law of the lande, all are com∣manded to resort to publique praiers and reading
of the vvord of God in the church, the same word may be also expounded vnto them: so shoulde you both keep the people committed to you of God vnder her maiesty, frō vvicked abuses of his holy Sabboths, which prouoke his wrath against the Citie: and also procure them to be godly ex∣ercised, to their encrease in all obedience to her maiestie and to your own authority. But I would▪ to God your selues vvere not examples of this disorder▪ For if there be any market, or peece of a Fayre, falling out vpon the Sabboth, or on the sa∣terdaye afore, any other tryumph, Shooting, or shew of actiuity to be shewed in it: you spare not to doe it lesse vpō this day then vpon any other. And though preachers haue cried out, frō time to time, for the reformation of such prophanation, yet there hath beene litle of no amendment at al. But I beseech you, euen in the bovvells of Christ, as you haue receiued the glad tidings of your sal∣uation, & do make profession of it: so learne novv at length to put it in practise. Be not vnprofitable hearers of the worde of God any longer, nor dull beholders of Gods iudgements, neither shut your eares vvhen God crieth oute by them so loudly, that their sound goeth not onely throughout the land, but also euen throughout the vvhole vvorld, least you be made also to feel them. God hath spo¦ken to vs many wais, his frowning coūtenāce hath appeared by this long & lingering visitation, both here and elsevvhere: by this vnseasonable wether, and by this present iudgement, that is yet so green and fresh in memorie. I am sure if you lacke anye necessary help and assistance, for so good and god∣ly
a vvorke, you may be, and shal be supported to the vttermost. But hither to neither the vvorde of God by the ministery, and voice of the preachers: the godly and noble aduise of their honours, the vnspeakable benefite, & comfort of youre selues, your Citie, and all youre vviues and children, nor the sundry iudgementes of God following one a∣nother, and threatning more to come, could yet be able to stirre you vp to any such worthy due∣tie in this behalfe, as the Lorde no doubt requy∣reth at your haundes. VVherefore I beseeche you in time, euen in Gods feare: consider vvhat belongeth vnto your peace, and according to the places, wherein God hath set you, be vigilant and diligent for your owne good. It shall be no profit vnto others, the gaine shall be yours, many disor∣ders shall be stopped, manye ignoraunt & erring mindes instructed and reclaimed; God shall bee serued, the prince better honored, your selues o∣beied, & euery one ranged to keep a happy course towardes heauen. Novv the Lorde Iesus establish your hearts in his trueth, and giue you a svveete feeling and taste of his exceeding mercye, that vvith true iudgement you maye discerne his iudgements, truely turning vnto him, & fearing vnder his hande, that in the end you may be sa∣ued. Amen. Fare you vvell this eyghteenth of January. 1583. Your humble and bound in Christ. ohn Feild.
The Lord Iesus open our hearts, and giue vs true vnderstanding, that we may feare his iudge∣ments, and profite vnder his hand, to tourne from our sinnes▪ till faith and assuraunce be wrought in our heartes, of that euerlasting kingdome, which he hath freely by his owne bloud purchased for vs. Amen. THere is no man wil deny, as I sup¦pose (dearelibelo∣ued in Christe) but ye the more a man hath receiued of ye graces and giftes of God, ye more is he bound by duty vn¦to his obedience. And surely if this bee true of all (as it is most certaine) then of all others, hath this little Ilande as a garden of the Lord, beene decked and garnished with sundry most gra∣cious and excellent gifts, whether we respect those that are temporal or spi∣rituall, that the Lord might worke in vs, both dutie and thankfulnesse. For concerning both these, wher should I first begin yt I might reckon them all
vp, being so infinite both in the one & in the other. And first concerning tem¦porall giftes, what is it, that in his rich mercy, either for ye sustentation & maintenance of this life, or for other earthly commodities and pleasures, that he hath not bestowed vppon vs? he hath set vs, as it were in the para∣dise of the world: where euen within our selues wee haue all good and ne∣cessary things: he hath giuen vs the fat of the earth, & ye dew of heauen: he hath made ye earth fruitfull vnder vs, & the heauens beneficial aboue vs: we haue corne, wooll, flesh, & fish in great plenty, ye beasts of ye earth, & the fouls of ye aire are ours: we haue gold, siluer Copper, Tinne, Lead and Yron, with other commodious mettals in al plen∣tie. Againe, with these earthly com∣modities and al the rest, he hath giuē vs publique peace, protection & qui∣etnes. Euery man enioyeth his wife, Children, goods, Cattell, and possessi∣ons. Euery mā sitteth vnder his own Vine, and heareth the voyce of his children in the streetes. Our young
men and our maidens, reioice in pub∣lique places, and the noyse of Musick is heard in our assemblies. We drink in Bowles of golde, and in cuppes of siluer: our heads are annoynted with sweete ointmentes, and our faces are cheereful, because our harts are mer∣ry. Our Princes sit in the gates, and our Nobilitie ride in Charriots and Coches. The voyce of mourning is not heard amongest vs, neither hath terrour and fear amazed vs. Our wea¦pons are turned into Plowe Shares, and Lions and Lambs do play toge∣ther without hurting one another. As for spirituall thinges bestowed vpon vs, they are infinite: how should I giue but a shadowe of them? God hath giuen himselfe vnto vs to be our God, and hath chosen vs to be his peo¦ple. He hath giuen vnto vs his Sonne Iesus Christ, and with him, all other good things, necessary for our saluati∣on: he hath giuen him to vs, his ene∣mies, to take our nature vppon him, to die for our sinnes, & to vndergo euer¦lasting damnation, to ye end he might
acquite & deliuer vs. For this he fulfil¦led ye law, wrastled hand to hand with his fathers iudgements, was cast, con¦demned, and crucified, & as a man re∣iected of God, and thrown down into the extreamest humiliation, became the most forelorne of the worlde, that he might recouer happinesse for vs. And therfore he aduanced his power, and brake the chaynes of death and of hell, ascended with glory, making a shew of all his enemies, and giuing giftes vnto men. For all this hee wrought for vs, and for our redemp∣tion, that we might be a peculier peo∣ple vnto himselfe: vppon whome he would powre forth the whole riches of his mercy. And in déede vppon his Church what is there, that he might haue more done for her, that hee hath not done. Hee hath purged her by his own bloud out of her bloud, and crow¦ned her with his righteousnesse. Hee hath giuen her a place in the highest heauens, and strengthened her to tri∣umph ouer all her enemies. He hath forgiuen her her sinnes, and decked
her with speciall ioy, and peace that passeth all vnderstanding: he hath gi∣uen her the gospell, a tydings of com∣fort, wherein the riches of his grace are fully displaied. Can the heart of man conceiue, the tong vtter, or the pen set downe, what God hath done for his people in all times and ages? he did much for his people in Egypt land: but hee hath done more for vs. He did much for thē being in wilder∣nes: but he hath done more for vs. He did much for them when hee made so many kings to fal before them, when he brought thē to the land of promise: but he hath done more for vs: he hath euercome a mightier army, and made greater Kings to bow vnder his scep∣ter and brought vs to a larger inheri∣tance, which can neither▪ wither nor perish. He fed them with Manna, that corrupted, when they transgressed the commandment touching the sabboth: but he hath fed vs with him self, that our corruption might be put off, and we might be clad with immortallity and euerlasting glorye. The Iewes
were his people, by a conditionall co∣uenant, that stoode in their obedience: they were the apple of his eye, and signet of his scale, to whome he gaue peculier blessinges: and yet because they were vnthankful, and knew not the day of their visitation, they haue no part by reason of their vnbeliefe, in the promises that were made to A∣braham and the rest of the Patriarks, to their séede and posteritie: but wee are his people adopted, assured in a new couenant, sealed in the blood and obedience of Iesus Christe, the end of all the promises: whose saluation is nowe wrought and perfourmed, if hee be in vs & we in him; if his glorious grace and mercy haue not appeared in vaine vnto vs. What could the Lord haue done more for his people then he did for them, & yet Isay the Prophet vpbraided them for their ingratitude, so many excellent bene fits of God be∣ing bestowed vpon thē? I wyl sing to myIsay. 5. beloued a song of my beloued of his vyne∣yard. My beloued had a vineyeard in a ve¦ry fruitful hil, he hedged it about, and ga∣thered
out the stones of it, he planted it with the best plants, & buylt a Tower in the mydest of it, & made a winepres in it. He looked that it shold haue broght forth grapes, but it brought forth wyld grapes. O Inhabitants of Ierusalem, & men of Iu¦dah▪ Iudge therefore, between me & my vineyard. What could I haue done more to my vineyard, that I haue not done vnto it? Why haue I looked that it shuld bring forth grapes, and it bryngeth forth wylde Grapes? Now I wyll tell you, what I wyll do to my Vyneyard, I wyll take away the hedge therof, & it shalbe eaten vp, I wyll break downe the Wall▪ and it shalbe tro∣den vnder foote. And I wyll lay it waste, it shall not be cut nor digged, but Bryars and thornes shal grow vp: I wyl also com¦mand the clouds that they rayne no rayne vppon it. You see how the Prophet setteth forth the large liberalitie and goodnesse of God towards his people: and againe their vnthankfulnes, with those iudg¦ments that it drewe vpon them: The benefits no doubt that God had besto∣wed vppon them were excellent, but
their abuse was like wise intollera∣ble, and therefore for the one, there is threatned the taking of them away, and for the other, what horrible pun∣nishments he would bring vpon, them He taketh his occasion, from a plaine parable, because it shold be vnderstod: leaning down to their capacitie, euen as our sauiour Christ did in his docu∣mentes and instructions. And yet I suppose he coulde haue soared as high in the clouds as any other. So Paule vsed similitudes taken from hus∣bandry, from building, from running1. Cor. 14. 18. 19. Ioh. 15. 14. and from fighting and such like. Mo∣ses in a plaine stile applieth himselfe to the capacitie of the rude people, in the highest historie that euer was written, concerning the creation of the world. This is againste his belo∣ued, his spouse and Church, euen to his beloued the spouses friend. The situation of this vineyarde was in an open and fruitful place: It had a notable Tower in it, to defend it, it had a hedge round about it, and a wyne presse in it. These were rare
and excellent benefites, and yet in∣stead of grapes, it brought forth wilde grapes. The like in euery respect a∣greeth with vs. Hee hath giuen vs a lot in a pleasant and good place, wher∣as he might haue set vs in one more barren. He hath in mercy planted his vineyeard amōgst vs, hedged it about and built a Tower of defence, and a wine presse in it, to gather the fruite of it: this was not done by our owne arme, nor by our owne election, but in his good mercy: And as he waited for fruit, in great patiēce before his iudg∣ments were executed, so he hath way∣ted vpon vs these many yeares: he sits looking to that tree mentioned in the Gospell, which long since had beene plucked vp by the rootes, had nothe in a wonderful patience expected our conuersion and better fruites. But a∣lacke it was ill with them, it is worse with vs, they brought foorth wylde grapes, but ours are scarce grapes. They were taxed with many sinnes, but ours are multiplied as the sande of the sea, and as the drops of heauen.
We are come to the dotage of the world, set on mischiefe, and growing to worse and worse iniquity, as our Sauiour saith is multiplied, and the nearer he hath approched vnto vs, the faster and further of doth the worlde flye from him. It is so laden with sins and abhominations, that greuous is shipwracke, when a ship is lefte to the winds to be tossed, and without a guyde, it must needes be drowned. E∣uen so, muste this tottering worlde come to vtter destruction. Onely they shall be preserued that walke with God, to beleeue his promises, and to feare his iudgements: They shall be preserued that are his, of all tymes: whome he hath loued, chosen, called, iustified, sanctified and saued, in Ie∣sus Christ his sonne. These shall not abuse his patience, but tremble at his iudgements, and be carefull to walke in all dutifull obedience. They shall make hast to meete him, when fire is come foorth from him, but the wicked shall scorne his wonderfull and mer∣cifull long sufferaunce▪ to their owne
destruction. Because hee cutteth not downe the trée at once, being staid by the praiers and humiliations of his seruantes: that in contrite harts how downe be∣fore him: the wicked insulte and are more incouraged, and as it were fle∣shed in their sinnes and wickednesse, euen to dispite him, (as Pharaoh and other tyrants did) vpon whom yet heExod 5. &c. Exod. 17. Num. 21. 31. brought a swifte and a sudden destru∣ction: And yet the greatest Okes are cut down with a little blast from him & the highest buildings can not stand if hee doe but shake them. For he is iust, euen as he is mercifull, and hee loueth iustice to punish the wicked, &Psal. 1. to mayntain the godly. If the thrones of earthly princes, must stand vppon these pillers, no doubt the throne of ye highest, yt is Iudge of the whol world must be founded thereon, that as the Prophet sayth. He may doe Iustice, andIere. 9. shewe mercy and iudgement vppon the earth. So he made Amalecke an exam∣ple of his wrathe, Canaen the king of Arad, Sehon of the Amorits: and Ogg
of Basan, So he met with Eglon of Mo¦ab,Iudg. 3. Iudg. 4. slaine by the hande of Aod, and al∣so with the army of Iabine king of A∣son, that had oppressed Israell by theIudg. 7. space of twenty yeeres. Gedeon was his hand against the Madianits, and though Oreb and Zeb fled awaye, yet they were afterwardes taken and killed. The Princes of the Phylistims though they were many and mightie, and thought themselues in safety and assurance in their Temple of Dagon: yet his hand founde them out, and in mocking of Sampson: they lastly recei∣ued a iust iudgemente méete for their iniquity. what should I speak of SaulIudg. 17. 2. Sam. 15. 17 and Agag, of huge Goliah, of Achab, of Hazael, of Senacharib, of Balthasar, of Antiochus, Herod & al the like: because1. King. 20. they were cruell, were they exempt2. Kin. 6. 7. 8. from iudgementes? No no, he found them out, and he will finde out all his enemies. He will strike them vppon the hearie scalpes, and their cheeke bones shall be broken, he will owe their backes, and his iudgements shal
declare his iustice, from generation to generation. The liues of the wicked are not in their owne hands, but the Godly are the cause of their prosperi∣tie. These from whom they seeke to take le, goodes, and limmes, are in cause, that they are spared for a time in the world. And hereby as God cal∣leth his to repentance, so he hardneth the Godles in their sinnes, that hee may be glorified in his iuste iudge∣mentes. But where are the wyse to marke these thinges, and to make their profit? Who taketh a note of his iudgementes shewed against our vn∣thankfulnesse, that we might be mo∣ued to repentance? Our benefits haue beene greater, then euer were besto∣wed vpon any Nation excepting one or other: and do we walke worthy of them? Is there thankfulnesse in vs▪ to retourne vnto him the praise of his mercies. He hath giuen vnto vs his worde, which is an incomparable iewell, in respect of which the psal∣mograph sayth: He hath not delt so with euery nation: but doe we bring
foorth the fruits of it. Nay doe we not rather treade it vnder our feete, as it were in dispite of the author of it? Is it not a lanterne vnto our feete, with out which, we must stray? And is it not the food of the soule, with out which we must starue: and yet who doth either seeke vnto it, or feele the sweet comfort of it? If the prophet ap∣pealed to the inhabitauntes of Ieru∣salem, and to the men of Iudah, to iudge this cause, being come to an is∣sue, in the assurance of it, committing it euen to them selues: shall not our owne mouthes, in the testimonie of our conscience pronounce sentence a∣gainst vs? who seeke his grace to late, and stay vntill his irreuocable sen∣tence is passed? He that hath eares to heare let him heare, while God spea∣keth vnto vs. He that might haue been both iudge and accuser, wil haue vs both to iudge and accuse our sel∣ues, that we may vnderstande, how greatly we haue displeased him. And if our conscience pronounce againste vs, is not God greater then our con∣science?
If our owne heart condemne vs, is not God greater then our heart? We are wont to be partiall in our owne causes, because our senses are dull to perceiue our own iniquities: and yet he committeth this to our sel∣ues, to the ende to drawe vs to speedy repentance. True it is, yt our partialities, though we would flatter our selues, & could be so impudent to do it, that cannot stain his iudgementes, but euen as he tooke away the hedge of his vineyard, shew¦ing him selfe a iust iudge, in being a∣uenged vpon their vnthankfulnes, so he will deale with vs. That which he hath builded amongst vs, he wil ouer∣throw againe. That which he hath compassed about from forrein force, from oppression of enemies, to keepe out vncleane beastes, that he might haue receiued a large croppe, he will lay open and waste. The wall and tower, shall be ouertourned within, beastes, dogges and hogges without shall fall vpon it, deuour and trample it vnder their feete. One stone shall
bruise another, & the cloudes shall not raine, to make it fruitful but to make it ranck wt thorns & briers. O England repent, thou that hast tasted of so ma∣ny blessinges, and yet hast prouoked God with so many sinnes. O London repent, thou that haste sit as a Lady & Queen ouer thy neighbour Cities, to whom the Lord hath giuen besides temporall blessinges these precious iewels: sending thee many messen∣gers to warne thee, to preach vnto thee, and to comfort thee: but thou hast not regarded the day of thy visitati∣on. If thy hedge be taken awaye, if thou be laide open and waste for thy horrible sinnes. If the Lord plant his vineyeard in an other place, a more fruitful soyle: what shall be come of thee? Is God more bound vnto thee, then he was vnto his owne people? Hast yu any greater priuiledge, then they who were once so precious in his sight? And if he spared not them, will he spare thee, that doest passe them in all abhominations? they regarded not the holy commandementes of God, to
keep them and obserue them, no more doest thou. They were Idolaters and followed the Gods of the Nations, e∣uery one rearing vp an Idoll in his owne heart, and following his owne will, and so doest thou: thou art as far from the true spirituall worshippe of God, belonging to suche a maiestie, e∣uen as they were. His precious name is prophaned & abused euery where, in swearing, forswearing, and lying, thinking, speaking, and practising su∣perstitiously & wickedly of it. And as for the Lordes Sabboth, as in times past they did defile it, did not consecrat it to God, to reste from sinne and to followe his will, but gaue him onely a ceremonial & outward seruice, defi∣led with following their owne willes, euen so dost thou. This day is the sab∣both of the Lorde thy God: that is to say: a daye consecrated to his glorye, wherein, all solemne assemblies of Gods sayntes shoulde bee occupied in hearing his worde, in giuing them∣selues to prayer, in receiuing his sa∣craments, in meditating of his won∣derfull
workes, and putting in prac∣tise of holy duties: but we contrary∣wise, euen from the highest to the lo∣west, break this Sabboth of the Lord our God, whither we come or do not come to the place appointed: For if we come, wee come with prophane minds, deuided from God, for custom and fashions sake, without any pre∣paration for so spirituall a seruice, there hearing we heare not, to make any conscience to learne our duties to grow in knowledge and carefully to practise holy doctrines: wee come as they did in the Prophets times, with lame sacrifices, hauing serued first our selues, & as they did in their solemne fasts: We bowe down our heads like Bull rushes, and perhaps haue torn garmentes, wee put on the counte∣nance of sorrowe, and our faces are not annointed: but there is in vs no sorrow yt leadeth to repentaunce, nor hearty turning vnto our God. Wee come to sit before the ministers, as ye people then did before the prophets, to heare the word preached, as some plea¦saunt
song: but when they haue sayde they haue done: we go our wayes, and they passe through our iudgementes, but the worde is passed as a dreame. And if these sinns be found, in al sorts of our commers, what shall we think of them that come not at all, who through couetousnes and prophana∣tion dispise these holy assemblies: ey∣ther following their wordly chaffaire and busines, or else thinking that the sabboth is well ynough kept, if they giue God some little peece thereof, o∣thersome i they bee idle, following their pleasures, and wicked pastimes with al gréedines. O Lord what shall become of these loose and sinnful dais? Howe manye prophane persons are there in this realme, both in City and Country, that hauing taken a muster of all the holidays in the yeare, vrge the keeping of them, and wil loose no iot of tune, that they may follow their vayn delights, and yet know not tru∣ly how to keepe one holy or Sabboth day to the prayse and honour of God? Both in Sommer and Winter, they
can finde occasions, to bereaue them∣selues of spirituall comfortes, eyther to runne out into the countrie with their bagges and bottels, or els bee∣ing at home to follow wicked exer∣cises. Euery dore hath his stake, and the streetes are full of blazers of ini∣quitie. There is gadding to al kind of gaming, and there is no Tauerne or Alehouse, if the drinke be strong, that lacketh anye company: There is no dycing house, bowling alley, or The∣ater, that can be found emptie. Those flagges of defiaunce against God, and trumpets that are blowne to gather such company, will sooner preuaile to fill those places, then the preaching of the holy worde of God, the Catechi∣zing and instructing of Children and Seruauntes, canne be to fill Chur∣ches. Nothing can stoppe them from the same: neyther feare of daunger, losse of tyme, corruption of maners, infe∣ction of diseases, expence of money, suspiion of honestie and suche like. But to the other, where to they should
come with great ioye and cheerefully, as to the house of the Lord, nothing in a maner can allure or draw them, neyther theire owne necessitie, the sweetnes and comforte of true doctrine, the reformation of maners, the holynesse and obedience that by the grace of God, is wrought in his Children, by such exercises: nor the hope and assuraunce it selfe of fayth and saluation. Here three pence, sixe pence, a shilling or two a quarter, is a great matter and a wonderfull bur∣then, much humming and hawing a∣bout it, but poundes and hundreds can be well ynough afforded, in fol∣lowing these least plesures, euery dore hath a payment, and euery Gallerie maketh a yearely stipend. Euery dog hath a coller, & euery Beare a prise. Here is no feare of infection, nor a∣nie inconuenience or discommoditie that can let them. Is not this thinke you to keepe the Sabboth? the lawes of the land haue Godly prouided, that all the people of all sortes, shall re∣payre to the publique places of Gods
worship, then to be taught and instru¦cted in the wholesome word of salua∣tion, and there is a penaltie set vpon it: but how this is looked vnto tho∣rowout the lande, I leaue it to them to consider that are wyse and in au∣thoritie. The Lorde blessed the sab∣both daye, and sanctified it, because in it hee rested from all the workes of his hande, that hereby we might learne, to rest from sinne and iniqui∣tie, and consecrate our selues to his spiritual seruice. And this he institu∣ted for mans commoditie, that al flesh might come to worshippe before his face: He gaue them double food in re∣spect of this, that it might abide with them, and that none might come out of their place, but might rest in his prouision and prouidence: So that it appeareth, he woulde not haue them occupied in making prouision for the bellie, to gather stickes, to treade the presse, or to carry burthens, either vp∣pon their owne shoulders, or vppon their beastes The commaundement for the obseruing of it, is so often set
downe in the scripture, as nothing more. The seuenth day is the Sabboth of the Lord thy God: Thou shalt do no ma∣ner of worke in it, neither thou, nor thy Sonne or Daughter, thy man seruannt or thy mayde, thy Cattle and the straunger that is within thy gates. Keepe my sab∣both, for it is holy vnto you: He that shall defile it, shall dye the death: He that shall worke on that daye, his soule shall be cut off, from the middest of his people. Nowe to worke, is to doe thinges of our owne, that are prophane or wicked: And because the commaunde∣mentes of God are morall, the equity of this commaundement belongeth vnto vs. In deed there was some thinge peculiar to the Iewes, in respect of the ceremonie, and the day: But there is yet a day to be kept, because intermissions from the trauailes of this life, are necessarie both for the soule and bodye: That both the one and the other may be prouided for, the Soule to be fedde, and the bodye to rest, our selues and our Seruanntes,
(yea our very cattle) are to be fauou∣red in this behalfe, because of this so∣lemne consecration to God. And therefore the king of Niniuie, com∣maunded, that that solemne Fast shoulde be extended euen to the Oxe within the staule, and to the Horse in the stable, and to euery beast of the field. Blessed (saith I say) is the man thatIsay. 56. 2. doth this, and the Sonne of that man that layeth hold of this, taking heed, that be defile not my Sabboth, and keeping hisIsay. 58. 13. handes that they doe no euyll: If thou shalt turne thy foote from my Sabboth, doe not that thou delightest in, on my holy day: If thou shalt call it, thy delight holy to Iehouah and honorable, and shall honour it, not in exercising thine owne wayes, not in performing that which thou delyghtest in, not in speaking a vayn word, then I wyl aduaunce thee, deligh∣ting in the Lord, vppon the hygh places of the Earth: and thou shalt enioy the possession of Iacob thy father, because the mouth of the Lorde speaketh it. So God speaketh by the ProphetIere. 17. 21.
Ieremy also: Take beede vnto your selues and bear not burdens vppon the Sabboth day, neyther bring those thinges into theEzec. 20. 20. gates of Ierusalem. &c. The Prophets are very vehemente in this behalfe: & therefore our sinne standeth at the dore, that haue made no regarde of these thinges. For we do worse then beare burdens. Not onely oure carriers Poste vppe and downe, but men trauaile all moste with oute conscience in euerye quarter, yea wee doe thinges that are naught, and therefore the wrath of God, must néedes be powred out against vs. And yet God hath shewed vs with∣in these fewe yeeres, many fearfull signes and tokens of his heauye an∣ger and displeasure, and one iudge∣mente dothe euen ouertake another, and yet nothing can mooue vs. Hee hathe spoken to vs from Heauen by Comettes, Ecclypses, and fiery impressions, he hath set Starres in vnwoonted places, & sent vpon the world, strange tempests. He
hath rumbled in the howels of the earth farre and wyde: and hath losed the depest and strongest foundations. The earthe hath quaked at his pre∣sence, and the very creature hath sled from before his face. He hath ope∣ned the windowes of heauen, and co∣uered the earth with his displeasure. He hath made bare the rootes of the corne, and fedde the foules with our nourishment. Hee hath sent out the pestilence, and burning fire from be∣fore his feete, that they might wast and deuoure the inhabitauntes of the earth. Many men haue receiued short summons, to appeare before him, & to render account of their doinges. They haue perished (as Iob saith) by the blast of his mouth, and by the breath of hisIob. 4. 9. 10. nostrils they are consumed. By the roa∣ring of the Lyon, and by the voyce of the fierce Lyon. and wth the teeth of the Lyons whelpes, they are ground to pou∣der. And yet notwithstanding all these Iudgementes and manye more, that I can not reckon vp,
who turneth to the Lord, who leaueth his wickednes: and forsaketh the com∣panie of fooles? Who is wise to vnder∣stand the plagues at home and the mi∣series that are abroade, that he may be prepared to a better Kingdome? Who looketh to the kéepinge of the Sabaoth, and considereth this feareful example, fallen out amongst vs? But that it may be remembred the better to doo vs good, that by ye harmes of other, we may make our profite I will set it downe as plainly as I can, and as truely as can be gathered from the examination of those same com∣mon euidenses, that haue fallen out: waying some circumstances that shall teach thée, that it was not the worke of any man, but the finger euen of God himselfe, to warne vs to turne and es∣pecially from these sinnes that we cō∣mit in that behalfe, for prophaning of the Sabaoth, which are too horrible You shall vnderstande therefore (deare Christians) that vpon the laste Lordes day being ye thirtéen day of the first moneth, that cruell and lothsome
exercise of bayting Beares being kept at Parrisgarden, in ye after none, in the time of common prayers, and when many other exercises of Religion, both of Preaching and Catechizinge were had in sundrie places of the Cittie, di∣uers Preachers hauing not longe be∣fore also cried out againste such pro∣phanatious: yet (the more pittie) there resorted thether a greate company of people of all sortes and conditiones, that the like nomber, in euery respecte (as they say) had not béene séene there a long time before. Being thus vngodlilie assembled, to so vnholy a spectacle and specially considering the time: the yearde, stan∣dinges, and Galleries beinge full fraught, being nowe amiddest their io∣litie, when the Dogs and Beare, were in their cheefest battell. Loe the migh∣tie hand of God vpō them. This Gal∣lerie that was double, and compassed the yarde round about, was so shaken at the foundation, that it fell flat to the ground, without poste or peece, that was left standing, so high as the stake
whereunto the Beare was tyed. Although some will say (& it may be truly) that it was very olde and rotten and that therefore a greater waight of people, beinge planted vpon it then was wont: that it was no maruell that it failed: and woulde make it but a light matter. Yet surelie if this be considered, that no one péece of poste, borde or stocke was left standinge; though wee vrge it net as a miracle, yet it must néeds be cōsidered as an ex¦traordinary iudgemēt of God, both for ye punishment of these present propha∣ners of the Lords day, and also to in forme and warne others. In the fall of it, there weare slaine fiue men and two women, that are come to knowledge who they were and where they dwelled, to wit. A∣dame Spencer a Felmonger, in South∣vvarke, William Cockram a Baker, dwellinge in Shordich, Iohn Burton Clarck, of S. Marie Wolmers in Lom¦bard streate. Mathevv Mason, seruant with Maister Garlande, dwellinge in Southvvarke: Thomas Peace, seruant wt
Robert Tashr, dwelling in Clerken vvell. The Maidons names Elice White seruaunt to a Pursmaker withoute Cripplegate: and Marie Harison, daugh∣ter to Iohn Harison waterbearer, dwelling in Lombard street. Ther is to bée considered in the qualitie and con∣dicion of these persons: whō God hath thus laid alonge amiddest their vani∣tie, to be an example vnto vs, how com¦monly these of such sorte are affected & disposed. For if these in the state of poore men had feared God, and in the hearing of gods words had vppon such shorte summons bene called to appere before God: yet had they lefte an vn∣doubted testimonie, of their religion and pietie vnto others. And therefore I doo exhorte all men to take héede of such follies. Let them learne alwaies to be prepared for death, seing yt death is so certaine, though no man know of the bower. If God haue sette them in a meane state, let them not followe rudenesse, nor hunte after such vaine pleasures, but séeke the best thinges, and those that are most precious. Let
them heard the comfortable worde of saluation that shall comforte them a∣gainst pouertie, and other afflictions whereunto we are subiect in this life. And for seruauntes, let maisters, see them better imployed vpō these dayes that are consecreated to holy exercises that they may bee frée frō their bloode, and lette seruauntes thinke it no bon∣dage, to be restrained from such vani∣ties: But alacke the worlde is nowe grown to that wickednesse, that the maisters being prophane themselues, the seruauntes are trained vp in all prophanation: yea seruaunts will in∣dent afore hand, to haue their libertie vppon such dayes to goe to the Deuill fréelie: & thereof spring infinite corrup¦tions and sinnes not to be named. If these seruaunts had had maisters, that would haue called them to a recko∣ning how they had spent that daye (as good maisters oughte to haue done) and haue had an accompt what they hadde learned, they might haue had lesse cause to sorrow, because they had performed good duties. But O you seruantes that
feare God, returne from such filthines Liue to God faithfully in your vocati∣on, and thinke it a great mercy that in peace, you may possesse such a bountie. You se in these, fallen before you, an ex¦ample to make you séeke better things that you may walke as in the sight of God faithfully to doo your duties: you sée the vanitie of pleasures: that our lyfe is but a puffe: to the end you may learne alwaies to bee in a readinesse. You haue hearde that ye father bring∣ing his chylde alyue thether, caryed it home againe deade, which came not to passe by chaunce but by Goddes prouidence. Nowe beside these that were thus killed outright, with the flat fal of the Galleries, strangely wrunge in pe∣ces at it were by God himselfe, it cold not be but in such confusion, ther must néeds come greate hurt to many. Howe many carried away death, as it were in theyr bosomes, that dyed the same night, or some little tyme after, the Lord knoweth. But this is euydent, that some are▪
since dead, and namely a Pewterers wyfe, that dwelt in Limestréete, who being therefore wounded, is nowe dead, and diuers others. Of al the mul¦titude there, which muste néedes be farre aboue a thousande, it is thought by the iudgement of most people, that not the third personne escaped vnhurt: and by some that haue made searche, they esteme that there were sore hurt and maymed, one hundred and fyftye persons, some theyr legs and armes broken, some theyr backes, theyr bodies being sore brused, so that euery waye into the cittie from that time till towardes nine of the clocke and past: and specially ouer London bridge, many were carried in Chayres, and ledde betwixte theyr friendes, and so brought home wyth sorrowfull and heauy hartes. They say also that at the first, when the Scaffolde cracked (as it did once or twise) there was a crye of fire, fire, which set them in such a maze as was wonderfull, so that as destitute of theyr wits, they stode styll, and could
make no shifte for them selues, til the Scaffold was ouerturned. But as in the execution of Gods iudgements, we shall often marke the miraculous prouidēce & mercy of God towardes many, euen so fell it out with diuers of these, that when as they had iustly deserued not onely to be hurt and wounded, but euen to be killed, yet God as a moste mercifull Corrector rather séemed to haue sha∣ken a rodde towardes them., then to haue touched them. For amongst the rest it is credibly reported that thore was one Woman; that being in the Gallery, threwe downe her childe be∣fore her, & leaped after her selfe: & yet thankes be to God neyther of both had any maner of hurt, so was it with di∣uers others. But it should appeare▪ that they were most hurte and in dan¦ger, which stoode vnder the Galleries on the grounde, vpon whom both the weghte of Tymbre and people fell. And sure it was a miraculous worke of God, that any one of those should haue escaped.
But here also God shewed his power for one mā falling downe into a hole, it pleased God that it was the meane of his deliuerance, so as al things that sel vpon him did not touch him, and by yt he was preserued, whereas two of tho∣ther, were slaine of ech side of him. Nowe what wee haue to learne of these iudgemēts sufficiently hath bene touched before, and therefore for a con∣clusion: A beséeche all Maiestrates by the mercies of God in Iesus Christ, that by this occasion, they take good héede to looke to the people committed to their charge, that they take order especially on the Sabaoth dayes that no Citizin or Citizins seruantes, haue li∣berty to repayre vnto any of those abu¦sed places, that albeit the place be without the Citie, & by that meanes, they haue not to deale with them, yet that they keepe their Beares out, and their straggling Wantons in, that they may be better occupyed. And as they haue with good commendation so far preuailed, that vppon Sabaoth dayes these Heathnish Enterludes and Plaies
are banished, so it will please them to followe the matter still, that they may be vtterlye rid and taken away. For surely it is to be feared, besides the dis∣truction both of bodye and soule, that many are brought vnto, by frequen∣ting the Theater, the Curtin and such like, ye one day those places wyl like∣wise bée cast downe by God himselfe, & with thē a huge heape of such contemp¦ners, & prophane persons vtterly kil∣led & spoylod in their bodies. God hath giuen them as I haue heard manye faire warnings already. And as I praye Maiestrates, so I béeséeche Ministers, my faithfull bre∣thren, that they performe this faith∣full woorke that God hath committed vnto them, that they call vpon ye peo∣ple more earnestly to kéepe the Lords Sabaoth, and that they employ themsel∣ues in teaching, exhortation, and doc∣trine, in Catechizing and trayning vp their people and youth, that they may know to detest such corruptions: that being occupyed in such holy exercises, they may be their crowne whom they
shall winne to Christ and to this obe∣dience. And lastly I beséeche you my bre∣thren all, of what estate or condition so euer you be: Faynt not in the hap∣pie course of the Gospell so freely and in so great mercye offered vnto you. Loue the assemblies of Gods Saints, that you may féele the hope and assu∣raunce of a better lyfe. Be ashamed to followe vanities, which when you haue fedde your selues with as full as you can, can worke nothing in you but lothsomnes, vexation, and sor∣row of spirite. Pleasures are like vnto swéete poysons, when the swéetenes is past, they worke tortures & tormē∣ts. Kéepe ye Lords Sabaothes. If you be Maisters be patternes vnto your ser∣uantes of diligence in hearing, and of true godlines, in putting holy doctri∣nes in practise. If you be seruauntes and youth, learne in the dayes of your youth, before age and death come vp∣pon you, that there is no felicitie but in the faith of Christ, there is no fayth wythout the ministerye of the word,
there is no ministery of the worde vn∣lesse giftes be giuen vnto men of God, and they be reared, vp to teach you, and to lead you in ye wayes of God, and last¦lye▪ when these ordinarie meanes are neglected, dyspised, and resisted, then we can haue no certainty or comfort of our saluation. Now the Lord Iesus who by his death and passion, resurrection and as∣setion into heauen, wrought full sa∣tisfactiō to his Father for our redemp∣tion and saluation, gyue vs fayth and sanctifie vs throughout, both bodies and soules: that we seruing him in a spirituall seruice in both, may féele it to be our greatest happinesse: may dispise this vaine and totring world, may detest all vanities, and specially accurssed prophanations: and ha∣uing faith and a good conscience, may walke on with good courage in ye hope of that euerlasting inheritance which he hath s dearely purchased for vs. Amen. Ianuary. 17. 1583. I, F.
