D764a R234080 [ocm]62369144 187863
A DECLARATION OF THE Scottish Army, CONCERNING Their present Designe, against the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, the Army under the Com∣mand of his Excellency, the Lord Generall; and their Resolution, to preserve and defend the KINGS MAIESTIE, and to gain his libertie from the Isl of Wight. And the proceedings of 7000. Scots. 5000. of Major Gen. Monro's Forces, touching the present Design against the Kingdom of ENGLAND. With a Declaration from the Royalists of the City of Norwich, concerning their Declaring for God and KING CHALRES. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for I. I. MDCXLVIII.
A Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland and Jreland, concerning the proceedings of this Kingdom. SIR, OUr condition is still very deplorable, but I know you are not ignorant of our many distractions and troubles, therefore I will not trouble you with any large relation, our perplexities & fears are many, which makes us doubt what the success of things may be & somthing amazes us for the present, but the hopes of sup∣plyes from England, quickens and revives our startling spi∣rits, so that now we dayly expect the provisions from England, which we here the Parliament hath ordered for our reliefe, and which by the blessing and assistance of the Almighty, we hope to receive in convenient time. The traiterous deedes of the Lord Inchiquin, did greatly startle us, and all the Protestant party in Jreland, so that they were in a muse, and much discomforted for the pre∣sent; but the supplyes from England being timely sent, will do very much good, and greatly incourage the Protestant Army. Col. Jones and Col. Munkes; with the rest of the Protestant Commanders, are very diligent, and use their
utmost indeavours to incourage their Souldiers, defend themselves, and offend their enemies, and if by any means, with the conjunction of their forces, they can make any thing a considerable party, they intend to give the Rebels battell, to hinder the uniting of their forces, who are as∣sembling, as it is thought, against them, by which meanes they shall be the better able to helpe furnish themselves with such necessaries, as otherwise they would extreamly want. Vice Admirall Crowther is very dilligent, and faithfull in his service, and with great care attends the Ports of Corke and Kingsate, and other the Havens thereabouts, and car∣ries a weary eye over all suspitious persons, and so very watchfull, that nothing be carried out of this Kingdome for the service of Malignants, or any in Armes against the Protestant party, and not any supplyes be brought into the Kingdom for the reliefe or assistance of the Papists, and blood thirsty barbarous Rebels here. The Irish Rebels have promised and assured the Lord Inchiquin to be true and faithfull unto him, and that they will to the utmost of their power assist him with their lives and estates, and for the assurance of this performance, they have entered into a Covenant with him, and for a wit∣nesse and Testimony that they which make good their proffers, and performe their Covenant: The Rebels have delivered up into Inchiquins hands, many holds and places of strength, as Galloway, Linerick, and others, which they say he shll keepe as a pledge and assurance, that they will not relinquish the promise and conditions contained in their Covenant; but what is further intended by Inchiquin, and the Rebels is not yet known, for they keepe their reso∣lutions very private.
Letters from Lewes in Sussex. SIR, I Shall acquaint you with a sad accident which happened at Lewis the County town in Sussex, on Sunday Aprill 16. occasioned by meanes of some who had not been care∣full to see that their Children and Apprentices, repaired to the Churches to heare Gods word taught, as it was fit they shuld; but left them idle to their own wills, who in their Masters and Parents absence, got together to pay in a house, where were left at home but such as were fit for their company, they assembled, and afer sundry pastimes, they in sport threw fire one at the other, and having thus pleased their foolish fancy, they departed thence, not minding where the fire lighted, or the Colebrands fell, they hasted away to some other vanity, with which they intended to end the day, but in their absence, the fire sud∣denly kindled, and set the house wholly on fire, where they had been sporting, and the people being some at Church, and some at play, the fire was not perceived, till the house was all in a flame, which suddenly fired others, and greatly indangered the whole Towne, and before it would be quenched, it consumed almost a whole streete of houses, and those houses that were burnt, were observed to be the most prophain in all the Town, and it was observed that one house escaped which was so near, that the flame some∣times touched (it being a house very famous for Religion) and others that were three or foure houses distance, were burned to the ground: this may be a faire, and a very good warning for all prophane and licentious livers, to take heede how they prophane the Lords day, and observe what vengeance many is powred upon the willfull abuses of this sacred day; and if they be
not very obdurate, it may cause them to consider well of the fact, and repent of what they have done, and take heede that they offend not for the future. Lewes Aprill 25. 1618. W. H. The Copy of a Letter from Scotland SIR, SEverall Acts which passed in the Parl. there, some are very desirous to have an Army raised here, and some preparations are making for that purpose, and many Soul∣diers listing; but I knew none of quality in command as yet. The Parl. of Scotland were preparing to send demands to the Parl. of Engand, and Sir James Lochart was appointed to bring them; but some of the Scots Parl. like not all the particulars, by which meanes it is not possitively conclu∣ded they shall be sent, nor who shall certainly bring them, it is not yet known. The Parl. of Scotland are upon a Declaration, wherein are the reasons which they say is the cause why they put the Kingdom into a posture of defence, which endeavours to satisfie the Kingdom; for so doing, this Declaration is already committed to several bodies of the states, and will be speedily published. From Ireland came a Messenger to the Parl. of Scotland from the Irish forces, and brought a proffer of their service, and gave in assurance that they would joyne with them, with the Messenger the Scoch Parl. treated, and passed on to this effect, viz. that they shall have a letter of thanks re∣turned them and that a fortningts pay be forth advanced for them. By this you may suppose, that the Scots are certainly re∣solved for a warre, and if their proposalls take notice, they intend to send to the Parl. of England, they will appear in
their proper Colours, & their raising of an Array would be facilitated, if they could agree about Officers in chiefe, but as yet they cannot, only there is much dispute, who shall be Generall, some would have on, some another; but who shall be Generall, it is not yet concluded, many of the Officers in the former Army, perceiving how things are like to be carried, refuse to take part with them, and so have quitted their places, and rendred up their Commissi∣ons. As for Captain Wogan, and other Englishmen in Scot∣land, which were demanded by the English Commissio∣ners, re not delivered up as was expcted; but a full deni∣all is given the Comm ssioners concerning them. There are as it is reported 7000 Scots quartered between Edenburgh & Barwick, there are as it is reported near 5000. English in Scotland, in a readinesse to help forward their designe, & 8000. are expected from Munroe, the Scots Gen. in Ireland: likewise there are 11. Regiments upon their march, out of the North of Scotland, under this pretence, that the Northern Army shall come and be disbanded up∣on the borders, it is confidently reported by men of cre∣dit, that Prince Charles shall speedily be landed in Scotand; but for my part, I cannot credit it, and whether it be true or false I cannot averre. EdenburghApril. 19. 1648. From Yorke April. 22. SIR, THe Malignants have a great desire to be medling, but cannot as yet for want of opportunity; but yet their hopes are great, there are some that would be in Scotland willingly, but that they feare that those which are there already, are extreamly put to their shift for provision and sustenance: therefore they intend to stay till the Scots come into England, and then joyn with them, by which you
may see they have hopes of such a day as I hope they ne∣ver shall, never see it. It is said, the Scots Armies pretence is to release His Maj. from the sl of Wyght, and to rein∣state him in his Royall Throane at Westminster. Captain Wogans men increase, and are amounted to the number of seven score, here are many Lords & Gentlemen in Scotland, would fain see the conclusion, because the English Souldi∣ers are maintained by them, till such time as it is known, whether they result for Peace or Warre. YorkeAprill 22. 1648. The Copy of a Letter from Norwich. SIR, OF late here hath happenned a sad accient, which was occasioned thus. The Mayor was sent for to at∣tend the Parl. to answer for somthing done; but the Malig∣nants opposed his coming up, and the well-affected endea∣voured to further it; but this began to grow into such a quarrel, that the Malignants began to repaire to, and armed themselves at the County Magazine, which was within this City; but the matter was so handled, that the Maga∣zine was blown up, and much hurt done to Churches, and many houses, what were neare were spoilded, and one hun∣dred people were killed, and mortally wounded; but for all this, those which were left, still continued their quar∣rell, and would not desist, but declared for God and King Charles, till at last there came in 3. Troopes of Col. Fleete∣woods borse, which after a little skirmishing, quickly quie∣ted the City. It is said, that most of the Committee-men were blown up by this sad accident. NorwichApril. 23. 1648. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott. FJNJS.
