S1667 R183388 [ocm]80923609 191993
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE BY THE KING. A PROCLAMATION, Anent the late Horrid ATTEMPT made upon the High-street of Edinburgh. Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of July, one thousand six hundred and sixty eight. CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  heraulds, Pursevants, Macers, Messengers at Armes, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch, as upon the eleventh of this instant, the most Reve∣rend Father in GOD, James Archbishop of St. Andrews, and the right Reverend Father in GOD, Andrew Bishop of Orkney, were publickly assaulted in the high-street of Edinburgh by a most desperate Villain, who having shaken off all fear of GOD, and respect to Man, did design to kill and murder them, and the Bishop of Orkney was cruelly wounded by the discharge of a Pistol, to the hazard of his life. By the which barbarous and inhumane attempt, not only the sacred Order of Bishops, and safety of the persons of the Officers and Ministers of Religion (which amongst Turks and Heathens, as amongst Christians, has been in all ages held inviolable, and in a special maner are secured by Our Laws) are in the highest measure invaded and violated; but Our Authority and Government most scandalously affronted and injured, and all Laws, Divine and Humane, most wickedly infringed, to the great reproach of the true Religion and Faith, of which we are Defender, and dishonour of this Our Church and Kingdom. And we being, upon all accounts, most highly concerned to express Our detestation of the said villainous attempt of paricide and murder upon innocent persons, the Governours of the Church, without any imaginable cause or provocation, but for their loyalty and affection to Us, and zeal for Our service; And considering how much it importeth the honour of the established Religion, and of Our Government, the preservation of the Authority of Our Laws, and in special Our Acts of Parliament, anent invading and pursuing Our Privy Councellours, and doing violence to the persons of Church-men, and the preventing of the overturning of the very beeing of Humane-societies, that Assassinates be exemplarly punished. And in order thereto, that all possible and exact endeavours be gone about for discovering and apprehending the said Villain; Therefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, command and charge all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Regalities and their Deputes, Magistrates of Burghs within their respective Bounds and Iurisdictions, and Officers of Our standing Forces, to search, seek, take and apprehend the person guilty of the said horrid crime, and to imprison him till he be brought to Iustice. As also, We command and charge all and sundry Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom, that they use their utmost endeavours for detecting, discovering and apprehending the foresaid Assassinate: And for their further incouragement therein, We do declare and give assurance, that whosoever shall so discover him that he may be apprehended, shall not only be indemnified and pardoned, albeit they were accessory to, and art and part of the foresaid crime, and shall never be called nor accused therefore in time coming; but shall likewayes have payed to them the sum of two thousand Merks, Scots money; and the person who shall apprehend the committer of the foresaid crime, and deliver him to sure Ward and Firmance, shall have instantly the sum of five thousand Merks payed and delivered to him. Likeas do We prohibite and discharge all Our Subjects of this Kingdom, upon any colour or pretext whatsoever, to resset, harbour, corre∣spond with, or supply the said person: Certifying all such who shall contraveen this Our Proclamation, that they shall be holden and repute guilty of the foresaid crime, and accordingly proceeded against with all rigour. And ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1668.
