D130 99825692 206668
TABLES OF THE VNIVERSAL CHARACTER So contrived, that the practice of them exceed's all former wayes of short hand writing, and are applicable to all languages. THE TABLE OF PARTICLES, Before the character after above under 1. Ego tu ille me te illum praet. praes. futurum passivum & non 2. Nos vos illi nos vos illos plurale genitiv. dativ. ideo quia quasi 3. Hoc illud aliud hoc illud aliud possum debeo oportet nam nisi ne 4. Uterque reliqui solus utrumque reliquos solum imperat. utinam licet quod si quamvis 5. Unusquisque alius neuter unumquemque alium neutrum hic illic alibi sed tamen cum 6. Omnes aliquis nullus omnes aliquem nullum ubique alicubi nusquam sic ut sicut 7. Omnia aliquid nihil omnia aliquid nihil sursum directe deorsum primo deinde denique 8. Quis qualis talis bene mediocriter male antrorsum à latere retrorsum partim dimidium potius 9. Ubi unde quo fere praecipue perfecte supra praeter infra omnino quodammodo praeterea 10. Quid quare qua certe possibile impossibile extra intra undequaque usque vix proxime 11. Quando quamdiu quousque facile difficile frustra simul juxta procul tam quam secundum 12. Quantum quomodo quam forte probabile falsum contra inter circum aut neque donec 13. Quot quotus quoties contingens conveniens necesse citra apud ultra hucusque adhuc quoque 14. Tot toties tantum nunc tunc tandem per de pro heri hodie cras 15. Solum satis nimis iterum brevi diu in cum sine raro saepe semper 16. Cito opportune tarde coram publice privatim super ab ex magnum parum multum 17. Statim aliquando nunquam aliter particulariter Universaliter ante penes post valde magis maxime Derivatives       18. Facere, actio, Infinitivus, actor substantiv. activ. sub. pass. adjectiv. neutrum. adject. act. adj. pass. abstractum, adverbium, potentia▪ 19. Officiū, Incipio, genus faemininum, Instrumentum, tempus, locus agendi membrum, vestis, fructus ars, vox animalis, morbus, The TABLE of Radicall verbs and adjectives CONTRARIES 1. Ego 1. Ego 6. When I sit down upon a hie place, I'm sick with light and heat Rise up, lowe, displace, whole, darke, cold, 12. For the many thick moistures, doe open wide my Emptie pores F. few, thin, drie, shut, narrow, full, 18. But when I sit upon a strong borrowed Horse, I ride and run most swiftly B. stand, weake, lend, goe on foot, walke, slowe, 24. Therefore if I can purchase this courtesie with civilitie, I care not the hirers barbaritie T. possesse, froward, rude, neglect, eloquent, 30. Because I'm perswaded they are wild villains, scornfully deceiving modest men B. disswade, tame, serious, lascivious, 36. Neverthelesse I allowe their frequent wrongs, and will encourage them with obliging exhortations N. dissallow, rare, discourage, disobliedge, rebuke 42. Moreover I'l assist them to fight against robbers, when I have my long crooked sword. M. resist, at peace, want, short, straight. 2. Tu 2. Tu 6. Worthie friend be entreated, to extoll religion and holynes Unworthie enemie, threaten, abase, superstitious, prophane, 12. F. true vertue being found giveth a rich blessing F. false, vitious, seeke, receive, poore, curse, 18. B. your courage concealed in a prison, provokes flyers to pursue you B. coward, tell, sett at liberty, pacifie, follow, defend, 24. T. hold firme your victory, against the heavie burdens of despaire T. let goe, instable, yeeld, light, disburden, hope, 30. B. the great sufferings of misery, kills wicked servants B. small, doe, prosperous, quicken, godlie, free, 36. N. you may constantly sell deare, and continue still your idle questions N. unconstant, buy, cheap, leave of worke, answere 42. M. you may remarke how chast virgins conceive, and afflict sleeping men with nakednes. M. unchast, bring forth, comfort, wake, cloathe. 3. Ille 3. Ille 6. A wyse teacher knowes, what he affirmes and understand's what he remembers Foole, learne, doubt, denie, ignorant, forget, 12. F. he chooseth rather to speake prophesies, then to please angry lovers F. reject, dumb, come to passe, offend, content, hate, 18. B. when he heares and sees clearly, they have promised to honour and thanke him B. deafe, blind, obscure, performe, dishonour, unthankfull, 24. T. he therefore absolves them from false accusations, and praises their flourishing innocency T. condemne, excuse, dispraise, wither, guilty, 30. B. hard beginnings of good, begett a lively growth B. soft, end, ill, corrupt, die, decrease, 36. N. he commanded presently to bind them, and lead them away and hang and burn them N. obey, absent, loose, drawe, drowne, smoake, 42. M. he punished them so with hunger and thirst, that they cryed out eating is sweet. M. spare, full, drinke, silent, fast, soure. 4. Nos 4. Nos 6. We'l call this old mad man, and tickle him till he fart for laughter Appeare, young, sottish, pricke, belch, weep, 12. F. the pleasant mirth of itching, will make him scratch his white snowie beard F. unpleasant, sad, sore, rubbe, black, haile, 18. B. sharp byting wounds, will bury his lustfull desires B. blunt, licke, cure, digge, covet, 24. T. we'll feed his lean barren corps, with fresh savoury dinners T. poyson, fat, fertile, rotten, unsavory, suppe, 30. B. filthie stinking roasts, move him fall a vomiting B. cleane, odoriferous, boyle, rest, stand, spit, 36. N. we'l penetrate him with fearfull thunder, and kindle unhappy flames in him N. dare, lighten, quench, happy, sparkle, 42. M. we'l prove he divorced his wife for dancing, and inchanted her to refuse his kindnes. M. improve, marry, play, coniure, graunt, unkind. 5. Vos 5. Vos 6. You vile breathlesse lyers, consider your wicked customes Pretious, strangle, speake, true, rash, godly, unaccustome, 12. F. you bowe own with deep groanings, when you use your flattering salutations F. lift up, ebbe, sigh, abuse, valedico, 18. B. you contradict the comparisons of honest men, and vilipend their skilfull corrections B. consent, unhonest, esteeme, unskilfull, fault, 24. T. your seed shall be perfectly excluded, and your names blotted out from inheritance T. reap, imperfect, containe, nickname, disinherit 30. B. you measure the creation by division, and hyde the world with coverings B. weigh, annihilate, describe, shew, square, discover, 36. N. the very despised shadowe of your comb, shall be accepted with sweating kisses N. respect, shine, brush, reject, faint, embrace, 42. M. your wilfully ensnaring witnesses, shall be shot through with a rough plough. M. unwilling, deliver, attest, bend, plaine, harrow. 6. Illi 6. Illi 6. Thriftie men paint their buildings, only with greasie blew and red Prodigall, print, cast downe, browne, yellow, green, 12. F. by the equality of this order, they take away the joynings where the raine poures in F. unequal, disorder, adde, disjoyne, blowe, poure out, 18. B. yet the power of the frost is so nimble, that it impudently breakes downe their baking houses B. unpowrfull, melt, wearie, bashfull, cut, brew, 24. T. they agree to spend cruelly, before the tempests tumble downe their place of worship T. win, mild, calme, slide, 30. B. they would vindicate the fitnesse of baptisme, from undiscreet and severe solitariness B. impure, unfit, circumcise, discreet, meek, accompanie, 36. N. they keep themselves unjustly armed, to hurt sincere undertakings N. lose, just, disarme, dissemble faile, 42. M. they force swimmers to admiration, by taking their beautifull sailes from them. M. flie, astonish, leave, deformed, rowe,
Radicall Characters, by the rule of derivatives. I shall subjoyne the particu∣lar rules only in so many words referring the explication of them and ex∣amples to be done viva voce. 1. Persons and particles of Universallity and Particularity have places both before and after the radicall Character, for distinguishing them when they are agents, and when they are patients. 2. Affixes of persons are rendred personally with verbs, & as possessives with nouns. 3. The compound pronouns which (ipse) are expressed by twice writing the affixe of the simple, whether person or possessive. 4. Those particles which end in (ever) in English, and (cunque) in Latine, are also expressed by twice writing the simple affixe. 5. If two simple points of affixe come so to be written, that they expresse two severall particles they are to be set at a little more distance one from ano∣ther, then they are set in the second place of affixes, where they expresse both but one single notion. 6. Adverbs of motion, from, or to a place, are expressed by the adverb of rest, in place, and the particles (from) and (to). 7. In verbs expressing action or passion, there is no necessity of adding the affixe of the present tyme: but let it bee taken for rule, that those verbs writ∣ten without any affixe of tyme are understood to bee of the present tyme. 8. Where nouns come to be coupled together without any other verb, but the substantive verb (sum) for the more compendiousnesse, the verb (sum) may be expressed by the affixes of tyme, unlesse it be in propositions of (est) secundi adjacentis, or some other few places, in which the radicall Cha∣racter of the verb (sum) may be made use of. 9 Those particles which signify adverbialiter with verbs, being affixed with substantives they signify adjectively, such as bene, male, praecipue, Ʋniversaliter, &c. 10. The notion of (to goe) or (to come) are expressed, the first by a quadrangle, the other by a, triangle, the reasons I can not enlarge here. 11. For reading any thing that is written in this Character, it is required first that the Table of Particles and Derivatives be perfectly understood, and had by heart; then let it be considered, whether the radicall Character be a noune or verb, primitive or derivative, and if it be a verb, what tyme it's of, if it have persons before, or after it, what the notions of the other particles are affixed about it: which all being understood, the sense of the whole will imme∣diately appeare: where it may be observed, that for the most part conjunctions are allwaies first read, adverbs or Logicall modi may be ead either first or last, & yet the sense stand intire; the expression whereof is all here required: but a little practice will shew that there can scarce be error in reading, un∣lesse there be error first in writing. 12. If two or three particles come to be expressed with one vew, which virtually & logically makes more the one proposition then the sentence is ei∣ther to be expressed logically by man writing the radicall Character, & every one of them it's proper affixes, otherwise if the Character before contrations cause, but once writtē, then the particle first to be read is set neerest the Cha∣racter &c. e g l love you but not him, this is Logically resolved I love you, but I love not him &c. Prepositions governing persons after verbs are to be set over the verb in their own place, and if there be two persons after the verb, to wit one governed by it self, and another by the preposition, that which is gover∣ed by the preposition, is to be set at a little farther distance frō the Character. I am necesstated in respect of the narrow compasse of this sheet, whereunto I have confined my self to passe over the Table of Derivatives, without ex∣plication, as also many other usefull observations. Of the Table of Radicall Characters. THis Table is divided into the Table of Verbs and Adjectives, & the Ta∣ble of Substantives: for understanding of the art and use of both, let it be observed. Every particular table containes fourty two words, expressing so many severall distinct notions of things, (which this designe only considers with∣out respect to synonymous words.) For helping of the emory to retaine these words, and render them readi∣ly by the Character, there is a story made up to couple them together, either by way of sense, or no sense, which somtimes is most helpfull to the memory: This story is divided in seven parts, to wit 1. a simple narration, 2. a conti∣nuance of the story by the particle, (for) 3. (but,) 4. (therefore,) 5. (because,) & because variety is very operative upon the memory, the two last particles which are (neverthelesse) and (moreover,) give a quite contradiction, to what hath been spoken in the former part of the story, and this method is constantly observed thorowout the whole Tables. Again those seven parts of the story so distinguished, are contained in seven lines, whereof every one containes six words, and those again so composed among themselves, that three of them goe allwayes together by way of sense; Those words expressed in the Italicke Character, are but only expletive particles, for binding the words belonging to the tables together, for helping the memory. One of the great advantages of this art, is the expressing of all contraries by one uniforme rule, without any charge upon the memory: the rule is, When the Character of the one contrary is had in the Tables, the other contrary is allwayes expressed by that same Character, with a single point put within it: those contraries which are to be expressed with a single point added to the Cha∣racter of it; contrary in the stories, are set e diametro opposite, to their owne contraries expressed in the story. Where it is to be observed, that I have not taken contraries allwayes from contrariety of nature, but from any ground of contradistinction, which might help the memory, this being all I intend. And it is to bee observed, that the order of the severall heads of the stories are carried on by the order of the particles of affixes, before the Character, that is the first story being made up in the first person: The second in the second person: The third in the third &c. The advantage of this is, the Charactr answering uniformly, by a numericall progression to this method, of th ∣rall stories, he who hath any notion of the story, so that he can referre any word either to the story of ego tu ille &c. immediately he hath the Character it is to be written with. For it is again to be observed, That one Character carrieth out the fourty two words of every table, by fourty two severall distinct points of numeration which are affixed upon it, whereof all the characters I make use of, are equally capable: the way of doing whereof I referre to actuall ex∣plication, seing the Character must be set down with my owne hadd. Briefly then for the attaining the perfect use of these tables: first the numeri∣call way of the Character is to be learned, then the seven cardinall points of numeration upon the Character, answerable to the seven parts of every story: the seven distinguishing particles of the story are to be gotten by heart as they answere to the cardinall points of numeratiō upon the character; which by any of common capacity can upon a simple explication of the way be fully com∣prehended and taken. And this being once rightly understood carries out the whole designe; for the method of the tables amongst themselves, and the me∣thod of the distinguishing particles of the particular Tables (which is that same in all) being rightly understood and attained, there needs no more for doing all this designe is capeable of, but to get exactly by heart those me∣morialls of the severall tables, which are composed by way of fictitious and foolish stories, which are apt to sticke more upon the memory then that which carries more sense and seriousnes with it. This being all then that is requisite for practising this art, to understand first the rules which are few, plaine, and easy, and then to get those few stories by heart; I am bold to af∣firme, that any man Indifferenly judicious and diligent, should be able both to write and read in this character in any subject so farre as the Tables will reach, in a week's tyme without the help of Tables set before him but simply, with the help of the memory. This I know will seem a thing impossible to many, but I hope experience shall confirme the truth of it. It is to be observed, that all those words in the table of verbs and adjectives which are expressed in the stories either as substantives or adverbs, which is done only for the more conveniency of making up the stories, are to be taken radically for verbs, and adjectives, according as the nature of the notion is: so in the table of substantives all those words expressed in an Italick letter, are radically to be taken as substantives. Then let it be observed that my main designe being to carry forth the cōmō notions and conceptions of the minde, in the ordinary intercourse of man∣kind, if my Tables be not so full and comprehensive as many may judge they should bee; I give for a farther explication those following considerations, to be seriously weighed by the more judicious and learned 1. The nature of this designe as it is intended for a common help & remedy of the imperfection & difficulty of the languages of all nations, (which is the chief and grand im∣pediment that stops the familiar intercourse, commerce and mutuall communi∣cations between the people of severall nations:) requires only the expression of those notions and things, which are that same in all nations; so that the particular ceremonies, customes, and technick words of particular nations and languages fall not properly within the compasse of it, for if any notions of things proper to any particular nation should be expressed in other na∣tions, they behooved to learn the nature of the thing, as well as the word or Character expressing it 2. those common notions, necessary for making up dis∣course in all ordinary intercourse, consisting chieffely of particles which are ligaturae orationis, coupling and binding together the radicall and principall parts of speech, and varying the formality of it, and verbs and adjectives by which are expressed the qualities of things, actions, and passions of the minde, motions, transaction of affaires &c. I hope there shall be scarce any simple no∣tions of particles, and very few of verbs and adjectives found to be omitted. 3. I acknowledge the chief defect of my Tables will be in substantives: for I did strive only at the present to pitch upon those, which were most obvious and occurrent in ordinary discourse, as transcendent words, relations, mem∣bers of the body &c 4. I dare promise, that by adding foure or five more Ta∣bles composed in stories, (which God willing shall shortly be done) this de∣signe shall be able to reach farther in communication and discourse then the most part of languages. 5. I desire it may be considered, hat my intention being to expresse things and not the words of any Language; I take of that irratio∣nality of all Languages of using many tymes multitudes of synonimous words for expressing that same thing. 6. It is worthie of observation by the learned, that beside that principall intended use of this designe, of facilitating the matter of language and communication, there are other choice advantages to be reaped by it as chieffely, the practice of it teaches a man to abstract from the particular phrases of languages, which many tymes logically considered, are impertinencies and non sense, and to compose and expresse his thoughts in a plaine and rationall method, and (as I had it from an eminently learned person) it makes a man as it were dip his pen in his soul, before he deliver his thoughts: for it is the complaint of many learned men, that Rhetoricall flourishes of words doe often obscure best literature, and what strife hath been in the world meerly about words, is a thing too we'll known. 7. If the synonimous words of languages signifying that same simple notion, were col∣lected and ranked together, (which for the use of weaker capacities is ne∣cessary and shall be done hereafter:) The extent of these Tables will appeare to reach a great length in communication. 8. This designe being chiefly in∣tended for common intercourse as is said before, it is not to bee expected that it shall containe the numberlesse multitude of the severall species of nature and words of art & techinck words of all trades, for this no language is able to doe, nor no one man able to understand, but those who would have those reduced to an artificiall way of expression, must make particular tables for every art and trade, which they must doe in all languages, notwithstanding there shall bee as many of the most common species of nature here expressed, as any lan∣guage is able to doe without Periphrases.
