R2008A [ocn]625106356 211332
The Round-Heads Lecture. Being a true description of a Round-Heads conversation, VVhich you may heare in this following Relation. To the Tune of, Neighbour Roger, Or, they cannot hold their wits together. A Tub Lecture. VVIll you please to hear a Song, though it want both rime and reason, It was pen d to doe no wrong, but for description at this season, Of he or she what ere they be, that wish Church Orders quite confounded, Yet make a show where ere they goe of fervent zeale, I meane a Round-head. First heele have a smoothing tongue, next hee'le learne for to dissemble, And when he heares of wilfull wrongs then sigh, and looke as he would Tremble, Next of all then let him fall to pride of heart and secret bravery, Speaking still against all ill. that is the cloake to hide his knavery. Let Charity be used much, in words at length and not in actions, For tis the common use of such, not to do't but give directions, They will be loath to sweare an Oath, by yea and nay you may believe them, But for their games they will take paines, to cheat and lye and never grieve them. The Common Prayer they like it not, for they are wise and can make better, And such a teacher they have got, confutes it all in word and letter, For they can raile, mens hearts to quaile, with deepe damnation for their sinning, Yet to amend heele nere intend, for to transgresse hee's now beginning. But hee's a very worthy man, and undertakes more then hee's able, And in a Tub sometimes heele stand, in Hay-barne, Sheepe-house, or in Stable, While all the rout that comes about, to heare his Doctrine, Saints he cals them, They vow and sweare they nere did heare, such worthy things as he hath told them, They will not heare of Wedding Kings, for to be used in their marriage, But sayes they're superstitious things, and doth Religion much disparage, They are but vaine, and things prophane, and therefore it no whit behoves them, So to be tyde unto the Bride, but doe it as the Spirit moves them.
The second Part, To the same Tune NO Pater-noster no: no Creed in their petitions they will mention, And holds ther's nothing good indéed, but what is done through their invention: Prayers that are old, in vaine they hold, which can with God no favour merit, And therefore they wll nothing say, but as thei'r moved by the spirit. The wisest Schooles they count but fooles, which doe no more then they have taught them For Brownists they can preach or pray, with wit their fathers never bought them: Then I perceive that wit they have, they doe receive by inspiration, No bookes they néed, to learne to read, if all be true in their relation. Onely the Horne-booke I would have, you practise at the first beginning, That they the better may peceive, the iute that comes by fleshly shining: Yet nere the lesse, I would suppresse, all oher Books which now are used. Lest that the Ghost, which leads you most, by too much art should be abused. Their haire close to their heads they crop, and yet not onely for the fashion, But that the care it should not stop, from hearing of some rare relation Therefore his eares he well preparee, to hearken to an holy Brother, That in regard, he may be heard, from one side of the barne to'th other, They count their fathers were but fooles, who formerly became such debters, To spend their meanes upon the Schooles, to teach their sons a few fond letters: The Christ Crosse row, is enough to show a child, the rest hee'l quickly gather, And learne to read, if he proceed, till he be wiser then his father. And at the last, when they must part, let Male and Female goe together, Ioyn'd in hand, and ioyn'd in heart, and ioyn'd a little for their pleasure: First for kisses they'l agree, and what comes next you may coniecture, So the wicked doe not see, and so breakes off the Round-heads Lecture. FINIS. Printed at London for Francis Coles, in the Old-baily. 1642.
