12556 99841724 6324
CERTAINE English verses penned by DAVID GWYN, who for the space of eleuen yeeres and ten moneths was in most grieuous seruitude in the gallies vnder the King of Spaine, and nowe lately by the wonderfull prouidence of God, deliuered from cap∣tiuitie, to the ouerthrow of many of the Spa∣niards, and the great reioycing of all true hearted En∣glish men. Presented to the Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiestie in the Parke at Saint Iames on Sunday the xviii. of August 1588. by Dauid Gwyn, as foloweth. Imprinted at London by Richard Hud∣son, dwelling in Hosier Lane, at the signe of the Wool-sacke.
Certaine English verses, pre∣sented to the Queenes most excellent Ma∣iestie, in the Parke at Saint Iames, on Sun∣day the xviii. of August 1588. SVch Rebels as do meane to sell, their crowne to forreine foes: Against their Queene for to re∣bel whose secrets God disclose. Marke well, and read this story mine, though simple and rude it be: And to your Queene with heart encline let treason from you flee. For I am one that captiue am, and know the Spaniards heart: Although he loue the traitors name, at length hee makes him smart. He giues the traitor daily pay, while treason is a working: But afterwards to his decay, he cuts him short from barking. Which is the due and iust reward, that doeth belong to treason: The hangman takes him by the beard, to cut his head with reason.
Examples many I could bring, which lately hath bene prooued: Of those that wrote to Philip king, whose hearts to treason mooued. The youthfull Duke of Bragan soile, Bargansiae cald by name: Who gaue the Portugall the spoile, and brought himselfe to shame. Also the Coundie of Caskails, did ioine with him in treason: Pretending for to purchase vailes, being void and cleare of reason. And so they sold their natiue land, to Philip king of Spaine: Who hauing Portugall in hand, as king therein did raigne. Who sudainly did turne his face, from this good duke and Coundie And gaue no credit to their race, wherein they knew the follie. Therefore good Christian countrimen, take heed, beware betime: Let no false treason mooue you then, to Pope, nor Spanish king.
Let not affection blind your eies, nor popish tales deceiue: Let not the Spaniards tales nor lies, constraine you to beleeue. For they are deuils, and are not gods, seeing people they deceiues: I wish you well, beleeue him not, if you will liue at ease. Therefore you Saxon sorte, that rebels meane to liue: Marke well, and reade the euill report, that Portugals do giue. The Southerne Spanish race, that mankinde would subiect: To turne vs all from Christes lawes, to liue in Popish sect. Repent therefore in time, and call to God for grace: To Queene Elizabeth doe incline, and flie from Spaniards race. Be true vnto the English Crowne, and doe the Pope detest: Procure to beat the Spaniards downe, the Romanes, and the rest.
Examples good you may well take, of Italie, and Cicilia soyle: By spaniards, Flanders all doth quake, they Portugale did spoyle. Therefore, good English knightes, be true vnto your Queene: In noble mindes set your delights, and flie from treason cleane. Marke well a Captiues plaint, that doth lament your case: To Queene Elizabeth be you not faint, and call to God for grace. And thus with mournefull heart, from Galley I doe end: Where I doe feele the bitter smart, of Popish Spanish men. Farewell good natiue soyle, farewell good Countrey mine: Defend your land from Spanish foyle, and flie from Spanish line. I write with dolefull pen, my leaue of you to take: My life I lead in Galley cheyne, from whence my moane I make. Viuat Regina Elizabetha▪
An other at the same time deliuered to her Maiestie by DAVID GWYN. THe Eagle and the Lyon fearce, doe ioyne their subiects all: Against the Saxon soyle to pearce, their counsell they doe call. To knowe the way for to obteine their long desired will, In iudgement seate they sit againe, to vtter all their skill. And as the commons bragge and boast, a fleete they meane to make: To saile vnto the English coast, the Queene and land to take. With helpe of Rebels they doe thinke, the Saxon land to spoyle: If Queene and Counsell do not winke, the land can haue no foile. But those that lurketh in the denne, and did not know the smart: I meane some kinde of English men, which beares a Spanish heart.
They thinke the Crowne of ioy to win, by treason and by guile: Against the Christian English Queene, to please the Spaniards wile. Therefore good nobles play your part, defend your Queene and land: Against the Spaniards shewe your art, your force and mightie hand. Good Christian Clergie, send abroad your preachers for to showe: Howe bondage is a deadly rodde, in winters time you knowe. The Spaniardes make the Christian slaue, and bondmen vnto thrall: Their heads & beards they daily shaue, which is a dreadfull fall. They meane with force of fiery sword, your Saxon land to runne: They say it is for Christes word, and Romaines lawes among. They sweare by Christ, and by their beards, the English Queene to take: The Counsell and the Nobles heads, to make them all to quake.
The merchant and the venterers, with Spanish bragge they threate: The officers and the labourers, with fists they meane to beate. Therefore you worthy wightes, that passe the southerne seas▪ Man out your princely shippes, your foes for to displease. And keepe your English coast, from Phillip King of Spaine: And from all those that daily boast, to put you all to paine. I write no more, I wish you well, my minde you may well knowe: From captiues chaine where I do dwel, with bitter paynes and woe.
An other presented to her Maiestie by Dauid Gwyn in commendation of Sir Francis Drake. O Noble knight, O worthie wight, O prince of nauigation: In martiall affaires is thy delight, for countries preseruation. Thy noble fame like Phebus trim, in all the world is spread, As eclipse the sun and moone doth dim, so Spaniards do thee dread. Thy valiant actes and worthie hart, deserues eternall fame: Thy knowledge and Astrologies art doth verifie the same. Thy happy course that thou didst runne vnto the westerne land. Did make the Spaniards all to shunne, as fearing of thy hand, Sanda Domingo makes great mone, Carthagena eke doth crie, The westerne Iles do greatly grone, thy force hath bin so nie.
Kalles likewise doth greatly feare, with reason thereunto. The narrow straites do daily care, because thou art their foe. Thy enterprise hath bin so high, that Turkes could not compare, Nor with his gallies come so nigh, which makes them all to feare. The Graund English they thee doe call of famous good report, The Spaniards and the Portingall, to England will resort, To serue the Queene & thee, good Drake for thy good famous acts, The Spanish King they will forsake with England to compact. Thou art so dread as God is feard, in southerne coast and land: The Spaniard daily shakes his beard, and feares thy mightie hand. Therefore good worthie Drake, serue thou thy soueraigne Queene, And make the Spanish foe to quake, and English force be seene.
For helpe and aide thou shalt not want thy vertuous queene is bent, Money and victualles is not scant, and men will not repent. If thou wilt follow victorie, as first thou diddest begin: All Protestants will pray for thee, and for our gracious Queene. The Spaniards brag and make greate boast as thou dost partly knowe, A huge great fleete they make in haste, as letters mine did showe. Wherein I writ a warning good, to thee and to the queene, Rehearsing all both bad and good that in their fleete was seene. Also I wrote the summe of men, as neare as I could learne, And sent it by an Englishman, whereby thou mightest discerne. To knowe thy foes, and what they be, all kind of generation: The dukes and earles in their degree rehearsed by relation,
Their ships and force I daily wrote, and all their preparation: To name them all I missed not, as void of desperation. And thus, good noble knight, my simple verse I ende, Vnto thy hand good worthie wight, my helpe I do commende, And wish all English christian men to pray for me poore Gwyn, That lieth in bondage and in chaine with popish Spanish king. FINIS.
