14075 99843118 7828
❧ BRIEFE introductions, bothe naturall, pleasaunte, and also delectable vnto the Art of Chiromancy, or Manuel diuination, and Phisiognomy: with circumstances vpon the faces of the signes. Also certain canons or rules vpon diseases and sickenesse. Whereunto is also annexed aswel the artifici∣all, as naturall Astrologye, with the nature of the pla∣nets. Written in the Latin tonge, by Ihon Indagine Prieste. And now latelye translated into Englishe, by Fabian Withers. LONDINI. Apud Iohannis Day. 1558.
To the gentle Reader. IT was the vse amongste the aunciente Philosophers (most gentle Reader) that they neuer admitted or receiued anye scholer, vnto whome they did not indict and appoint a certain time to heare & kepe silence: willing thē in no wise for to speke, vntil that by hearinge they had learned to speake wiseli and discretely. Whose exam∣ple being present in my mind, and also the rash & temerarious iudgements of many conuersant before my eyes: I thoughte it good to admonish you, that folowing the example aforsaid, to bestow some labour & time in perusinge and readinge this briefe worke of Chiromancy, or manuel diuina∣tion, before you entre into iudgemēt of ani effect or certainty of the same. The whiche thing if thou diligently & attentislye do: I dout not, but that beside the great pleasure and delectation, thou shalt find therin that thou shalt in likewise repe & gather no lesse good frute & profit therof. For herby thou shalt perceiue & se the secrete works of na∣ture, how aptly & necessarily she hath com∣pound & knit eche member with other: ge∣uing vnto ye hand (as vnto a table) certain signes & tokens whereby to discerne and know the inward motions and affectyons
of the minde and hearte, with the inwarde state of the whole bodye: as also oure in∣clination & aptnes to al our external actiōs & doings. For what more profitable thing may be supposed or thought, then when a mā in him self, & by him self, maiforsee and know his proper & fatal accidentes: & ther∣by to embrace and folowe that whiche is good, & to auoid and escliue ye euils which are iminent vnto him, for the better vnder stāding and knowledge therof. And for as much as the Chiromāci vnto some perad∣ture may seme obscure & darke: we haue a∣nexed hereunto an Epiloge or brief collec∣tion of the art of Phisiognomy and circū∣stances vpon the faces of the signes, wyth certain canons or rules, aswel for ye know∣ledge, as also for the curing and helping of diseases, very necessary & profitable. Then orderly cōming vnto Astrology, we haue described vnto you aswel by the artificiall Horoscope, as also by the naturall entring of the Sunne into any of the .xii. celestiall signes: the hole effect and power that anye of the Planets or erraticall starres maye by any meanes worke in vs, Wherby ha∣uing recourse first vnto the hād, and mar∣king and noting suche signes and tokens as therin shall appere, then becholdinge the
proportion and liniaments of the hole bo∣dy, and according to the prescript rules to way and considre the equality & agreable∣nesse betwene them, with like respecte had vnto the natiuity, iudging either by thar∣tificial Horoscope, or by the natural course of ye Sun: yu shalt not only see & perceiue a great necessity & affinity betwene our ter∣restrial & the celestial bodies, but also forse & know a. M. accidentes either to good or euil prouided vnto vs, & hanging ouer our head. But least that any mā shuld thynke that hereby we attribute so much vnto na∣tural prouidēce, as though it wer ineuita∣ble, & therby vse it as a refuge or sāctuary, for al their euil actions and doinges. Vnto such we wil obiect thanswer of Crisippus writing in this maner. Although (saith he) ye nature hath prouided al thing frō the be∣ginning, and yt by her prouidence al things are moued & styrred vp by a certain neces∣sary reason and motion: yet notwithstan∣ding our dispositiōs & mindes are no fur∣der subiect or in daunger therof, then theyr propriety and quality is concordante and agreable vnto the same. For if yt by nature our wittes be fyrst made holsōe and good, and after endued with reason and vnder∣standing: either they do vtterly put of and
auoid al euil influences and accidentes or els receiue and beare them the more easily without hurt or domage. If contrariwise our dispositions of them selues be rude & grose, not endued with any kind of letters or good learning to assiste and helpe them withal: with euery light conflict or assault of our natural inclination, we runne hed∣long into al kinde of errours & vice. Euen folowinge the ensample of the Cilindre stone, which by nature being apt to roll & tomble, and being cast or throwen downe ino holow or steye places: doth run with out ceasing, not so much because it is caste or throwen, as for his owne nature & apt∣nes therunto, and not hauing in it self any thing to withstand the same. The aucthor him self in like maner forseing the cauilla∣tions of certaine euill disposed persones which wold make al thinges subiect vnto the influences of the heauenly bodies: be∣fore he entreth to speak of the iudgmēts of natiuities, writeth in this sort. We ought (saith he) first to know and vnderstād that the stars do not prouoke or force vs to ani thing, but only maketh vs apt and prone: and being so disposed, doth as it were al∣lure & draw vs forward to our naturall in∣clinatiō. In the which if we folow yt rule
of reason, taking it to be our only guide & gouernour: thei lose al their force, power, & effect, which they by ani means may haue in, & vpon vs. Contrariwise, if we geue our selues ouer to folow our own sensuality & natural disposition, they woorke euen the same effect in vs yt thei do in brute beasts. And this shalbe sufficiente at this time to answer the vain obiection of naturall pro∣uidence, wherby the frute of this woorke might by anye meane seme to be cōuerted into any vice or error, the which in dede of it self, is veri necessary & profitable. What should I nede to stand aboute with longe circumstances, to describe the perticuler cōmodities of these briefe workes anexed togethers: when that the labor is so smal, yt wyth once or twise diligēt & attentife re∣ding, the hole effect is known & vnderstād Notwithstanding, I wold wishe & desire yt al men which shal read or take any frute of this smal treatise: to use such moderation in perusyng of the same, that they do not by and by take in hand to geue iudgment, eyther of theyr owne, or of other mens e∣states or natiuityes, without diligent cir∣cumspection and taking hede. Wayinge & cōsidering how many wayes a man maye be deceyued, as by the prouidence & discre∣tion
of the man in whō thou geuest iudge∣ment. Also the dispensation of God, and oure fallible and vncertaine speculation. Wherefore, let al men in seking hereby to forsee their own fortune, take hede that bi the promisse of good, thei be not so elate or high minded, geuing them selues ouer to osiuetye or idlenesse, trustinge altoge∣ther to the naturall influences, neither yet by anye signes or tokens of aduersitye to be derecte or caste downe: but to take and waye all thinge with suche equalitie and moderation, directinge their state of life and liuinge to all perfectnesse and good∣nesse, that they maye be ready to embrace and followe all that whiche is good and profitable, and also not only to eschue and auoide: but to withstande and set at noughte all euill and aduerse for∣tune, when so euer it maye happen or chaunce vnto them. FINIS.
The boke of Palmestry. ❧ The first Chapiter of the distinction of the hand. THE auncient Grekes, who (as it may ap∣pere by yt long and old vse of the word) did vse this sorte and kinde of Diuinatyon, whiche is ga∣thered by the beholdynge of manne his hande, called it by this propre name of Chyromancia. Wherfore I intendynge to write the rules & obseruations therof, do thinke it necessarye and mete first of al to discribe the hand of man, and point out & set forthe his partes, whereby such rules and preceptes as shall be geuen v∣pon this manuell diuination, maye the more easily be vnderstand and knowen. The hand therfore being extent or ope∣ned
abroade, the playne within is called the palme, in the middest whereof there is a certaine space called the concaue or holownesse, oute of the whiche the fiue fingers haue their originall and begin∣ning. Amongst the which, the first being the strongest and mooste grosse, is called the Thombe: the next is called the index or forfinger, because in shewing or poin∣ting to any thing, we do commonly vse that finger. The next that foloweth and is in the middest of the fiue, is by the same name called the middle finger: next after this, is the ringe finger: so called, because it is commonly to weare a ring of golde vpon it, and speciallye that on the lefthand, for because as learned men hold opinion, there dothe passe a certain small sinnowe from that finger to the heart of man: wherefore it semed good in times paste to the antiquitie, to wear a ringe as a crowne vppon that finger, or els as some do suppose, that goulds by nature doth comforte the heart. The laste finger and leaste of all, is called
the eare finger, because it is commonly vsed to make cleane the eares. And thus farre concernynge the fingers. More o∣uer, the hand beyng closed or shut wyth the fingers turned in, we call the fiste, the nether parte wherof (amongest such as vse this Arte,) is commonlye called the percussiō or stroke of the hand. Thē the place where the hand is drawen and gathered in, & ioyned to the arme, is also called the wreste. Furthermore, euerye finger hath his proper rising or swelling of the fleshe, whiche doth rise at the rote or nether parte of the saide fingers, and of some is called hylles, and are attribu∣ted vnto the names of the Planets. A∣mong the whiche is reckened the risyng or hyll in the nether parte of the fist, cal∣led the percussion of the hande, so that in the hande are limitted and appoynted seuerall places vnto euerye of the Pla∣nettes, whereby iudgemente maye be gathered. For the risynge or hyll of the thombe is assigned vnto Venus, and marked with this carecter ♀, the hyll
of the fore finger to Iupiter, and is thus noted ♃, the middle finger is attribute to Saturne, with this note ♄, the ringe finger to the Sunne, with this character ☉, the hill of the little or eare finger is vnder Mercury, with this marke ☿, the risyng or hill which is in the percussion, the Mone doth possesse, and is thus figu∣red ☽. Now what place Mars shal haue we will shew you hereafter, but first we will make discription of the incisions & diuisions of the hand, which we call the lines. Amongest the which there be two chiefe and principall, which be these: the wrest which diuideth the hand from the arme, and is almost ioyned to the line of life, or of the hart, the whiche beginueth vnder the hill of the forefinger, as it wer betwene the forefinger and the thombe, and dothe deuide the hande stretchinge downeward towarde the wrest. In the same side of the hande at the hyll of the forefinger, beginneth a line whiche pas∣seth ouerthwart the hande to the hyll of the Moone, and is called the middle cri∣nean naturall. And these two lines thus
beginning and passyng sundry wayes, make the forme and shape of a triangle. To the whiche, if the line of the Liuer or stomacke, whiche beginneth ouer a∣gainste the wreste, and passeth vnder the hil of the thombe, to the hil of the Mone, by the end of the meane natural line, do apere, as in some it doth not, it finisheth the triangle. And the space conteyned within these lines, is attribute and geuē vnto Mars, and is called the triangle of Mars, noted wyth this figure ♂. There is also an other line called the ta∣ble line, beginninge vnder the eare fin∣ger, at the ende of the hyll of the Mone, and runneth to the forefinger, and is so called, because the space betwene it and the middle or meane natural doth argue or shewe the fashion of a table, and that space is alwayes called the table or qua∣drangle of the hande, and the line is also called the lyne of fortune. And these be almost the chiefe diuisions or lines of the hand, to the which all other lesse & smal∣ler incisions and lines are referred. But nowe as neare as we can wee wyll dis∣cribe
them all, and as farre as partey∣neth to this Arte, shew their nature and signification. And first I thinke mete to speake of those lines, whiche take their denomination or name of the three prin∣cipall membres of mans bodie, that is of the hart, the brain, and the liuer. For as in those parts, whatsoeuer is in mā is al¦tered & chaūged: so bi those thre incisions and lines, a man may foresee & pronosti∣cate what soeuer shall happen, touching health, or aduersitie, or other thinges na∣turall. The which if any man thinke to be vaine and triflying: let him call to re∣membraunce the auncient Philosophers of Pythagoras secte, who chieflye by the proporcion and liniaments of mans bo∣dye, did declare and pronosticate the ma∣ners, state, and ende of man his life. For what is saide of Socrates, when that a certain man professying the Arte of Phi∣siognomye, or speculation: beholdynge Socrates, iudged hym by his outwarde habyte to be a verye euyll manne, of vncleane lyfe, libidinous, and geuen to
all euil, was therefore wonderfullye re∣buked of his scholers, as thoughe he had shamefullye flaundered hym. Socrates aunswered, that in dede naturallye he felte suche mocions and inclinations, so that if he hadde not corrected the vyces, his nature by the rules of reason, he had bene suche a one as he hadde pronoun∣ced hym to bee: meanynge thereby all those vices, whiche nature and destenye hath planted in vs, maye easilye by rea∣son and custome be amended, if we wyll striue agaynste destinye. And the prince of the Paripetecians Aristotle, saide, the hande of manne to be made of Nature, the principall organe and instrument in mannes bodye. For sithens it is his of∣fice to minister and serue all other partes of the bodye, and that in humaine gene∣ration, the vertues, powers, and strēgth, of all membres do come together. It is verye consequente and agreable, some certaine signes and tokens of the quali∣tie and complexion of man, to be knowen and perceiued by the hande.
Suche is the proporcion of membres a∣mong them selues, that they do partake one wyth another in all thynges. And further, that this arte of Chyromancie was vsed in the time of Plinie, he him selfe dothe affirme. Wherefore I take it to be my dutie to admonyshe you what you ought to attribute to this arte, and what is els to be ioyned wyth it, lest a∣ny man should thinke to include or shut vp the knowledge of so highe and great thinges into so straight and narow cor∣ners. Wherfore what I thinke herein I thinke good to shewe. As often as I must answere to any that enquireth, by and by as is accustomed, I loke vpon the hand, and therwithal beholde the whole bodye with the lineamentes, and pro∣porcion of the same, whiche is called his Physiognomie, (whereof in the boke fo∣lowing I will intreate,) then I cast my minde to the hour of Natiuitie, moneth, daye, or yere: the whiche knowen, I re∣ferre strait to the rules of natural Astro∣logye hereafter by mee written, then plainely iudgyng none of these by them
selues sufficient. And thinking it better to iudge them foles in geuyng light cre∣dite, then I to be counted rashe and fo∣lishe hastye in geuyng sentence. So that when I haue gathered all these thinges together, and taken holde of that which I thinke meete for my vse, I vtter my iudgment, estemyng the point of a mad manne by lokyng onely in the hande, to geue iudgemente of the life and all the states of mans bodye. And nowe I returne to the rules of Chyromancie.
chiromantic diagram A The table line, or line of fortune. B The line of life, or of the heart. C The vvreste of a vvoman. D The pomell of the hande. E The middle naturall line. F The line of the liuer or stomacke.
chiromantic diagram A The table line. B The pomell of the hande. C The vvreste of a man. D The line of the liuer. E The table or quadrangle. G The hyll of the thombe. H The line of life, or of the heart I The triangle. K The middle naturall line.
chiromantic diagram The names of the fingers after the Planets. A The imperfect table line. B The sister to the naturall line. C The line of the liuer or stomacke. D The sister of the line of life. E The line of life.
The seconde Chapiter of the line of life, or of the heart. THe line of life, called also the line of the heart, beginneth as is saide before at the hyll of the forefinger, passing by the midst of the palme, goeth to the wrest. The whiche if it be long, straite, liuely coloured, bright and cleare, it betokeneth longe life, endoma∣ged with fewe diseases or sickenesse. Plinie affirmyng the same, sayth: that it is token of longe life to haue vpryght shoulders, & two longe incisions or lines in one hand, the which are to be vnder∣stande of the line of lyfe, and the meane natural line. If that the natural powers be weake, and that the line doe appeare short and of diuers colours, runnyng in & out, thinne or slender, and cut or par∣ted in sunder, with manye ouerthwart riuels or small crestes, it dooeth declare shortnesse of life, muche sickenesse, small strength, and that he in whom this is so noted, shall seldome or neuer bringe any
thing to a good end. So likewise, the line grose, long, and vndeuided, doth shew al the contraries to the same. Wherfore, if any man do requyre or aske a reason of this thing, we answer yt the blud, which doth norish the hart, and is also thought to be the seat & resting place of ye minde, to be the cause efficiēt of this thing. For it is most certain, that as ye blud is pure, or vnpure: so the line shal be coloured, either cleare or dark: so as long as bloud dothe abounde, it sheweth reddye and brighte: and contrariwise, pale, & swart, when the bloude doth fail or war scarse. Wherby aswel the natural heate dimi∣nished and the weake bodye, as also the strong & lusty body is shewed & declared. Thē if this line be narow, subtile, & wel colored, & stretch forth toward the mean natural: it signifieth a mā of good coun∣sel, of subtile vnderstandinge, and of an high and princely minde and stomacke. And if it be broade, il coloured, and pale: it signifieth the cōtrary. This is always to be noted in all principal lines, that if they be straite, not deuided, neither
cutte, and well coloured, it doth declare a good complexion: if they be contrari∣wise disposed or set, if sheweth the con∣trari: Also if ye line of life be grose, depe, and diuersly coloured: that is to say: one place redde, another pale or swarte, is a signe of malice, craft, enuy, and the man to be a great talker, and boaster, and one that standeth much in his own conceit. If the line be grosse and very red, it be∣tokeneth a crafty, a filthy, and an incon∣stant man, but if it be pale, mixed wyth a certain rednesse: it signifieth an angry man, almoste mad with anger. And it be very red, mixed with palenes or swarth∣nesse like leade: it sheweth an vncon∣stant, vnshamfast, wauering, traitorous, and angry man, and delitinge to stir vp mischief, and sow discord. But if it be red in the part next the wreaste: it signifieth cruelty, and oftentimes it chaunceth to be forked in the vpper corner, which be∣tokeneth an vnstable man, a runner a∣boute countryes, and marueslous in all his doinges, the whiche if it be croked & writhen toward the mean natural line:
if signifieth a craftye, disceitfull, wan∣ton, and a manne of a peruerse and fro∣ward minde: and if you happen to finde in the hande of a woman, a crosse, with three small lines at the vpper corner of the line of life: it signifieth an vnshame∣faste, and vnhonest woman, but if that crosse be founde aboute the right corner in the line it selfe, and be depe in: it sig∣nifieth an vngodlye and mischeuous woman, whiche shall suffer greate pu∣nishemente for her mischiefe. For suche a crosse in that line, dothe alwaies beto∣ken euel, bothe in man and woman. If that there be founde two lines in thend of the rising of the thumbe, nere the line of life, as they wer liyng on the one side: by ye token I iudge the mā to die shortly. And if ye line of life haue braūches stret∣ched out toward the meane natural, in forme as you see in the margente: it is a sine of riches, honor, and perfection. But if ye said braūches run dounward toward the wrest in this maner, it signifieth po∣uerty & domage by houshold seruantes, through their vntruthe, and if the saide
braunches do passe strait thorow the tri∣angle to the meane natural: it signifieth a man, after diuerse and sondrye daun∣gers and chaūges of fortune, to come to prosperity and riches. Moreouer, manye smal lines deuiding the left line, betoke∣neth much sickenes: furder, if there be in the line of life certain points or graines scattering: it declareth a man vnshame∣fast, a fornicator, and in ieoperdy of hys life for murder in a tumult, whereof he was auctor him self, and shalbe diuerse times sore wounded. When in the beginninge of the lyne of lyfe be thre smal croked lines, deuidinge it in this maner: it is a token of a leprosy to come, for it doth declare the il disposi∣tion of the liuer, whereupon this whych is already said maye be gathered, that if the line of life be long, and depe, wel co∣loured, hauinge a good proportion with the meane naturall line, and the line of the liuer or stomacke, and that they two be of due quantity and length, and well coloured: it is a good signe of long life, good nature, wit, disposition, and com∣plexion.
And oftentimes there be found in the line of life one ☉ or ☉ ☉ of these notes, which do signify the losse either of one, or bothe eyes, the whiche although they be seldome found, yet in my selfe I haue had the experience, for in the same place of my hand is the same marke, the which whē I saw, I cald to remēbrance in what daunger I was of one of my eyes, for sitting by the fire in winter, I fell therein, and tumblinge in the flame with my left eye, I was vehemently tor¦mented. Albeit I find that not only that did prognosticate that euel vnto me, but also the opposition of Mars, & the Mone in my natiuity. For I finde at the tyme of my birth, Mars to be in the eleuenthe house in a manlye signe, and the Mone likewise in the fyfthe house, whiche con∣stellatiō, is obserued of the Astronomers to signifye some suche thynge. And in so muche as I haue found this true it doth so muche the more verify that whyche I sayd afore, that these artes were ioyned together, as it were by a certaine aly∣aunce, or affinitie, and that thone wyth∣out
thother could very litle preuail. For it is most certaine, the inferior bodyes to be gouerned by them aboue, and as all power and strength haue their influence from those heauenly bodies: so like wise al lack and default to come by them, it is most sure. Wherfore we may wel consi∣der, that nature was a careful workman about the creation of mans body, which hath geuen knowledge to man diuersiy and manifoldly, to iudge by these three most noble and principal partes. In the other partes, she hathe not so done. For she hath set in the hand of mā certain signes and tokens of the heart, braine, and liuer, because that in them the life of man doth chiefly consist. But she hathe not likewise done of the eyes, eares, mouthe, handes, and fete, for be∣cause those partes and members of the body, seme rather to be made for a come∣linesse or beautye to the bodye, then for anye necessitye. Therefore all handes haue the thre lynes aforesayde, but the other incisions or lynes manye do wante or lacke. Husbandmen beinge
also excluded frō hence for their continu∣al labour. Wherefore, sithens these two sciences nede such a mutual help, one of the other: I wil declare vnto you oute of astrologye, the nature of the Erratical signes, whiche the Crekes cal Planets. Saturnus maketh sad, circumspect, coue∣tous, slow, and litle speakers, and self lo∣uers. Iupiter causeth pleasaunt, liberal, quiet, sobre. and eloquent persons, Con∣trariwise, Mars causeth cruel, fiers, and liers. The Sonne maketh godly, wittye, happy, or fortunate, and coragious mē. Venus causeth incontinent, libidinouse, comely & faire. Mercury causeth subtile, craftye, learned in sciences, and nimble men. The Mone maketh quicke witted, and comly, but vnstable and slow. Now I haue spoken of the diuersitie of dispo∣sitiōs and wits: I wil also shewe some∣what of voice, and speche, wherby the di∣uers effectes and workinge of the Pla∣nettes amongest them selfes, maye the better be vnderstand and knowen. Satur¦nus doth cause a slow and scriking voice or speche, Mars a crashing voice, like the
breaking of metals. Iupiter, a shril, soun∣ding, and gentle voice. Venus maketh a weake, soft, pleasant, & effeminate voice. And so likewise doth the Sunne, & Mer∣cury, The signes also haue their proper voices, for Virgo, Gemini, Libra, Aqua∣rius, do make good voices or soundes. A∣ries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorne, and the last part of Sagittary, cause meane voy∣ces. Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, are ey∣ther altogither dombe, & without sound: or els minister som great impedimēt in yt speche, Ther be also certain signes, cal¦led fertile, because they do increase with Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces. And others be called barraine. as Gemini, Leo, Capri∣corne. So that what so euer a man can do, may be applied to the signes, as fur∣derers of the same. The which thing in that it canne not be denied, so muche the more are they to be counted slaūderers, which esteme & report Astrologye not as deuine, but as a vaine friuolous arte, or knowledge, whō in their places we wil set forth with their colours. But nowe to returne to our purpose.
chiromantic diagram
If you find a crosse in this fort about the vpper corner, procedinge oute of the line of life, and on the nether side, three smal lines, and on thupper side two, as you may se by this figure, it signifieth a libidinouse and an vnshamfast woman. But if the thre lines be found in the ne∣ther ende of the line of lyfe towarde the wrest, it betokeneth that the woman shall suffer greuous punishment for some mischief, or cuel doinge.
chiromantic diagram
When that certain smal lines do de∣uide or touche the line of life in the vp∣per ende, in forme prescribed: it dothe de∣clare the infirmitie and sicknes of yt bo∣dy. But if on thother parte of the meane natural line, there be incisions in this manner, liynge as it were direcily from the nether parte of the line, and risinge vpwarde: it betokeneth cuel, as paine in the heade, whiche commeth of exhalati∣ons of the stomacke, or some suche other disease. And those thre lines on thend of that line, do betoken euel, as shal appere hereafter. ❧ The third Chapter, of the meane naturall line. THe line whiche beginneth at the roote of the line of life, and pas∣seth through the Palme of the hande, towarde the hyll of the Moone, or pommel of the hande: is pro∣perli called the meane natural line. The whiche if it be straite, and vndeuided
with ani smal ouerthwart lines, it shew∣eth good health, a sound brayn, a quicke & liuely wit, and also a good memorye. If it be long, stretched oute to the hill of the mone, it doth declare a stout stomack and long life, which if it be shorte, that it passe not the holownes of the hand: it be¦tokeneth a feareful, couetous, vnwise, & vnfaithful man, and if the saide line do not stretch out to the hill of the Moone, but end euer against the space, which is betwene the middle finger, and the ring finger: it betokeneth a mā of il maners, and that shal not liue long. Then if the same line run out beyond the hill of the Mone, and turne in again in forme of a halfe compasse: the farther it stretcheth, the longer life it betokeneth, but in age pouerty. But if the same line at the vp∣per end do rise toward the fingers, it sig¦nifieth an vnshamefaste and malicious man, the which if it rise verye muche to∣ward the fingers, it doth declare him to be verye folyshe, and vnwise. Contrari∣wise, if it tourne down warde almoste to the palme of the hand, it is a token of a
couetous and vncleane man. On the o∣ther part, if it turne vpwarde, touch the table line: it signifieth some great osse, and aduerse or euell fortune: and if the same line be writhen, vnequal, and of di∣uers coulours: it is a token of an il dis∣posed mind, and oftentimes of theft. The line being straite, equal, and bright co∣loured: betokeneth a good consciēce, and iustice. But when the meane naturall line is brode and grosse, with a certaine rednesse intermedled: it signifieth a rude disposicion and lacke of wit. And if it be nether to straight, nor to large, and wel coloured: it betokeneth a mery, chereful, and a fortunate man, but if it be subtile, and slender, swarte, or pale: it declareth weaknes of the braine, and vapores ri∣sing from the stomacke into the heade. And if the line appere grosse, & very depe & hath a certaine smal line nere to it, red coloured: it sheweth an angry and fury∣ous man. Again if it haue certain knot∣ty spaces in this maner o, so many knots as there be, it doth declare so many mur∣ders, ether al ready cōmitted, or hereafter
to be done. The which knottes if they be not fully closed or shutte, they are a tokē of a great quareller, whiche shal beate & wounde, but not kill outright. If there be in the same line certain grosse pricks, or pointes: it sheweth an vnmanerly, fo∣lish, and vnpleasant manne, the whiche pointes if they be verye redde: it betoke∣neth a very cruel and fierce man. If the same line be croked, makyng halfe a cir∣cle, with a certaine obscure or darke co∣loure: it signifieth daunger by foure fo∣ted beast, or els to be slain of wild beast. And oftentimes, nye the same line there be two smal lines ioyned together (as in the figure of the hande folowynge you shal see) which signifie wounds, but not with weapon. More ouer, if there be a crosse in the same line, ouer againste the middle finger: it betokeneth that the man shal dye within a yere. If any man haue this line forked toward the wrest, with smal diuisions: he semeth to set al his minde on mischiefe, and neither to feare God nor man.
chiromantic diagram Linae media naturalis
This figure of the hande here descri∣bed with the meane natural line, begin∣ning at the rote of the line of life, & pas∣sing directly through the middest of the hand, withoute any incisions: signifieth the good state of the body, and health of the braine. And when it maketh a sharp corner, with the line of life: it declareth a quickenesse of memorye, and vpright∣nes of minde. But if it be (as is rehersed in the cannon before) vnequal, not stret∣ching past the pit or caue of the hand: it betokeneth a fearfull, coue∣tous, and a forgetfull persone.
chiromantic diagram L. mēsal L. naturalis
If the meane naturall line aboue fi∣gured, make as it were a halfe Circle, with a certain obscure colour: it threate∣neth hurte by beastes, and oftentymes death. But if at the ende of this line on eche side do appeare two small lines: it signifieth woundes by Weapons. If there appere ouer against the middle fin∣ger a little Crosse deuided with small lines, it doth demonstrate the weakenes of the bodye, and breuitie of life: and so muche the rather if the square or quadrangle be lackyng in the hand.
chiromantic diagram
If the hande before portured, haue in the meane naturall line certaine pale knottes: howe manye knottes there be, so many murders it doth declare alredy committed: if they be red, they do pro∣nounce the persone to be hereafter bothe a murderer and thiefe. If there be croked incisions in the said natural line: I iudge him to be a verye vnhappye and vnfor∣tunate manne. And by the crosse there, I suppose him to be ful of strife and debate, and desirous of discord.
chiromantic diagram
When this meane natural line stret∣cheth to the table line, and is croked in the ende in forme prescribed: it decla∣reth a noughty euil tonged man, a shea∣der of bloud, and shall often be in daun∣ger for the same, & at the lengthe perad∣uenture suffer condigne punishment. If the same line haue priuy incisiōs: it doth denounce a proude, bablyng, and angrye man. But if there be a crosse in the vp∣per corner, right against the risyng or hil of the thombe: it sheweth an honest mā, and apt and disposed to all kinde of goodnesse, and so likewise on the contrary. The fourth Chapter of the table line. THis line is called the table line, be∣cause it maketh the fashion of a table in the hande, for so wee do call the space remainynge betwene it and the meane naturall line. It is also called the qua∣drāgle or square line, because that wyth
the mean natural line, it maketh almost a quadrangle or square. If this lyne be equal, long inoughe, depe, and straite: it is a token of a good nature and strength of the principal membres of man, of mo∣desty, temperance, and a constant minde in al good workes. If it stretche past the hill of the forefinger, and touch the hyll of Iupiter: it is a signe of vehement an∣ger and crueltie, beinge redde aboue, is a signe of a promoter, and enuiynge an∣other mans felicitie or welfare. And ha∣uynge braunches risynge straite to the finger of Iupiter: it dothe promisse pro∣mocion, encrease of riches: and that be∣inge poore, shal come by little and little to honoure and worshippe. But if the line be naked without anye braunches stretchyng toward the roote of the fore∣finger: it betokeneth an vnfortunat and poore manne. If it haue in the end three smal lines or braunches aboute the hyll of Iupiter, runnynge straite forthe to the vpper corner: it signifieth a fortu∣nate, liberall, merye, modest, and noble manne, whiche deliteth in all kinde of
comely and cleanlye apparel, and swets smelles and sauoures. In whose byrthe who doth consider the Horoscope, (whe∣ther he finde Taurus or Libra, whome Venus dothe rule: or Sagittarius & Pisces, vpon whome Iupiter hath dominion: or what planet els there be) shal easily per∣ceiue and finde the cause and reason of this matter: a crosse stāding in the same place, doth signify a liberal man, a louer of truth, benigne, gentle to be spoken to, and in a maner one indued wyth al kind of vertue. But if this line do finishe or ende ouer againste the hil of the middle finger: it betokeneth a lier, a selfe louer, inconstante, disceitful, vnshamfast man, and a sower of strife and debate. When this line is ioyned with the mean natu∣ral, so that they both make a sharpe cor∣ner: the same man shalbe in many daū∣gers bothe of bodye and minde, that he shall be euen wearye of his life. And if he lacke the meane natural line, that the table line ioyninge to the line of life do make a sharp corner or point, I iudge that that manne shall lose hys heade, or
bee deadlye wounded, and shall neuer bringe nothinge to passe. If this line be deuided, that one part loke towarde the meane natural, thother towarde the hil of Saturne: it is a token that he shall be often in daunger of his life, and yet es∣cape. The same line beinge subtile and straite at the ende vnder the hil of Iupi∣ter: it signifieth a gouernor of houshold: and promotiō or rule ouer his brethren, kindred, and equalles. If it hathe incisi∣ons ouer againste the middle finger: it betokeneth a flatterer, and a double ton∣ged manne, whome fewe menne shall loue. If a line comminge directlye from the quadrangle to the hil of Saturne, de∣uidinge the table line, do make a little crosse there: it threateneth violent death. For as this line is a token of greate fe∣licitie and good fortune, if it passe by the hill of the middle finger, and stretche be∣yonde the hill of the forefinger: so like∣wise, not touchinge the middle finger, and endinge vnder the hil thereof, is a signe of extreme pouerty, and many ca∣lamities and daungers.
Thē this line hauing any interruptiōs or incisions liyng scattered, it signifieth a folish, and an vnconstant man, whose study or desire is to be in contētion with women, as now to loue, now to hate, & oftentimes to chide & fighte with them. And this line being depe, subtile, & pale, at the end aforesaid: declareth an honest chaste man, but weake, & much troubled with sicknesse and diseases. But it is an ill signe, and specially in a woman, whē the line beginninge at the meane natu∣ral, going to the hil of the middle finger, doth both deuide the table, and the table line, and is forked in the ende. And that woman whiche hathe a line comminge from the line of life, to the hil aforsaide: it signifieth that woman to haue killed her owne childe. The whiche line if it turne backeward to the hil of Iupiter: it betokeneth that woman shal haue great inheritaunce, if that line be redder then the other: it betokeneth pain in the bow∣els, & knawing about the nauel. Again, if that line be double, cuttinge the table line: it sheweth that the man shal dye a
miserable death. For bothe in man and woman, it is a tokē of an il end. And of∣ten the table line towarde the hill of Sa∣turne or Iupiter, is sene forked: whiche doth note the man shal suffer many we∣ry laboures and trauailes in his life, the whiche the redder it is, it sheweth him ye more inclined to anger. When there ap∣peareth in the same line, certaine small lines risinge one by another: the more there be, the more honorable thei declare him to be, & to haue the greater power and rule. But in whose hande there is no table line at all, I coniecture them to be of both kinds, il willing, contentious, angry, vnfaithful, vnconstant, & ready to al mischief. More ouer, if there appeare a line, cōming from the table line toward the little finger, it is obserued, that man neither to be good nor fortunate: but co∣uetous, angry, and horribly sad, and al∣so filthie, enuioue, and a companion of mischief, if there apere any lines red, be∣twene the table line, & the eare finger: it betokeneth so many mariages as thei be in nomber, but if they be croked and
pale, thei be already past. Again, if there be found vnder the roote of the table line certaine croked crosses, so many as there bee, so many deadly enemies do they be∣token. When that a line comming from the table to the hyl of Saturne, deuide the table line, and make a crosse on the ende therof: it is saide to be a token of a vio∣lent death. And certaine wise menne in this science saie, that if there be small in∣cisions about the vpper end of the same line: it betokeneth sickenes in youth. If they be in the middest, in middle age: if at the other ende, in age: and if the same lines runne downeward, the discase shal be of cholore, if they ascend, of fleume: if they rise out of the midst vpward, it shal be of bloude: and if contrariwise thei turne downewarde, it shall be of melan∣cholye, after as his coloure is brighte or darcke. Here is to be vnderstande, that Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, do rule the salt fleume, and Saturne causeth all dis∣eases that come of a viscouse or slimye fleume, as the morphew, leprosy, canker & goute. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorne,
are of like nature, colde, and drye, and rule the melancoly. And therfore Venus dothe cause colde and moiste diseases in the throte and priuy membres. Likewise the Moone causeth the dropsye, fallynge sickenes, and appopleri. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, haue dominion of the cholere & agues, and biles, which come of bloud. Likewise Mars dothe rule hote agues, fronsies, and the worme in the head: vn∣to Iupiter we attribute the cōbust bloud, vnto Mercury is applied the diseases of the minde, bitter, and heauy thoughtes, & troubled conscience. The Sonne brin∣geth hote & drye diseases. Al which thin∣ges shal appeare more plaine hereafter, wher the nature of the planets & signes shalbe spokē of, wherfore note always yt the rednesse of the lines or incisiōs come of the heat of Mars. Therefore in all the iudgements of this manuel diuinatiō, I wil you to haue respect to the nature of yt planets & signes, wherin the sunne was the time of natiuity or birth. And so like∣wise the Phisiognomy must be taken hede of, & by that meane the wise iudge shal get both profite & praise.
chiromantic diagram L. mēsal
If there be founde in the line of for∣tune (called also the line of prosperitie) thre smal braunches and be ioyned with the line of life, and therwith deuide the wreast: it betokeneth a good and quicke witte, but if it ioyne to those lines, as it is here described, with a certaine wri∣thinge or crokednesse: it signifieth an euel, peruerse, wicked, and a malitious slaunderer, and one whiche coueteth al∣waie to shede bloude. For when so euer you shal see these maner of lines, straite remember and haue re∣course to the nature of Mars.
chiromantic diagram L. mensalis.
The table line thus disposed that it begin and ende in his due places, do de∣clare the good state of the body, & strēgth of the members of generation. But con∣trariwise, if there be no table line at all, or that it be withoute braunches shorte and grosse, stretchinge oute beyonde the hill of the forefinger: it signifieth a mischeuous persone, and hard of learninge or vnder∣standinge.
chiromantic diagram
¶ These three Braunches in the ende about the hyll of the forefinger, a∣gaynste the vpper corner: is a good sygne bothe in manne and woman. Also a little Crosse in the same place, betokeneth good likewyse. If the saide table line haue manye incisions: it sig∣nifieth hatred of Princes, and of greate menne: but if the incisions be vnequall and dispersed, you shall vnder∣stande the varietye of Fortune.
chiromantic diagram
If that the table line be lackinge in the hande of manne or woman: it is a verye euill signe. For it sheweth a man prompte to all mischiefe, which also shal die an euil death. There must also be re∣spect to the lines aboute the hill of Mer∣cury, for there is the signes of ma∣riage, and the iudgemente of suche thinges as pertaine to the planet of Mercury.
chiromantic diagram
Againe, if the table lyne do through∣lye touche the natural line, that it make a sharpe angle as you maye see: it beto∣keneth ill, for so many perils shal hange ouer his heade, that he maye iustelye re∣pent that euer he was borne. But if the naturall line be lackynge, and the table line touch the line of the heart: (except I be vtterlye disceiued) that man shall lose his head, or dye some yll death. When a certaine line (as here you may see) doths deuide the table line, and make a smal crosse in the vpper ende: it doth betoken a violent death. The which line, if it rise straite vpright in the hand of a woman, and deuide the table line: it is an euil to∣ken, for the whiche seke the cannon or rule afore. If there be a smal crosse in the end of the table line: it betokeneth spiri∣tual dignities, and the rather, if there be two crosses (as I haue often pro∣ued:) it signifieth ecclesiastical promotions.
❧ The fifth Chapter of the wrest. THe space which as is aforesaid ap∣pering in the ioyning of ye hand to the arme, is called the wreaste, the whiche if it be pure, and of a good liuely colour: it declareth the good estate of the body, and cōtrariwise the euil. And note, that for the most part there be two lines which as it wer deuide ye hand frō the arme. If there be two lines, then if that next the hande be equal, straite, and wel coloured, stretching vpwarde: it pro∣miseth riches, yea, although he be very pore, it promiseth encrease and felicitie, and so much the rather, if there be strait braūches and not ouerthwart. If that a line rising at the rote of the arm, do run vp to the rote of the middle finger: it sig∣nifieth good successe and prosperous for∣tune. But if ther be in the space or ioynt foure equal lines wel ioyned, deuidinge the arme ouerthwart, beholde great ho∣nor and dignitie, succession, and heritage of thy kinred. And if there be founde in
the rote of the arme, neare the hil of the thombe, nigh the line of life (if it descend so lowe) thre lines or starres or more: it signifieth that persone to be accused and betraied by women, and to suffre slaun∣der bi them. Further, if a line beginning in the midle of the wrest, go toward the hil of the Mone: it doth pronosticate ma∣ny stormes and troubles of fortune, and priuy enmitie and hatred. The whiche line if it be croked & vnequal: it is a to∣ken of continual bondage, and that that person shal neuer come to promotiō nor riches. If there be many lines scatred in the wrest, & rise to the hill of the thōbe: he that hath that signe, is in daunger to be afflicted, wounded, spoiled, or caste in prison by his kinred, or by those whō he most loued. If there begin certaine lines in the arme, and deuide the wreaste, and ioyne together in the vpper parie: that man without doubte, shal die in exile or banishment. The which lines if they do not fully close, but be somwhat distant a sonder: he shal end his life amongst for∣rein nations, far from his own country.
The same lines tendynge to the pomell of the hande, do for shew long nauigati∣ons and iourneyes by sea, & an vnstable life to be spent in such sea perigrinatiōs. Further, if there go a line directly frō ye wreste, to the hyl of the forefinger: it sig∣nifieth a longe iourney, and a difficult or doubtful returne. Also, if there rise a line at the wrest, and runne into the caue of the hande, and be very redde: it declareth the weakenes and diseases of the bodye to come. But if it be pale: they be al rea∣dye past, & no more to be feared. If there be founde in the hande of a womanne a triangle, tendyng from the wreste to the hyl of the Moone: it sheweth her to haue ben corrupt, defiled, and defloured in her first youth and floure of her age. Moreo∣uer, if there be about the wrest of a wo∣man a little crosse: I iudge her thereby both honest, wise, and chaste. Behold the the signes of the good estate of the body, when the space in the wrest next the hād at the other next the ioynte of the arme, be both of good & liuely colour, hauynge the foure incisions aforesaide: it betoke∣neth
al goodnesse. Againe, howe hateful are the three Starres, whiche threaten daunger by accusation and slaunder. Marke also going from the wrest to the pomel of the hand, how manifest an ar∣gument of infelicitie and euil fortune it is. Thē that cōming from the wrest to ye hil of Iupiter, how it signifieth a forain, & far distant life to be led. Another rising vpright, dothe promisse riches & fauora∣ble fortune. Moreouer, the signes which are in the hil of Iupiter: betoken riches, honor, & dignitie. Also four lines almost cōpassing the arm (as you may se in the hand folowing,) are tokens of long life, and certain lines going from the rote of the arme, making a sharp angle or cor∣ner, and a smal crosse by thē: do promisse greate quietnesse of life, and to passe his time merilye with promotion. But the crosse be away: it doth only promisse suc∣cession and heritage of manye. If the crosse or certaine litle starres be there: that man shal lacke nothing necessary to his life.
chiromantic diagram
If there be founde in the wreste two large lines, and the nether line be subtil: it signifieth riches vntil the midle age, and after worship, but decrease & decay euerye day more and more. If there rise out of the same lines two smal lines, as it were supporting and holdinge vp one another, and certaine other lines rise vp directly through the palme to the natu∣ral line: it is a token of great integritie, and declareth that man to be of a good conscience, the which through his beha∣uiour shal come to great riches and pro∣speritie, and also come to a good end: but yet it will be the lenger or theese thinges happen, if the line as∣cendinge be croked and writhen.
chiromantic diagram
If that two lines beginninge at the wreaste, do rise throughe the Paime to the hil of the Sunne or ringe finger, and the same hil be deuided with two lines ouerthwart: it signifieth a compasser or doer of greate thinges, which shal haue rule and aucthoritie in kinges businesse and af∣fairs, and therby get both great honor and richesse.
chiromantic diagram
If in the wrest there be sene a certain grose line, and then an other subtiller and slenderer, and the thirde grosser and deper then the other: it preposeth abun∣dance of richesse in the first age or youth, infelicitie & pouertie at the middle age: and in the thirde and last age, recouerys of al before loste, with increase of riches, and a quiet life vnto the laste ende. If there be two croked lines ascendyng to the hyll of Iupiter, and vppon the first ioynte of the same appere two lines go∣ing ouerthwart: it signifieth increase of substaunce, by longe iourneys and tra∣uailes. The same lines goynge to the hyll of Mercury: betokeneth a man apte to manye thinges, but not fortunate to great richesse. But if they runne to the finger of Saturne: there can be no worse signe, for he will al couetousnesse, and immoderate desire, enuye, and disdaine at an other mannes felicitie and welfare, and a minde geuen to al euil.
chiromantic diagram
The sixte Chapiter of the Triangle. THe triangle in the hande is three lines, (that is to sae) the line of life, the meane natural line, and the line of the liuer or stomack: which are so dispo∣sed and set, that they make the forme of a triāgle. And the space inclosed within those lines, is deuided into thre partes or corners: wherof the firste is made by the line of life, and the natural line, and is called the vpper angle. Thother which is formed by the line of life, and the vt∣ter part of the triangle: is called the sini∣ster or lifte angle. The triangle being of equal angles, hauinge lines faire, wel coloured, and straite: doth represent the good qualitie of nature, and of the bo∣die, wyth healthe and securitye of the minde, with fame and renoume, and al∣so longe lyfe. And contrariwise, the lines beinge darcke, vnequal, no ma∣kinge a playne triangle: dothe derlare the contrarye. Further, if the space of the Triangle bee wide and broade,
it doth argue a stoute, liberal, and bold stomacke. Againe, if it be strait & shorte, it betokeneth nigardy, couetousnes, and fearfulnes. If the plain within be pale, declininge to swarthnesse: it signifieth an angry and disceitful persone. Also, if it be cut and deuided with many wrin∣kels: it she weth the ill disposicion of the body. Moreouer, the vpper angle is clo∣sed by the line of lyfe, and the natural line thre maner of waies: first of al, if it close in the caue of the hād ouer against the valley: betwene the forefinger and the middle finger: we iudge thereby a miserable life, endaungered with cala∣mities and captiuitie, and a minde ful of anxietie and care, and oftentimes as it were drowned and ouercome, and speci∣ally for the desire of mony. Secondlye, if it be wel closed with a sharpe corner vn∣der the midst of the hil of the forefinger: it declareth a good nature, a quick wit, and good disposition, happy and prospe∣rous successe, with integrite of maners. And all these thinges are so muche the perfecter if the angle be wel and sharply
closed. Thirdly, the lines not ioyning to¦gether, but hauinge a certaine space left betwene: is an argumente of an ambi∣tious man, a selfe louer, vnpure, and vn∣mannerly, a slaunderer, and cruel, a lier, & liuing withoute praise or good name. The whiche man if he happen to come in captiuitie or bondage: he shall neuer recouer againe his libertye. And if he be fre, yet he shal die miserablye. The space within the triangle roughe and harde: is a signe of anger, and crafte, and subtili∣tie, if it be roughe with wrinkles: it sig∣nifieth enuy, hatred, & slaunders. When there doth appere a certain line betwene the two lines so nere, that it touch either of thē: it signifieth that man shal either be poisoned, or haue some mortal woūd. When there appeare in the vpper space foure lines deuidinge one another like crosses: it sheweth enuie, backebitinge, with studye and desire to oppresse o∣thers. For the two lines ioyning sharp∣lye together, dothe declare the goodnesse of the hole body, but if they ende in the caue or pitte of the hande precisely ouer
againste the finger of Saturne, makinge an angle: it betokeneth bloudsheadinge diuerse and sondry waies: as woundes of the head, fluxe of the belly, and if this signe be in women it signifieth the in∣cessant fluxe of the menstrue, and daun∣ger in childbearinge. If there be in the triangle a figure like a starre: it shew∣eth and aduoutrous woman, & past shame and furious, which throughe her irrefre∣nable anger, shal fal into suche a frensye and madnesse of minde, that she shal co∣uet and go about to cut her own throte. When so euer you perceiue in the hand of a woman in the place aforesaid, a cer∣taine starre puttinge forthe a long role: iudge that womā to haue four husbāds. If in the same space ther be a crosse with out any incision: it betokeneth good both in man & woman. For in those whiche haue that signe, it betokeneth a life wel passed, and to ende with good name and fame. The right angle being veri sharp, doth shewe a circumspect, witty, and spa∣ring man: the same beinge obscure and grosse: is a signe of rudenesse, slouth, and
much geuē to slep. The left angle sharp, betokeneth a babler and crafty man, not withstanding witty and painful: but if the vpper corne be not sharpe, and ha∣uinge as it were the caacter of Saturn: it is a token of an euel and plaine Satur∣nine nature. And he whose fingers are so set, that there be in euerye oynte as it were certaine spaces or risinges croked and vnequal: it betokeneth him to be∣come very pore, & to liue miserablye. If there be in the vpper parte that is in the third ioynt, an euident writhing or cro∣kednesse: it is a signe of enuye, disceite, malice, and altogether of an euel disposed minde, which man also shal leade a life ful of mise∣ry and calamitie.
chiromantic diagram
The Triangle bothe in the hande of man and woman, dothe signifie muche goodnesse. But if there be founde in the hande of a woman within the triangle, the similitude of a starre: it betokeneth an vnchaste woman, and geuen ouer to the lust of the fleshe. Also, in a manne it is a signe of euill. Further, if there be in the hande of a manne abouie the right angle, an expresse playne starre: it dothe plainly declare an vntrusty, troublesome disceitfull, and slaunderous persone: Also a thiefe and robber, doinge al thing be it right or wronge, by violence, in∣clined & also instructed in al euil, who at the length shal dye an euil death. Smal braunches in the beginnyng of the line of lyfe, or table line: dothe betoken abounn∣dance and encrease of houshold.
chiromantic diagram
chiromantic diagram
If a starre hauinge a longe stalke or braunch going from it, be founde in the hande of a woman: it do the declare that she shal haue many husbandes, as often as the two lines of the vpper corner be distante a sunder with a space betwene them, it is an euil signe. Also, foure lines deuidinge them selues in the vpper cor∣ner in maner of a crosse: do demonstrate an enuious detractor, and a man of euel fame and name. Thē a figure as it wer the caracter of Saturne, dothe pronounce an euel end: the table line also fashioned as you may se, doth betoken an infortu∣nate man, and geuē to the belly, if there be the figure of a forke either vpward or downward in the said triangle: it shew∣eth an inconstant and libidinous man. The seuenth Chapter of the Quadrangle. THe quadrangle is called that space which is betwene yt line & the meane naturall. Then if the incisions of thys quadrangle be of a bright and liuely co∣loure,
it dothe promisse the equitie and vprightnesse of life: and contrariwise, it doth declare a wicked & naughtye man. The same space ample, & large: betoke∣neth liberalitie and stounes of stomack. A crosse also in yt same place of the hād, signifieth good successe in ecclesiastical ministrations, and is so muche the more fortunate, if the figure be doubled or tri∣pled like vnto a lattise: but if the same crosse be croked or vndeuided with ouer∣thwart incisions, it doth pronosticate the contrary to al that is aforesaide. Moreo∣uer, an euident starre in the same place, dothe demonstrate a stoute manne, vp∣righte, true, and of a good conscience. The whiche manne although throughe aduersitie and misfortune he fal into po∣uertie, yet he shal rise againe by his own vertue and goodnes: Yet notwithstan∣ding, it sheweth him to be a femi∣nine man, which also shal suf∣fer some aduersitie and trouble for women.
chiromantic diagram
Oftentimes also the hole table is lac∣king: then if the table line ioyne with the natural line, and beginne a triangle: it sheweth that man to be in daūger to be slaine by many that shal lye in wait for him. But if in the end of the table about the pommel of the hande there be a ma∣nifest crosse: iudge therby many perigri∣nations, longe iourneis, and often chaū∣ging of place, but therby good fortune. When the two lines whiche make the table be far distant, with a greate space betwene them: it is a token of superflu∣ous heate, and vntemperate humoures in the body. Contrariwise, the plaine or table of the hande beinge narowe and straight: betokeneth a couetous mā, care∣ful to get goodes, and therwithal dead∣lye cruell. And this is sufficientlye spo∣ken of the principall incisions or lines whiche are within the hande. And con∣sequentlye wee will intreate of the ri∣singes or hilles of the fingers, and also of the fingers them selues, with the sta∣tions of the planettes, and what so euer els shal remain nedeful to be spoken of.
You haue heard before declared what these characters, lines, & crosses in the ta∣ble of yt hād, do signifie & foreshew. The starre also in the middest of the Table, doth shew a louer, and mainteyner of all honestie & goodnesse, and therfore had in reuerence, & aspiringe to great dignitie. And let this be a general rule, for al those whose handes doe quiuer and shake by nature, (for vnto many it happeneth by chaunce, and to other some by sicknesse and diseases,) to iudge them as angrye, scolders, and braulers, vnclene men, and dronkerds. ❧ The .viii. Chapter of the hilles of the fingers, and first of the hill of the thombe, called also amongst aunciēt writers, the hill of Venus. NOwe that there is sufficientlye en∣treated of the principall lines of the hande: we will also write of the parti∣culer incisiōs of the fingers, and of their hilles: laiyng before your eyes their sig∣nificatiōs,
with the natures of the seue planets, wherby you may know what is agreable among them, and contrariwise what doth hurt. The rising or swellyng of the flesh, beginnyng at the line of life, descēdyng straite to the wrest is called ye hill of the thōb: it is also called the hil of Venus, because it is soft and plain with very few or no wrinkcles or incisions, & being ruddy and liuely coloured: it shew¦eth the good quality & estate of the body, also a louer of women, & one delityng in cleanely and fine appare. But if there appere in the same place a certaine short line going down ward by the line of life, (& therfore called the sister of the line of life:) it signifieth a man delitynge in ve∣nerye. Notwithstanding, the same line being long, not broken of, wholy accom∣paniyng ye line of life thorow: doth pro∣misse continual richesse. But if it begin not in the vpper ende of the hill, but per∣aduēture in the midst, or not farre from the nether ende: it betokeneth lacke and penury in youth, but after abundaunce & plenty. Often also there be foure lines
equally distant, cōminge from the top of the hil to the wrest, whiche do promesse richesse and honoure euen in the firste age, the which lines if they begin not at the verie, top but at the ioynt of ye thōbe: they do promisse the same successe, but lōger and latter to come to passe, euen in the extreme age. If the same foure lines do deuide the vpper ioynt of the thombe a litle within the naile, or be very neare the same ioynt, and be long, brighte shi∣ning: they betoke present honour and ri∣ches. And also ruie and dominion if the same foure lines be deuided or cut, with other smal lines going ouerthwart. Ma∣ny times there is a subtile incsiō begin∣ning at the top of the hil of the thombe, going toward the line of life: which sig∣nifieth that man shal die by some stroke of weapon. Also, many brighte lines ri∣singe ouer againste the fore finger, and deuidinge the line of life, are tokens of manye perigrinations and longe ioure∣neis into diuers places. The same lines deuiding the line of life in ye vpper part or beginninge: sheweth a boaster and
an ambitious manne, riotous, and denē∣rous. In some also a red line wandringe vp and downe the hil of the thombe: be∣tokeneth incest, and carnal companye with his kinred. Albeit, I wold not haue suche credite geuen to this science, that this shoulde straite be iudged true, the hande beinge loked vppon, for when we speake of accompaniynge with kinred, we woulde haue it vnderstande that man to be so enflamed with fleshly luste and appetite, that there is but little hope that he wil abstain from them. To the whiche thinge it behoueth muche to be∣hold the face and hole bodye of the man, whiche dothe declare the state of life to come. For they which be pleasaunt ma∣nered, leadinge a mery and ioconde life, beinge conuersaunte and reioysinge in plaies and daunses, haue smal starres in their hil, for this is the whole studye of Venus: and suche menne haue theyr hil commonlye deuided with many smal and brighte incisions, whome if you do wel behold, you shal see his face wel co∣loured, his body decently cōpact, his eyes
blacke and cleare, a pleasaunte counte∣naunce & honest gesture, and altogether enerous, and therefore wanton, rio∣tous, lecherous, delitinge in dise playe, daunsing, and other pastimes, hauinge pleasure in flours, roses, and swete smels costly apparel, desirous of golde and sil∣uer, often laughing, conuersant amōgst women, desirous and apte to learne all sciences of this sort and nature, and of a dul wit and vnderstanding to lerne any other thing. Also light of belief, easye to be deceiued, liberal, gentle, iust & faithful, deliting in painted tables & pictures, & al so desirous to learn to paint him self, ha∣uing good fortune in al thinges of that sort, in the contraries not so fortunate: Whose life shalbe pleasaunt with mean substance, not couetous of lucre & gain, beloued of manye, geuen to all kinde of pleasure, not easilye moued with anger, not careful about hard & doutful busines, but content with his present estate, set∣ting al anxiety & trouble of minde apart, & so liuing to his last end. For likewise as in this, so in all other is the nature of
man to be considered, aswel by the habit and proportion of the body, as by loking in the hand, wherfore that which is here expressed, let it be an example to be fol∣lowed in al others. Further, they which haue the hil of the thombe deuided with many smal wrinkles not equally distāt, but scattering and out of order: are to be counted fleshli, vnpure, froward, & braw∣ling, delitinge to be in contention with women, burninge so much in lust that they be neuer satisfied but seke straunge and vnaccustomed kindes of vse like vn∣to monsters & beastes, howe be it they be of an vnplesant conuersation & life, deli∣ting in no kind of wisdō or learning, ne∣ther profiting any thing at al therin, but very apt to learne al handye craftes, and to deuise and inuente al thinges pertai∣ning vnto riot. The cause of this I as∣signe to Venus beinge in the .vi. or .viii. house in the birth of such men. Wherby you may perceiue how Astrology & Chi∣romācy do mutually embrase thone tho∣ther, so that one without thother can not wel be vnderstand, as shalbe shewed hereafter more at large.
chiromantic diagram Venus.
If there be about the first ioynt of the thombe a creste like a ring going round about, and deuiding the thombe: many do stifly iudge and say that that manne shalbe hanged. The which thing I haue proued true in one man, but because I haue sene many hanged which haue lac∣ked that marke, I leaue it as vncertain. Also thre or foure incisions in breadth vnder the first ioynt: betokeneth richesse and honor in youth, if they be aboue that ioynt, it shalbe in the middle age, but if the same incisions be neare the seconde ioynt: it signifieth the same effecte, but in the extreame or laste age. If any wo∣manne haue her thombe so marked (as is described in the second figure) I iudge her to be eschewed and auoided, as craf∣tye and noughte. Also this marke ☉ in the midst of the hil of Venus: signifieth a libidinous, euel mannered, & an aduou∣trous womā, willingly putting forth her selfe to hordome & vice, wonderful vntē∣perate, & vnsaiable in copulation. Fur∣der, what maried womā hath thre lines
somwhat vnequally distant, deuidinge the first ioynte of the thombe: it sheweth her to be in daūger either of death, or of a wounde by her owne husbande. More uer, many smal crosses vnder the second ioynt, declareth a verye holy woman, ge∣uen to religion. Againe, onelye two of those markes dothe signifye an vnfaith∣ful babbler, and a woman full of strife and discord. Also many smal braunches in the same place dothe betoken a wan∣ton women, and one sone ripe. ❧ The .ix. Chapiter of the hil of the forefinger, and of the finger, with the nature of the Iouialles. IVpiter the most benificial planet of al, hath his place in the hil whiche is vn∣der the forefinger, the whiche hil beinge plaine and smoth, dothe shewe vnto the honesty of life and goodnes of nature. And so muche the rather, if there be cer∣taine smal darke riules going out from the same finger, the whiche if they be
not farre distant: it betokeneth honoure and dignity by princes. And some being bolder, do define and saye, that he shal attaine to so many degrees of honor, or ecclesiastical dignities, as there be suche incisions in his hande. It is also a token of magnitude and boldnesse, desire, and study to compasse greate thinges, as also a desire of renowme and glorye: when a strait cleare line beginning at the rote of the forefinger, almost at the mean na∣tural line, doth turne backe again to the corner of the hil. A smal line also goinge from the table line to the hil of the fore∣finger: doth signify the same aforesaide. If that certain ouerthwart riules do de∣uide the lines aforesaide, they betoken wounds in ye head. Also a grosse, bright, and ruddy line, deuidinge the forefinger from the middle finger in a man, dothe betoken the sickenesse of the intrailes or bowels, in a woman it signifieth daun∣ger in childe bearinge, and so muche the more daunger, if it be very red. More o∣uer, crosses in the hil of Iupiter, do signi∣fy honoure and promotions in so manye
degrees, as there be founde crosses, for it hath bene often sene, such men to haue gotten henefices and ecclesiasticall pro∣mocions abundauntlye. And those men hauyng those markes, are chiefly called Iouials, or of the nature of Iupiter, ha∣uyng for the most parte good successe in al affayres of that sorte or kinde, who for the most part are of a meane stature, and pleasant forme or shape, whitely co∣loured, thicke heered, comely eyed, geuen to clenlines & mirth. They be naturally stout stomaked, & hie minded, hauyng to do in great & waighty affaires, liberall oftē times aboue their abilitie, coueting to rule and haue dominion ouer other, despisers of al mediocrite and meane e∣state, honest, noble, couetous of glorye & renowne, ambicious, pleasant and me∣rye, faythful and frendly, abhorrynge al fraud, and disceit, peaceable, apt and in∣clined to al learnyng and wisedome, po∣litique, and eloquente. The walkyng or goyng is meane, neither faste nor slow, betokenyng a great constancy of minde. No menne more fortunate then they, or
that soner obteyne their desires. For the most part alwaies in fauour with prin∣ces or gréate men, louyng dearely their wyfe and children. Also prosperous and happye in succession and posteritie. More ouer, they bee greate eaters, and therfore often diseased wyth the rawe∣nesse of the stomack or liuer, or els long liued, hauynge a cleare and shril voyce, & the formost two vpper teeth stickinge oute. And thus muche of them on whose byrthe Iupiter is lorde, without coniun∣ction of any euil wyth hym. Further∣more, many lines goynge ouerthwarte in the vpper ioynte of the forefinger in the hand of a woman, do declare that she shal haue large inheritance by the death of her frendes and kinred. The same in the middle ioynt, do signify enuy, lying, and disceit, which signes if they be in the hil of Iupiter, do minister suspicion of an angry, testy, vnmanerly, and scolding woman.
chiromantic diagram Iupiter.
And thus haue I also founde oute the number of children: If anye wo∣man haue in the middle ioynte three bryght incisions runnyng lengthwaies, whereof the middlemost is shorte and blunte at the one ende, and an other bright line goyng ouerthwart, & two o∣ther darke lynes whiche touche not the middle shorte lyne. Also wicked and noughtye women haue starres wyth a halfe compasse in the hyll of Iupiter.
chiromantic diagram
The same also do declare thre crokd lines almost equally distant within the vtter ioynt of the forefinger. Contrari∣wise, it is a token of honestie and chasti∣tie, when the middle ioynte is deuided with many lines going in length, with a starre in the middest. Also it promiseth great inheritance or riches to come (whe¦ther it be by order of inheritaunce, or of ecclesiasticall dignities or promocions) vnto hym that hath a cleare starre not interrupte with anye line or wrinkle in the hyl of Iupiter. A line going from the hil of the middle finger to the wreaste: sheweth fearful and weake harted men, but notwithstandyng enuious. Some also affirme, that those which haue that line, if they chaunce to be taken & caste in prison: either they shal dye there, or be greuously punished, or very hard∣ly escape and be deli∣uered.
The .x. Chapiter of the hill of the middle finger, appropriate to Saturnus of the finger it selfe with the nature of the Saturnines. THe middle finger of the hande as is aforesaid in this science, is attribute vnto Saturne, and called by his name, & therfore the risynge vnderneth it, is also called the hill of Saturne. The which hil if it be plaine and smoth without wrin∣kles or incisiōs: it declareth a simple mā, paineful, and without disceit. If that a riule cōmyng from the table line do cut the hyll of Saturne: it signifieth a care∣ful man, disquieted and vexed with day∣ly troubles and cares, alwayes studiyng and musyng on somthing, notwithstan∣dyng seldome riche. Also many incisions in the same place, do declare an heauy & pensiful life, full of penurie & necessitie, prisonment, and tormentes. Likewise, a line bowyng from the rote of the rynge finger to the hyll of Saturne, sheweth a flouthful and sluggish man, folishe, and
rashe, neuer doyng any thing wittely, albeit sometime folishe, bolde, of a folysh and rude minde and vnderstandynge. They saye also, that woman which hath more lines betwene the fingers of the Sunne and Saturne, then betwene the Sunne and Mercurye, there beinge some lines also: to be apt to generatiō, and spe∣cially of men childrē. This also I know certaine, that if any smal lines go from the principal lines of the hande to the hil of Saturne: thei declare an euil dispo∣sition, and not a verye honest life. It is also iudged a token of sterilitie and bar∣rennes in a woman, to haue a crosse or a starre in the first ioint of ye finger. And those whiche haue ye hil diuersly deuided with riules, thother hil beinge smothe and plain, are to be iudged Saturnins, whose nature for the most parte is to be pale coloured, vncomelye vysaged, their eyes fixed downeward to the grounde, in goynge slowe, leane, and oftentimes croked backed, and for the most part euil manered. For Saturn maketh them ma∣licious, disceitful, and craftye, delitinge
chiromantic diagram to be alone, regardyng no man, without al frendshippe. Not very curious aboute their meates, great drinkers, and often times great eaters, continually disquie∣ted with cares and miseries, neuer free frō them, ful of heauy and fearful thou∣ghtes and imaginations, louyng fennes
and standyng waters, liuynge filthelye, slow and rare of speach, colde of nature, weake bodied, and sickly, of a low voice, hoorse, and sluttyng, lightly enuiyng o∣ther, and whom thei hate, thei persecute continully without remission. Their de∣lite is to buylde, to plante, plowe, and al thinge that will continue, hauyng no great pleasure in women, and therfore seldome hauynge children, but diynge without issue. Wonderful defēders and kepers of their libertie, iudgynge it ex∣treme miserie and euil to serue and be in bōdage, deliting in blacke, & therfore clo∣thing them selues therwith, ful of suspi∣cion and feare, geuing great regard vn∣to dreames: and thus far of Saturnins. That womanne that hathe fiue or syxe lines in the firste ioint of the middle fin∣ger runnynge downewarde, shal beare a sonne which shal be a priest. Also that manne which hath a starre in the same iointe, shal either kil or be killed.
The .xi. Chapter of the ringe finger and hyll, and the nature of them borne vnder the Sunne. depiction of the Sun THe hil of the ringe finger, called al∣so of most learned men the hil of the Sunne, is that which riseth in a certayne space betwene the finger and the table line, if there procede from the rote ther∣of to the table lyne, certaine smal lines: they worke the same effect that Mercury doth amongst the Astrologians, whiche maketh a man of a pregnant and quick wit, geuen to diuers kinde of learning, proude, and eloquent, also fortunate to promotions, as wel prophane as spiri∣tual. But if there be other lines drawē ouerthwart thē, or that they deuide one
another: it signifieth the clene contrary. But if the same lines do not touche or deuide the other: it is a good token that he shal ouercome & treade doune al his e∣nemies. The which, if they neither touch ye finger, neither be equally placed frō the table line, but be hangyng betwene, ac∣cordynge to the alteration of the lynes: they note the chaunge of estate, and lyfe. Also, manye slender redde lynes in the same hil, do shew a wise and mery man, the which lines if thei be croked and red: betoken diseases wherewith a man is presently vexed and troubled. If they be pale, paines al ready past. Again, if they deuide thē selues like a saint And rewes crosse, stretched from the table line to the first ioynt: it signifieth a prouidente and circumspect man in doing his businesse. There is also another token pronoun∣cing fortunate thinges, specially in get∣ting of honour and dignity, and al thin∣ges pertaininge to vertue, liberality, and wisdō: which are two croked lines, equal¦ly distant going from the wrest, as you may perceiue by this figure.
chiromantic diagram Also many lines in the hand of a wo∣man about the vpper ioynt runninge to gether, do shew ye same. And more ouer, that she shalbe had in reuerence & made rich by her husbandes, also they shewe her to be deuout, but not to lead no mo∣nastical life. So likewise, if they be in
the secōd ioynt, they declare that she shal alwaies be had in reputacion and honor but amongst them of her own stocke. Alwaies they signify riches, aswel in menne as in women. But they are euel if they stretche to the hil of the Sunne. ❧ The .xii. Chapter of the hil and finger of Mercurye, and of his nature. depiction of Mercury THe hil of the eare finger or rather of Mercury, is betwene the little finger and the table line. It is greatlye materiall whether it be plaine withoute incisions or vaines.
For it being wel colored without wrin∣kles, sheweth a constant mind in a man, in a maide integritie. A slender line ri∣sing at the table to the rote of the hil: be∣tokeneth liberality. Also mani such lines beginning betwene the table line, and the little finger: signifieth so many ma∣riages as there be lines. Notwithstan∣dinge, the lengthe, coloure, and slender∣nes of them must be marked: for the pale lines signify mariages past, the long and wel coloured thē to come. It happeneth often some of them to be grosse and ve∣ry red, wherby thou shalt iudge a lier, a these, and robber, and one defiled with al kinde of mischief. Now if there be a cro∣ked line, as it were a circle goinge from that finger to the middle finger: it decla¦reth an excellente wit and disposicion, in whome there is great hope, that he wil he apt and prompt to al kind of affaires. If there be smal croked lines in the vp∣per part of the litle finger in the hand of a woman: it sheweth a condition propre to al women, which is pride, much talke and babling, with inconstancy. And this
for the most part is the Phisiognomy of al the Mercurians, meane coloured be∣twne blacke and white, hie foreheade, round face, faire eyes like a cat, blacke and thin berd, slender body, comelye sta∣ture, thin lips, sharp nose, shril voice and ready, a quicke motion and stirringe. If thou wilt for know this by the hil: if it be ful of strait lines, he is also of a pregnāt wit, bold, a horemonger, faithful, readye to lie, a louer of his owne sectes, a hater of superstition, not regardinge temples nor oracles, apt to al sciences Mathema∣tical and Geometry. Finallye, a man fit for al assaies, a doctoure, a poete, endued with the knowledge of tonges, a sercher of secretes, a Philosopher, harty, modest, but ful of wordes, hurting no man, de∣liting in the cleanest handye craftes, as in painting and such like. Albeit, he is more vexed with sickenesse and troubled with delusions of spirites, then other men.
chiromantic diagram
There be also certaine tokens, wher∣of the first in the first ioynt doth declare a man to be studious, chiefely of Retho∣rike, arrogant, proude, and of a ripe wit. That in the second ioynt although it vary frō the first, yet hathe it the same effecte, it sheweth an excellente preacher or oratoure, if it stand ouerthwart: he is troubled with sondrye passions, horri∣ble dreames, and euel fātasies. If in the thirde ioynt there be a crosse, it is a sure signe of pouertie and necessity. And this is sufficient of Mercury, although the fi∣gure do not conteine al the signes, yet we haue described the chiefest and prin∣cipal, for who can comprehende so ma∣nye sortes of lines & tokens of so diuerse dispositions in so small a roume. Wee haue lefte nothinge oute in the cannon or rule, which might be to any effecte or purpose.
❧ The .xiii. Chapter of the vtter part of the Triangle, and of them ouer whom the mone hath power and dominion. depiction of a devil FIrste of al, I will declare what the Chiromanciers cal ye vtter part of yt Triangle, it is the same whiche by the cōmon name is called the line of the stomacke or liuer, with risinge at the tail of the line of life, touching the mean natural, maketh a triangle, if ther be no let in the natiuitye. Albeit, I knowe in some it doth not ioyne, yet it is not to be left out, for it is found to be of as muche force as al the other, for if it make a per∣fite Triangle with the meane natural and line of life: it sheweth the florishing helth and prosperitie bothe of bodye and
mind. If it happen to be darke coloured & ful of points: it sheweth the il digestion of the stomack, morphew, colick, flegme, bindinge of the bellye, paine of the sto∣macke and ribbes, and specially if it be pale. But if it be wel drawen, ruddye, nearer the line of life then the midle na∣tural: it betokeneth paine in the head, if contrariwise, it be nearer the middle na∣tural, it signifieth the inflamation of the lungs, anexed wt a feruēt ague, ye kongh, and stinke of the mouth. Also, such a cir∣cle in the place of the Mone, ☉ although it seme to be but a reft, yet it betokeneth the losse of one eye, if there be two ☉☉, the losse of bothe eyes, whiche thinge I haue proued true bi my own hurt. Like∣wise a starre in the same place, signifieth a wicked and mischeuous man. If you desire to know ye phisnamy of the luna∣tickes, they be whitlye faced with some red, their browes ioyned together, their face and cheekes blowen, vnequal eyed, somwhat blacke, peraduenture marked in the face, vnthrifty, sickelye, vnstable, slow, folish, pore in youthe, in the seconde
chiromantic diagram locus line age richer somwhat. But in thertreame age miserable again, dotinge, vnfortu∣nate, and borne to trauail, geuen to the fallynge sickenesse and Palsye, to the flixe & blastyng, except the Moone in the rote of natiuitie haue the Sunne or Iupi∣ter propice and in amitie with her.
The .xiiii. Chapter of the place of Mars, and the nature of the Martialistes. chiromantic diagram loc{us} Martis. Mars.
VVe thought it mete before we spake of Mars, to place hī in the caue of the hād in the triangle, ouer against the na∣tural line: in the which if there apere an∣other perfit triangle according to al the natural properties of the Martialists: you may pronosticate, ye by hew much ye same is larger & bigger the man is to be iud∣ged the more vicious. And specially if it be wel proportioned with the lines. The phisnamye herein is not to be dispised, which I haue therfore adioyned because it shuld helpe the Chiromancier the bet∣ter in iudgemente, otherwise it can not be so exactly iudged. Thei be hie colored in the face, as burnte of the Sunne, thinne heered and curled, small eyes, somewhat croked bodied, with a sharpe and fiers aspecte, boulde, couetous, disceitful, a briber, vnfaithful, a iester, vnshamefast, lighte, vnconstant, angry, seditious, suspicious, impaciente, a mur∣derer, a boaster, a mocker, periured, and a counterfaiter of all thinges, that maye be counterfaited. ¶ The conclusion of this worke of Chiromancy.
Chiromantial prognosti∣cation or manual diuinations, accor∣dinge to the places of the. vii, Planets. BEsides the Charecters & lines which are commonlye in the hande, there dothe often appeare straunge notes and markes, whiche betoken some great vn∣knowen thinge, wherefore our intente now is to she we their effect & meaning. W haue shewed before the natures of the signes, and what Planet is lorde of euerie man, nowe we will attempte to knowe what suspecte tokens bee in the Planettes: I meane not thoose in the heuens, but (heir charecters which be in the fingers, of what force they be.
Of the place of Mars. THe place of Mars is in the Triangle, wherefore if you perceaue or finds suche a marke or signe drawen in thys sort in the triangle, iudge that man to be a Martialist, & that he shal be hanged. The other three markes ouer againste the table of the hande: signifieth bolde∣nesse, stubburnesse, seueritie, wastinge of his patrimonie and inheritaunce, wyth oppression of his frendes and kinsfolke.
chiromantic diagram Of the finger of Venus. VEnus doth possesse the thombe & the hyll therof, which for the plainnesse of it, is called the hil of Venus, if there be in the first ioint such a marke, they shal prospere in all their affayres. In the
seconde iointe, it betokeneth pouertye, and neare the naile, that he shal haue a leprous childe, or els in the place of Ve∣nus, it she weth a venerous man, geuen to incest and aduoutrie, and speci∣ally if the markes be in the hill. chiromantic diagram
Of the finger of Iupiter. IVpiter hathe also his proper markes, who possesseth yt forefinger, as is here presccibed, in the first ioint they signifie an aduoutrer, & in thupper ioints riches, and speciallye in age. The other signes for the most part betoken no yll. chiromantic diagram
Of the finger of Saturne. SAturne the highest amōgst thē, kepeth the midle finger with his priuate cha∣rectes here discribed, which declare a sa∣turnine mā, whose nature you may part¦ly gather bi that which is aforesaid, and partly we wil define more at large hereafter. chiromantic diagram
Of the finger of the Sunne. A Line portured in this sort appearing in the ring finger, called properly the finger of the Sunne, signifieth long life and prosperitie, al other apparances are tokens of euill. chiromantic diagram
Of the finger of Mercury. THey haue appointed vnto Mercurys the little finger with certaine lines, whereby you may perceiue and know a Mercurial here briefly expressed, they be∣token benefites or offices, all other sig∣nifie sadnesse, melancholy, and heauines. chiromantic diagram
Of the place of the Moone. THe place of the Mone is in the pomel of the hande. Wherfore if thou per∣ceiue the lines here discribed rising from the wreste: it sheweth sluggishnes, in the place of Iupiter dulnesse and folishnes, & speciallye in women, whiche by nature are not very wise. chiromantic diagram
The Conclusion. YOu haue hearde (deare Reader) the signes and markes of the planets, by the which without Astrology you maie learne and knowe vnto what planet e∣uerye man is subiecte, desieryng you to take this our Treatise in good worth, & to make a proufe thereof with labour & diligēce, lest yt we mai be thought herein to haue spēt our time & labour in vaine. There lacketh but only iudgemēt, the la∣bour or pain is nothing: for so much as the hole effecte maie be vnderstand and knowen by once or twise readyng at the moste. Fare ye well.
❧ The seconde Boke en∣treateth of an Epiloge or briefe collection of the hole summe of the Arte of Phisi∣ognomy. By the which you may vnder∣stand and perceiue, what euery membre from the crowne of the head, to the soule of the foote, dothe signifye and meane. Also a brief introduction vppon the faces of the signes, with certaine cannons and rules, vpon sick∣nes & diseases. And first to begin with the eyes. THe eyes therfore being moiste and cleare, sheweth mirthe, good man∣ners, and an honest life, declininge and loking downward, red, & ve∣ry great: betokeneth glotony, and fleshly luste. Smal hollowe eyes, couetousnesse. Graye eyes an euil man: hollowe eyes a craftye man, waueringe vnstable eyes, declare a seditious, suspitious, vnfaithful boster. Great eyes slouth, trēblinge eyes sluggishnes, glistering eyes betokē drō∣kēnes, smal eyes vnshamfastnes, diuerse coloured & smal: signifieth crafty flatte∣ring. Turning toward the nose, betoke∣neth
lecherous men. Greate dropping eyes with an vnstable coūtenance, mad men. Dry eies, crafty men. Black cleare eyes, iust, witty, libidinous, and cūning. The circle of the ball gren: declareth a craftye wicked man and a theefe. Moiste eyes stoutnes of stomacke, perfect speche and good coūsel. Great glistering eyes: shewe mad men, light, & glotons, Cro∣ked hollow and dry eyes, declare vnfaith¦full and traitorous persons. Highe eyes, large, cleare, pure, & moist: are tokens of circūspect, diligente persons, and louers. Alwaies running and droppinge with∣out cause of sicknes, declareth folishnes. Misty dry eyes, vnfaithful mē. Larg eyes glistering, moist, & cleare: signifieth wit∣ty and high men, violent, stout, and boa∣sters. Blacke and shining eyes, fearful and euel men. Swelling eyes and raw: sheweth glotons and vnamiable men. Smal and holow eyes, couetous, disceit∣ful men. Chereful eyes betoken iust mē, prone to laughter, gentle, & holy. Moist eyes, good coūsel. Winking eyes, a these and a lier in wait. Bleared eyes, libido∣nous
mē. Vpright browes, amiable, the browes hanging ouer effeminate plat∣ynge with the bries: signifieth adulte∣rous persons. The forhed narow, sheweth a folishe person, long, one apt to learne. A hie fore hend swelling and round, is a signe of a crafty man & a coward. Ful of wrinkles, ful of cares, round, enuious and craftye, A large forhed betokeneth a liberal mā. The browes heery, signifieth stutting: & being extent to the sēples vncleannes. The face plaine and lat, declareth a mā ful of debate and strife, without any rising or swelling: infurious, and an vn∣cleane person. A leane face is token of a wise man. A fleshy face one apt to learn. A sad face sheweth somtime folishnesse, sometime wisdome. Open eares betokeneth a man with∣out reason or vnderstāding, great eares an vnwise man, smal eares a fole, square eares a learned and wise man. A sharpe nose sheweth an angry per∣son, thicke and lowe, euil manner. The nose tending or stretching to the mouth,
declareth honesty, strength, and apte to learning. A great nose good, a litle nose a disceitful person. A nose like an ape, be∣tokeneth a libidinouse & riotous person. The nosethrilles thicke and stronge, betokeneth strength: round, feare: drawē in lēgth, mery & coragious: ye nosethrils narow & round are tokens of a fole. A bigge mouth sheweth a bolde and hardy warriour. The mouth very bigge with the vpper lippe hanging ouer: sig∣nifieth a glotton and an vngodly man, a babler, rash, folish, and vnstedfast. Slender, thinne, and subtile lips, beto∣ken eloquence, but thin lips with a litle mouth, an effeminate persō. Flesshy lips a fole. And they whose dogge teethe do beare out their lippes, are to be counted cōtumelous, slanderers, and vnfaithfull. A sharp throtbole signifieth a vain sester A long slender necke declareth a fear∣ful euil mannered man, thicke and long: a furious, fearful, and stubburne person. A meane necke, a stronge and vertuous man, and apt to learning. A thick necke, sheweth rude, barbarous, and vngentle
persons. Sharpe neck a slaūderous per∣son. A short neck rashnes. A croked neck a couetous mā. The necke turned to the right side: sheweth a tēperat man. Tur∣ned to ye left side, a hore master & a fole. A great brest is alway praised, a larg brest doth represēt Magnanimitie, bold∣nesse, and honestye. A little breast a fear∣ful person. A pursye or grosse breaste, an vngentle and cruel man. The paps hanging downe from the brest, do shewe a violente man. A great belly, declareth an vndiscrete folishe man, proude, and riotous. A lanke belly with a bigge breaste, a man of vn∣derstanding and counsel. A brode backe declareth gentlenesse. The mean proportion both of the backe and breast, is alwaye commendable: a croked backe is token of a nigarde, and couetous persone. Very long armes are signe of boldnes, honesty, and strength, short armes a sow∣er of discord and riot. The handes very short doth signify a grosse & rude person, fat and flesshy with
the fingers likewise inclined to thefte. Smal handes crafty men. The feteful of flesh declareth folishnes, Smal and slender fete, hardnesse. Slender legges shew ignorance, grosse legges, boldnes and strength. Large and ful of sowes, fortitude, & strēgth. Short & fat legs, crueltye. Croked & hollow in∣ward, is a token of very  men. Soft and swlling legges, euil manered men. The shnne grosse & short with a sharp heele and fatte thighes, do prognosticate madnesse or frensye to come or happen to that partie. Thus haue you here these briefe intro∣ductions to this art of Phisiognomy, by the which a man may iudge the disposi∣tions of other. Folowing herein Aristo∣tle and Valla, who did the like, by whose help we haue performed herein that we may or can. Wherefore, if any man wil slaunder vs, let him know that we haue not written any commentaries, but a cō∣pendious treatise of this science, and thus an end.
❧ Briefe introductions upon the faces of the signes, what effect the Sunne doth worke in euerye house or mansion. NOw that we haue fully pro∣posed & also determined as∣wel to instruct, as to induce and allure the studious and desirous, to the studye and knowledge of Astrology, and that there be many things to be obserued and mar∣ked therein, as the situation and placing of the houses, and the iudgements of the Horoscope: we thinke now onlye to re∣maine necessary to intreate or speake of the faces or triplicities of the signes, and of their worke and effect in euery degre. For the Sunne and euerye other Planet haue diuerse and sondry effectes in eche degre & face, working one thinge in the first triplicity, another in the second, and a far different and contrarye operation in the thirde face. The whiche that you may the better vnderstande, euery signe
is deuided into thirty degrees. The same thirty being parted again into .iii. parts, ye first part or order to ten, doth make the first face or triplicity, & al whiche cometh betwene ten & twenty, is attribute to the secōd: & that which remaineth to ye thirty degre, is added to the third face. And in this manner music you deuide al the o∣ther signes: and these degrees as thei in∣crease in number, so do they in force and strengthe. So towarde the ende they be of losse power then they were in the be∣ginninge or middesie of the triplicitye, and specially in the last faces or triplici∣ties. These notes and others we haue brieflye drawen or taken out of Abrahā, Haly, Alcabitius, Firmicus and suche o∣thers. Wherefore, if anye zoylous or en∣uious persone, wil obiecte or demaunde whye we ioyne these thinges to our do∣inges: wee answere that those learned menne did not fullye and distinctly write the whole effects, which a perfect Astro∣logian mighte altogether do. But ra∣ther to admonishe their owne Disci∣ples and scholers then to teache others.
And these thinges thus beinge touched, we wil procede to speake of Aries. The Sunne in the firste face of Aries. ♈. THe Sunne in Aries, which is the first and principall signe, amongste the twelue, and in the firste tenne degrees of the same, dothe commonlye make those whiche be then borne, red coulou∣red, smal visaged, lanke and slender bea∣lied, and leane, marked in the lefte sote, or elbowe, hauinge manye frendes, ha∣ting euil and louing al that is good. In the second face whiche is from the tenth degre of Aries, to the twenty degre of the same, it maketh them blacke co∣lored, the which blacknes is not reputed as any vice or deformity, but for a come∣linesse and great ciuilitye. They be also of a mean ciuility, angry, suspitious, dis∣ceitful, and hartye, compassed and beset with many ennemies which shal pursue him euen vnto death. In the thirde face it maketh them of∣tentimes red, inclining to a saffrō colour solitary, and deuising craftes & disceites The sun in the first face of Taurus. ♉
Maketh them that be borne apt or di∣ligent, great eyed, and greate lips, mar∣ked in the necke, but very merye, and al∣waies occupied in riot and banketinge. In the secōd face, it maketh them wā∣ton and riotous, (but not so muche as in the first face) runners aboute countries, and vnstedfast. In the thirde face it causeth a colder complexion because of Saturne whiche doth possesse this laste face, and bringeth the paines or diseases of the eares, belly, and thighes. The Sunne in the firste face of Geminy. ♊ VVho so euer hapneth to be born the Sunne being in the firste face of Ge∣mini, is for the most part of a meane sta∣ture, wel bodied, euery membre decently compact, marked in the heade or knees, gentle, and painful, vnfortunate through women, and cōmonly without issue. In the second face it doth minishe the stature, adding blacknes of colour, mar∣ked in the elbow or preuy members, and that whiche semeth to be deminished or
wanting in thother partes, is repaired & fulfilled with eloquence. In the declination of the thirde face, it maketh theim to decrease in honestye and the due proporcion of the mēbres, making them folishe, and inuentors and spreaders abrode of iestes & vain trifles. The Sunne in Cancer ♋. THey which are borne in the first ten degrees of Cancer, are comelye bothe of bodye and heere, narrowe browes, quicke and pregnant witted, marked in the right arme and thighes, hauynge a good spirite and disposition, and plenty of frendes. In the second face redde heeres, short stature without any beard, and marked in the eyes. In the third face it maketh thē grosse and dull, with heery browes, ful of ytch, and as it were blowen or puffed vp in the face. The Sunne in Leo ♌. SO in the first face of Leo, is the gift of life, and it maketh thē of a smal come∣ly body, reddy coloured, mixed with some
white, rouling eyes, straight bodye, ful of diseases in their feete, & specially in age: famous and notable, simple, and beloued of the kinges and rulers of the earth. In the second face it maketh thē large breasted, the stones and priuy members slender, harty and honourable. In the third face short of stature, rose coloured, mixed with white, vexed with much sicknesse, a whoremonger, and lo∣uer of women. The Sunne in Virgo. ♍ THe Sunne possessing the first face of Virgo, causeth a comely stature, high and tal body, a faire face, witty, prudence and quicke, curled heere, a player of in∣struments, with a quicke and shril voice, learned in many sciences, but vnfertil & barren in hauinge or bringinge forthe of children. In the secōd face it maketh thē likewise comly coūtenanced, smal eyes, fair nose, religious, learned, honest, without blame or reproche, and desirous of praise. Vnder the third face, simple, fair, apt, witty, prudent, and good.
The Sunne in the firste face of Libra. ♎ BEing a signe of a māly shape or form causeth a fayre face, a simple, painful and modest person, which shalbe woun∣ded in the heade. In the second face it maketh likewise a faire face, but blexe eied, or squint eyed, for they shal haue some default in them. In the third face it maketh them ho∣norable, reuerent, and comely: in thend of this face it maketh them oftentimes of both kindes, and let them take hede they take no venemous thing. The sunne in Scorpio. ♏ CAuseth them whiche are borne to be euel fauored, marked in the heade or shulders, or in the left fote or arme, large brested, mery, & plesant in geuing checks or tauntes, sobre, and discrete. In the seconde face it causeth a great head, and a great babler, marked in the knees or backe. And vnder yt third face maketh a smal and litle stature, gogle eyed, a glotton or great eater, and a horemonger.
The Sunne in Sagittarius. ♐ MAketh them of a comely countenāce and tall stature, belonginge to the Courte, studious and desirous of good thinges. Vnder the secōd face it causeth a com∣ly & faire countenance & stature, inclined to a saffron colour, thin browes, & mar∣ked in the breast. In the third face tal and comly, large & big brested, marked in the brest & fote. The Sunne in Capricorne. ♑ MAketh oftentimes a large breaste, a tender and soft person, of a competēt stature, but somwhat black colored, mar∣ked in the elbow or brest craftye. In the second face fair, marked in the left arme, but if the natiuity be by night, it maketh them malicious, longe nosed, and quicke witted. In the thirde face it causeth a comely body, a citrine face, marked in the arme or knee, angrye, louelye, and a louer of women. The Sunne in the first face of Aquarius. ♒
THe sunne in the first face of Aquarius maketh a comely bodi & face, marked in the brest or left fote, also benigne, ea∣sy and gentle to be spoken to, tractable, & familiar amongst men. Vnder the second face, it maketh thē very long red face, marked in the backe or elbow, endomaged with many vexa∣tions and tribulations. In the third face it causeth a short sta∣ture, a rose coloured countenaunce, mar∣ked vnder the elbow, and a louer of wo∣men: but if it happen him to be borne in the last degree, he shal not only be diffe∣rent and cōtrary disposed in the propor∣tion of the bodye, but in all his actions and doinges. The Sunne being found in Pisces. ♓ CAuseth a soft body, white, bigge brest, comely beard, faire forhed, clear skin, large & fayre eyes, ful of fleshe & honest. In the second face, an equal and short stature, blacke bearde, thin heared, nim∣ble and mery. In the third face it maketh thē come∣ly and decent in al members, and geueth
also clerenes of sound or voice. This also we haue iudged worthy to be noted and marked, that in artificiall Astrology there be certaine formes or signes, whiche do cause greatnesse or bignesse, as Leo, Virgo, Sagittarius: and certaine which cause diuination or ma∣king lesse, as Pisces, Cancer, Capricorne. The beginninges also of Aries, Leo, and Taurus, do cause bodyes to tende to grosenesse and strengthe, the endes of the same, do contrariwise cause leannes, slendernesse, and debilitie: likewise the beginninges of Gemini, Scorpio, and Sagittarius, cause leannesse and debility, and the endes of the same, grosnesse, and strength, but Virgo, Libra and Sagittarius cause equalitye and good proportion. Taurus, Scorpius, and Pisces, as Halye writeth, do woorke and cause a diuerse and vnequall proportion of the bodye. For they whiche are borne in the daye, are clearer then they whiche are borne in the nyghte: for the nyghte doothe helpe the Planettes, signifying obscuri∣tie and blackenesse. Also the Moone in
coniunction with Mercury, in the houre of natiuitie, and not beinge ascendent: causeth the fallinge sickenesse, and spe∣ciallye if Saturne be in anye angle in the day birth: or Mars in the nighte birthe. Also Saturnus in anye of the angles, ei∣ther in the nighte or daye birthe, causeth madnesse, and speciallye when Cancer, Virgo or Pisces, are founde in any of the angles. More ouer, Saturne in the houses of the lightes: that is to say, the Sunne or Mone, whiche are Cancer and Leo, it be tokeneth the passion or hurt of the eyes. These signes, Aries, Cancer, Scorpius Capricorne and Pisces: do signify & cause biles, leprosy, red spottes, itches, scurffes, deafenesse, stuttinge, baldenesse, and a smal bearde. Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces, are signes of manye sonnes or men children. Also these signes betoken the honesty of wo∣mē, their religion & puritye of life, Tau∣rus, Leo, Aquarius. These signes haue reasō and are called reasonable signes, Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the first part of Sagittarius & al Aquarius
Signes mouing to anger and sharpe∣nes, are Aries, Leo, and Scorpio. More ouer, Gemini, Virgo, and Libra cause great, loude, & shril voices, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, are dombe, & without voice or sounde. There be thre planets which do geue riches: that is to saie, Iupiter, the Sunne, and Venus. The Sunne also geueth wis∣dome, Mercury eloquence, and Venus goodlye vtterance or pronunciation. There be also three signes oriental or of theast. Aries is the heart of theast. Leo the second triplicitie and the lift part of theast, & Sagittarius his right part or side Capricorne is the heart of the Southe, Taurus the list side, & Virgo the righte. Libra is the heart of the west, Aquarius the list side, and Gemint the right. Cancer is the heart of the north, Scorpio his lifte parte, and laste of al Pisces his right side. Wherefore, if you wil knowe to what ende this respecte or disposition of the signes doth belonge or attaine, you shal briefly hear. We haue said there be thre
signes oriental, or of the east, three meri∣dional, three perteininge to the northe, & three to the west. The oriental signes profite vs, if that thei risyng, & the sunne beinge in them, we order & direct al our doinges to that coast, parte, or place. As if thou wlt leade an healthful lyfe, slepe quietly, prospere in children if thou be maried, or haue any thing to succede or go forwarde, if thou wilt sell or make any bargaine, or hope for any honour or gaine, or any such like: to directe al your doinges toward that place, in the which the sines hauing respect to those things, are situate or placed. So contrariwise, if that we feare the euill successe of anye of those thinges, the contrarye signes are to be eschued. And in this sort maye you sudge of the other signes. Also wee haue made a larger discription hereof, where as we make mention of the qua∣litie & nature of the houses. Thus haue we here no lesse copiouslye then brieflye discribed the nature of the faces of the signes, neither do I perceaue how they coulde more compendiouslye haue bene
touched, not iudgyng it of great effect to haue taried longe herein with great cir∣cumstances. At be it, they be necessarye vnto Astrology, yet are they not of such force (that as is saide in the prouerbe, bothe shippe, and helme were to be com∣mitted vnto them) or that the hole rule, and gouernance of Astrology did depēd on theim. For as they can not well be left vnknowen, yet are they with suche a moderation to be learned and vnder∣stande, that vpon the knowledge of them a man oughte not to iudge him selfe by and by an Astronomer. Wherfore, who soeuer thou art that semest to be propēse or apte to this science,mo∣n of ctor. I warne thee to vse moderation, and to do nothing rash∣lye, neither vnaduisedlye to geue iudge∣ment of anye man his natiuitie. There are so many thinges whereby we mate be discetued, as the wisdome and circum∣s on of the man, the dispensation of O, and our vncertaine iudgemente. or example, it maye be that a man home vnder Aries, bee verye fierce and angrie, who waiyng wyth hym self the
foulnes of the vice, doth moderate & sup∣presse his anger. If I then should iudge this man an angrye or testye man, who would not mocke me and laughe me to scorne, albeit nature and destinye do in∣cline thereunto: yet notwithstandynge the sentence and iudgemente is so to be tempered and ruled, that without per∣fect respect had to all thinges, thou vtter nothinge rashely. The whiche if you do not take hede of, be assured you shal nei∣ther Prognosticate or foreshewe anye truth: but also become a mockyng stocke to all men. And this I do euerye where admonishe you of, because I haue kno∣wen manse to haue erred and bene fou∣lye disceiued: who thinkyng them selfes sure, haue bene (as they saye) sixtene fote of from the marke or pricke.
Certaine cannons or rules vpon sicknes or diseases, bi what meanes the patientes may be cured and holpen by the aspectes of the signes. The preface. THE folishe and vnaduised sorte of Phisitions which in these our daies we see so much to aduaunce them selfes, and claime vnto them selues the supre∣macy ouer vs, albeit they be commaun∣ded bi their auctours not to take in hand to cure any mā, without hauing respect vnto the starres. So farre are they di∣stant from the true knowledge of Phi∣sicke, which are ignoraunt of Astrology, that they ought not rightly to be called Phisitions, but disceauers. Howbeit, it is now come to this poynt, that amongest an hundred you shal scarsely finde one, the which can truely discerne what time euerye medicine ought to be ministred. The which is no maruaile, for how can they finde any time to bestow or occupy
them selues in Astrologye, whiche haue no leasure to read Galene or Hipocrates, but do all thinge a head or vnaduisedlye by certaine prescript receiptes. Like as there was a certaine (no simple man) at Moguntia, whom you would haue iud∣ged to haue bene the thirde Cato or ano∣ther Galene, if that grauitie would help any thinge thereunto. This man being moste rude and vnlearned, vied two re∣ceiptes, from whence he had drawen thē I knowe not. There was in them. 3. sz. of Elleborns, or so much feamonye, to purge the wombe. These he ministred bi course, without hauing respect either to the completion or sickenes: by the which vaine trifles he scraped together so much money, that being deade, he left behinde him. 3000. gilders. He iudged the whole effect of this science to consíst in losinge of the bealy. Such effect hath authoritie and boldenes in Phisicke. These sorte of rude and grosse men the which disdaine to learne, we wil neither admonish nor yet reduce into the right way. But vnto others whiche intende hereafter to bee
Phisitions, we wil prescribe certain rules whereby setting apart al olde vaine tri∣fles, they maie learne frō aboue to helpe the patient or diseafed. For it hath-bene many times experimented and proued, that that which many Phisitions coulde not cure or remedye with their greatest and strongest medicins: the Astronomer hathe brought to passe with one simple herbe, by obseruinge the mouyng of the signes, the which we haue wholly deui∣ded in Canons. THe first Canō. There be four signes the which beholde or gouerne the in∣ward partes of a man, the which Phisi∣tions do cal the spiritual mēbres. Those are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra. Of these Cancer beholdeth the Liuer, the lunges, and the heart stringes. Leo go∣uerneth the stomacke, & the mouth ther∣of. Virgo the nether part of the stomack, the bealy, the midriffe, and the bowels. Libra hath respect to the nether part of the bealy, the loynes, and the nauell. The .ii. Canon. Cancer which goner∣neth
the lunges, engendreth the cough, the pertises, and pleurisie. Leo causeth impostumes, taunders, feuers, and pesti∣tence. Virgo the swelling of the bealye, the dropsy, and hardnes of the belly, and collicke. Libra causeth the exulceration of the bowels, pain in the bealy, & about the small of the backe: and chieflye if the signes aforesaide happen into those houses whiche are naturally euil. Such as are the. 6. house, the. 8. &. 12. house from the ascendent or Horoscope. The .iii. Canon. He whiche is borne vnder Taurus for the most part shalbe in peril by poyson, witcheraft, or the colick: and specially in the fatall yeres, whiche are the .vi.viii.xviii.xx.xxiii.xliiii. accor∣ding to the reuolution of euerye twelfe yere, beginninge at the .viii. yeare of the natiuitie. And because that Taurus doth gouerne the throte, thei do also refer vn∣to him the squinancy & al impostumes & biles which happē in the throte, ye which when the expert Phisition dothe vnder∣stande and know, let him take hede that he minister notvnaduisedly.
For this is almoste a general rule, that the Sunne, or rather the Mone beinge in any signe which beholdeth any member vered or diseased during that reuolutiō, ther be no medicine ministred therunto, or els that it be ministred in suche te, not to cure or heale, but to comforte and nourish, least that it decline into a worse estate, vnto such time as the Sunne be re∣moued out of that signe. The. 4. Canon. They whyche are much vexed or troubled with the Stran∣gulion or stone, or with any such kind of diseases, moste commonly are borne, the Sunne being in Aries or Gemini. The. 5. Canon. They that haue Pisces in their ascendent, or are born vn∣der Pisces, are in daunger of hote infir∣mities: as hote feuers, knawynge of the bealye, and poyson, because of Libra and his lord of the .viii. house. These diseases shall partlye happen by harlottes, and euil women, and specially in the. 44.56.78. yeres, in the which he shalbe in great daunger of death. Wherefore, the wise Phisition oughte carefullye to obserue
those things. There be also certaine euil times & yeres of a mās life, which are at euery seuen yeres eh: so ye euery seuenth yere is perilous. Wherfore, if yu wilt pro∣long the daies of thy life: as oftē as thou comest to euery .vii. or .ix. yere, (if yu geue any credit to Marsilius ficin{us} or Firmic{us}) diligētly consult with an Astronomer, from whence, and by what meanes any pearil or daunger maye happen or come vnto thee, thē either go vnto a Phisition or vse discression and temperāce, and by that meanes thou maist defer & prolong thy natural ende, throughe the rules of Astronomy, & the help of the Phisition. Neither bee ashamed to enquire of the Phisition, what is thy natural diet: & of ye Astronomer, what starre dothe mosle support and fauour thy life, and to se in what aspect he is with the Mone. Like∣wise, in the beginninge of thy sickenesse to behold the Sunne in the daye, and the Moone in the nighte. They, if they be letted or hindred, there must be great hede and diligence be had vpon the pa∣cient. The like is to be feared in al sick∣nesse,
when the Moone and the lorde of the ascendent be letted in the .viii. house, whiche is called the house of death. For in suche case it is past all hope, without the great diligence and labour of the ex∣pert and wise Phisition. These and ma∣ny other such like thinges, the wise and learned Phisition oughte diligentlye to obserue and take hede vnto. The .vi. Canon. Leo in theyght house engendreth to him that is borne vnder Capricorne these kinde of diseases: that is to saye, knawynge of the stomacke, the pluresie, the coughe, inflamation of the liuer, & impostumes of the stomacke. Wherfore in curyng or helpyng therof, you must eschue wedensdaye, bicause of ♊, the sixt house Sunday, because of ♌ in the .viii. house, and thursdaye, because of Sagittarius in the .xii. house. The .vii. Canon. Cancer causeth the inflamation of the lunges, with a feruët ague. The sunne beinge in sagittarius, engendreth likewise the Ethica, & swel∣lyng of the lunges. But and if Saturnus be in sagittarius, it causeth the swellyng
of the feete, and the goute. Saturnus in cancer causeth the payne of the coddes, stones, and priuy members. The .viii. Canon. Scorpius engen∣dreth the gowte in the hande the sciati∣ca, and sometime the paine in the head. If Saturne bee in scorpio, it causeth also payne vnder the ancley. Wherefore let this diet be vsed, not to wash their heads vppon a tuesdaye, neither vse any hotie bathes, the sunne beinge in Aries, lest they fall into a continual headatche, for then they shall be in greate daunger of frenesye or madnesse. And for because that the euill dayes, monethes, and yeres, are to be obserued and taken heede of: let theim abstayne speciallye from hotte thinges. The for∣tunate dayes for the cure and healpe of suche as are infected wyth that kinde of melancholye, are thursdaye, mondaye, and Sondaye. The infortunate dayes are tuesdaye and wedensdaye. And for so muche as Scorpio dothe beholde the priuy membres, thei ought not to be mi∣nistred vnto the sunne being in Scorpio.
The. 9. Canon. They that haue Virgo in their Horoscope, or els are borne vn∣der Virgo, for the mooste parte haue the natural infirmitie of the legges or fe swollen: the legges runnyng with cor∣rupte and filthye matter, or els the eye liddes or chekes full of pimples. In like∣wise, great paines in the head throughe the exhalation of humours out of the ete vnto the heade. The which paines are sone delaed and appeased by cutting the swelling of the feete. And so muche the rather if Saturn be in Virgo at the time of natiuitie. Wherfore if thou diligently consider it, thou shalt perceiue and see it to be a natural disease, and for the most part ineuitable. And therfore onlye to be auided and put of by the natural obser∣uation of the signes. Such ought to ab∣staine from hot houses, whether they be to washe or sweate in, which if they can not altogether eschue, let them abstaine Tuesdaies and Saturdaies, and the euel monethes & yeares before prescribed: be∣cause ye at those times more thē at anye other, they do most vehemently pour out
their mischief and poyson. Let them also refraine from al Autumnal frutes. The. 10. Canon. The infortunate dayes vnto such as are borne vnder Leo are Saterday and Thursday, the which thing must be taken hede of in their diet: for all sharpe and pepered meates, are hurtful for thē. Moreouer, they may take no drinckes or purgations. And in like case when the Sunne remoueth oute of Leo, and cometh vnto Capricorne or Pis¦ces, they must abstein frō al kind of salt∣fish and diminution or letting of bloud. The. 11. Canon. If that any manne chaunce to fal sicke, the Sunne beinge in Aries, and thou be admitted or called for Phisition: vnderstand that he in especial, engendreth the paines of the heade, and deafenesse, therof with ye dunes of sight. Wherfore, beware that thou minister no hote bathes or stewes, because of Mars, and specially in October, whē the sunne doth possesse Scorpio, neither geue him in his diet, any Mutton, Rammes flesh, or Lambe, neither suffre him to washe his heade vpon the Tuesdaies, wedens∣dayes
because of Mercury being Lord of Virgo in the .vi. house, whereas Mars al so doth priuely reioyse, and Scorpius in the eight house, for then thei prolong the sicknes, not only bicause the .vi. house is mansion of sickenesse: as also that Virgo is a signe colde and drye, earthlye and Melancholye. Not withstandinge, this hope remaineth that the patiēt shal not depart. And al be it Scorpio, as is afor∣saide, be in theight house whiche is the mansion of death, because that Mars is Lord of the same signe, it preuaileth no∣thing, for no euil Planet is noysome or hurtful in his proper mansion or house: and suche kinde of menne mooste of all, shall be withoute pearill of the swearde. Wherfore after his recouery or amend∣ment, you muste warne the patiente that he do not take in hande anye ioure∣ney, the Sunne beinge in Pisces, whiche is the. 12. house from the Horoscope. Or elsse not to haue to do with nota∣ries or scribes, grauere, or gold smithes. Also that he abstaine from wemen, and
horsses. For by al these thinges infirmi∣tie or sickenesse maye happen vnto him, by reason of the .vi. house, whiche is the house of sickenesse, and chiefly in August the Sunne hauinge his course in Virgo. The. 12. Canon. In like maner, the noumber of the yeares of the pacient are diligentlye to be obserued and marked, for alwaies euerye .vii. and .ix. yeare, are mortal and deadly, and are called of the Astronomers: the perillous time of a mans life at euery .vii. yeares end. The cause thereof, is the greate mutacion and chaunge of the bodies, that happe∣neth in those yeres. For Saturne whiche in the other yeares is farre distaunte from vs, is then ioyned to the Moone, which is the lowest planet of al. Wher∣fore you musse obserue in the reuoluti∣on of the yeares, the aspectes of those Planettes: and thereby iudge whether there be anye daunger towarde the pa∣tiente or not, or whether Saturne or Mars which also gouerneth euery .ix. yeare, be in strengthe or power to woorke their
malice vpon vs, or elsse if that any good or fauorable Planet, haue the rule or do∣minion ouer him. And by this meanes yu shalt not only put away ye sicknes: but also through thengines of Astronomi, de¦fer and proong the fatal end and death. The. 13. Canon. Alwaies the diet of the patient is to be enquired, secondlye the Horoscope of the natiuity, and then by a figure erect to beholde ye stars of the planets, & by the situation of thē in their houses to know their strēgth & operatiō with the cause of thinfirmitie, & the lord of the birth: & so by the cōtrary qualities of the signes, to driue awaye the disease, as we wil declare hereafter by exāples. The. 14. Canon. Furthermore, you must note and marke euery .vii. day, and the courses. For therby is life or deathe to be loked or hoped for, but whiche be those Cretical dayes, we haue referred to be learned of the Phisition. As for as much as examples to most instructe and teach, we haue anexed one. It may hap∣pen peraduenture, that in the beginning of the sicken the Moone be in Aries,
which is a hote and drye signe, & accor∣dinge to his nature, dothe inflame the diseases. Here thou maest admonish the sicke person to be paciente, and that his paine wil be delayed at the .vii. daye, at which time the mone wilbe remoned in∣to Cancer. For Cancer beinge colde and moiste, and being a quartile aspecte vn∣to Aries: except the sicknesse be very fu∣rious, will moderate the same throughe his coldnes and moistures. The whiche thing if thou diligently attend & marke, thou shalt sone perceiue and vnderstand. And in like sort thou must worke b the other signes, considering how i signes of like nature, diseases are augmented and increased: and by the cōtraries, they be cured and holpen. The. 15. Canon. In likewise the se∣conde number of daies is to be obserued and marked, whiche is the. 14. daye, the whiche dothe geue a certaine and deter∣minate iudgemente, by meanes of the ful Moone, not so much for the Crisis as for the influence of the Mone beinge thē in opposition. As Aries, & Libra, Taurus, and Scorpio.
The. 16. Canon. The medicines thē selues haue likewise their propre signes, neither are they indifferentlye to be mi∣nistred at all times. For some serue for gargles, some for suffumigations, and other some sorpotions or drinks. Wher∣fore to auoide tediousnesse, I will com∣prehende all these in oure Canon. The Mone being in Aries, Leo and Sagitta∣rius, it is good to corroborate and strēgth the vertue attractiue in a man. Vnder Virgo and Taurus the vertue retentiue, the digestiue in Gemini, Libra and Capricorne, gargiles, vomettes, and suffumigations are to be ministred, the Mone being in Aries, and sometime on∣lye gargles in Taurus, Laxatiues by drincke in Scorpio, by electuari in ♋, by pilles (if you will) in Pisces, in Gemini and ♒ al confortable medicines is to be receiued and taken. In Libra or Scorpio, suppositories or glisters. The. 18. Canon. In the ministringe of purgations, there is greate respect to be had vnto the Mone, and her aspectes.
For she beinge in Cancer, and hauynge a trine or sextile aspecte with Venus, it is good to pourge cholere, hauinge the lyke aspectes with the Sunne: is good to pourge flegme, and with Iupiter me∣lancholye. either by pilles or by gobbets, called of the phisitians Boli. But if thou wilte pourge by drinkes: vse the same as∣pectes in Scorpio, and likewise in Pisces for ministring of pilles. And if that two Planettes at one time be in the aspectes aforesaide with the mone, two purgati∣ons may be taken at once. As for exam∣ple, if the Mone be at one time in a trine or sextile aspecte with Venus & the Sun, you may pourge bothe Choler & flegme together. The. 19. Canon. Suche as haue in the roote of their natiuity, Mars in Aries, or on his triplicitye, are colericke, for the most part indaunger of hot feuers, by a∣boundāce of cholere, phrenesi, pushes or biles cōming of blud, scuruy itch, bur∣ninges, and suche diseases as consume
and eat the flesh, the holy fire. The which diseases, if they can not vrterly be auoi∣ded and eschued the Phisition or surgean must take diligēt hee that he may driue awaye the disease by the rules of quali∣ties of the signes before expressed. The. 20. Canon. The like is to be vn∣derstande of al those with Mercury euill placed in the house of Mars, the whiche when thou perceiuest in anye natiuitie: iudge therby hote feuers, pimples rising of bloud, the canker, the kinges euel, and holy fire, darkenesse of the eyes, suffoca∣tion, and moreouer, horrible and fearful thoughts & verations of the minde. Er∣cept there come any temperament vnto the Mone, either in the signes or places appointed vnto Venus, and speciallye in collericke men. The. 22. Canon. The infirmities of the phlegmaticke, are of an other sorte: for vnto them happeneth most comonlye the agewes called Quotidians, and are much vexed with cold, the whiche is per∣ceiued by the Vrine, which for the moste part is thicke and raw. Wherfore suche
must vse exercise and laboure, and ab∣staine from al fat flesh and swine fleshe, also from chese and milke, and from the marrowe and braines of be astes. The. 23. Canon. Saturne with the Mone engendreth the fallen sickenesse, blacke chollere, leprosy and fistula. Also the morphew, goute, and oftentimes so∣daine panges. The which diseases when they hap∣pen are leasurelye and gentellye to be dealt withal, neither maist thou in suche case striue againste the Planets: excepte the medicine be such as will endeuoure with al force and strengthe, to expel and driue away the sickenesse, and pul it vp cleane by the rotes. Also, if anye man be borne, at the time of the coniunction of the Sunne and Mone: alwaies that na∣tiuity is iudged euil, for it maketh men when thei come to age, daungerously af∣flicted as it were with euil spirites, to be sickely, enclined to the falling sickenesse, to madnesse, and such kinde of diseases, as may hardly and difficultlye be cured by the Phisition.
The. 24. Cannon. You maye also iudge by the course of the Sunne, the sickenesse whiche we are in daunger of, if that ye marke the month in which the man is born. As for example. The man borne vnder Scorpio, shall be endoma∣ged with the disease of the shoulders, the goute in the handes, and the contracti∣on or conuulsion of the hāds or fingers. If it be a woman, it causeth the paine in the splene and stomacke. Likewise, they which are borne vnder Cancer, shall be¦vered with a drye scuruy itche, or rough∣nesse of skin, biles, and pushes. The we∣men with knawyng in the bowels, and pearils by waters. Taurus bringeth the infirmities aboute the throate, and ma∣ny other vexatiōs of the body: & specially in the euil monethes & yeres prescribed. Also Leo causeth ye paines of ye stomack. And Aquarius engendreth quotidian fe∣uers, as we haue briefly touched before. The. 25. Canon. This is also to be noted no lesse profitable vnto the sicke manne then to the Phisition, that is to saye: if that the patiente haue Saturne
or Mars in the seuenthe house, it is not conuenient to meddle, neither with phi∣sition nor Phisicke: althoughe the Lorde of the house, be neuer so vnfortunate, for so Galene thoughte it meete. Also if the Phisition be Saturnine or Mertiall, suche as is the patiente: It is approued and knowen, that these kinde of menne are borne for the destruction of man∣kinde. For it is vnpossible that they shoulde euer cure or helpe, or bringe any thinge prosperouslye to passe, excepte peraduenture amongest prophane and rusticall people. Suche one we haue knowen, a man surelye well learned, and in greate reputation amongest no∣ble menne, in whome there wanted no∣thinge as touchinge the arte or science, howe be it beynge admitted eyther to priestes, noble men, or ecclesiasticall ru∣lers, his labour and knowledge was al∣waies frustrate & in vaine, and brought the most part of them to their ende: but contrarywise amongest the prophane and rude sorte. he did cures withoute a∣nye difficultye or paine. Hereby you
may perceiue as wel in this as in all o∣ther thinges, of what force and strength the planets are. And this dare I be bolde to professe, that who so euer hathe Mars conioyned with Venus in the .vi. house, that he shalbe an excellente Phisition. And suche kinde of men, oughte not to geue them selues to anye other kinde of learninge or knowledge. I coulde re∣hearse vnto certaine graue men, Phisiti∣ons witnesses hereof: vnto whome it is a ready and easy matter to cure & helpe: yea, euen without any paine or labour. And againe, other some vnto whome it is so difficult and hard, that withal their possible endeuour, they can scarsly bring any thing to passe, whose names we wil kepe vnder silence, least we may seme to backbite or slaunder any man. Thus we haue briefly spokē, not hereby to expoūd all thinges whiche can not be done in so fewe wordes: but to minister occasion vnto Phisitions, that beholding and con∣sidering the vtilitie and profit of Astro∣nomy, hey may with their hole power and endeuour embrace the same, & ther∣by
learne not only by the prescript rules of men to helpe the diseased: but also by their owne wit and engine to put away the diseases, euen without medicines. For euery sicke man is not of that sorte that he can beare salues or medicines. For some by diet, and others by obser∣uations of the signes maie be cured and holpen. Scorne vs who will, we verelye haue written these thinges of a sincere minde and affection, intendyng shortlye to set forth greater things. But first we thought it good to declare the things in general: and afterwarde the some and effect wheron the matter dependeth.
❧ A compēdious discription of Naturall Astrologye, ne∣uer so briefely handeled before. Made by, Iohn Indagine Priest. FIrst of all and chiefelye, it is mete to resell and put of the obiections of suche as ob∣tecte and saic: that besidethe Sunne and the Mone we at∣tribute verie little or nothinge at all to the other Planets, but do collocate and set the whole summe & power of Astro∣logye in them two onelye. Wherefore let euerie man vnderstande and knowe, as muche vertue and force to be in them two, as in all the other. And that the Sunne hathe the whole power and go∣uernance in the daie, and the Moone in the night, so that it is not neadefull to
haue respecte to anye of the other pla∣nettes. And this is the onely difference betwene naturall and arificiall Astro∣logye, that that thinge whiche artificial Astrology dothe by the seueral obserua∣tions of euerye Planet and Horoscope: the same doth natural Astrologye bring to passe by the onely obseruation of the motion of the Sunne and Mone. Or els they are so knitte and toyned together, that the one without the other can not well be learned or vnderstande. Wher∣fore, he shall not lofe his laboure whiche shall ioyne them bothe together, as well for the learnynge, as for the pleasure of them: for the naturall hathe somewhat more delectation then the artificiall, albeit the other seme the better. But now we wil define what a house is.
A House is a certaine space in the fir∣mamēt deuided by certain degrees, by the which the planets haue their mo∣tion, so Metaphorically called. For as in a house there be many mantions: so euery planet hath his proper place in the heauen or firmament, by the whiche they do moue, and in the which they be resident and situate. And it is called the discription or diuiston of the signes by. 30 degrees, for euerie house or signe hathe 30. degrees. astrological diagram
The number of the houses. AS the Astronomers do make menti∣on in their common Rithmes, there be .xii. houses, the whiche wee will here ascribe with their interpretations. The first is interpreted the house of life The .ii. the house of faculties or substāce, called also of thimportunity of the place, the gate of hell. The .iii. is the mancion of brethren. The .iiii. beinge the bottome of the hea∣uens, and the angle of the earth, is the house of parentage. The .v. is the pleasure of Venus, the house of children. The .vi. of euil fortune, seruauntes, sick∣nesse, and the pleasure of ♂ The .vii. being opposite to the firste, is the house of mariage and open enemies The .viii. is the house of death. The .ix. of religion or long iourneys, the delite of the Sunne. The .x. being the middle of the firma∣mēt, is the house of rule or gouernance. The .xi. is the house of Fortune, the ex∣altation of Iupiter.
The .xii. is the house of prisons, euil for∣tune, the pleasure of Saturne. ¶ Of the principall Angles or houses of the heauen or firmament. AMongest these .xii. there be certaine which are called ye principall angles or coruers of the firmament, whiche are the first, the tenth, the seuēth, the fourth. The firste is the angle of the Easte, the Horoscope of the birth, and the house of Aries. The seconde is the midst of hea∣uen, and the house of Capricorne. The thirde is the angle of the west, and per∣teyneth to Libra. The fourth of Firmic9 is called the bottome of the firmament. And in these foure almoste the whole iudgement dothe depende and consiste. For they are the principall angles and houses, & the planets haue more power and strength in them then in any of the other.
Medium celi. Oriens. Occidens. Imum celi. I Iudge it but supersticious vnprofita∣bly to intreate much of the beginning of the natiuitic, because it dothe rather pertain to artificial Astrology: as of the fall of the sede into the wombe, and the ascendente of the houre of the natiuitye, whiche (as I said) perteyneth to an other kinde of speculation. Our intention at thys presente is fullye derected to the Sunne, and the signe wherein the Sunne is the daye of natiuitie.
For as Ptolomye is witnesse, there are as great effectes and vertues in the Sunne as in al the other Planets. And those thinges which nature & long expe∣riēce hath taught vs: we will make eui∣dent vnto you, letting passe all supersti∣tious thinges. Of the effectes of the Planets. FIrst of all it is conuenient to declare the natures and effectes of the Pla∣nets in euery house, the which although we haue sufficiētly handled in our boke intituled Octocedrō, yet I am nothing a hashed to describe it here the secōd time. If any man be borne betwene the .x. or .xi. daye of Marche, (when the sunne commonlye dothe enter into Aries) and cōtinueth there through thre decanes or faces, vnto the .x. or .xi. daye of Aprill, Mars is founde larde in the day of nati∣uitie: who beinge by nature fierye, and Aries likewise, dooeth augmente and increase his heat and furye, and al other cull dispositions, more then if he had ben in an earthly or watery signe. Saturnus wheresoeuer he be, and spe∣ciallye
in the .vi .viii. or .xii. house, is the auctoure of all miseries, calamities, la∣boures, and sickenesse. Venus being temperate, causeth a mā to be a louer of women, of playes, son∣ges and bankettes, and all thinges per∣taining vnto mirth. Mercury is the minister and geuer of wisdome and eloquence, lawes, retho∣ricke, subtile workes, merchaundise, and such like. The Mone causeth madnesse, vnsted∣fastnes, moistnesse, and stouth. Iupiter in the angles is the auctor of beauty, richesse, honor, and rule. The Sunne in the ascendente, or in the angles maketh a greate and honou∣rable personage, and had in reputation amongst princes and greate men. The signes also causinge beautye, are Gemini, Libra, Virgo, and the firste part of Sagittarius. Workers of meane beauty, Scorpio, Capricorne and Pisces. Barren signes, are Gemini, Leo, virgo. Causinge defection or lacke of chil∣dren
Aries, Taurus, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricorne, and Aquarius. Meane and without voice, Cancer, Scorpio, pisces. Ministring reason, Virgo, Libra, A∣quarius, Gemini. The qualities of the signes I iudge are wel inoughe knoweit. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, are hotte and drye. Taurus, Virgo, Capricorne, melancho∣like, colde, and drye. Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, are colde, moyst, and waterye. Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, are hotte, moist, and ayrye. And thus always thre signes agreing in one nature, do make a triplicitie. And euerye Planette likewise haue certaine powers and effectes in their priuate or proper houses, as for example. Aries and Scorpius, are the houses of Mars. Taurus and Libra, of Venus. Gemini and Virgo, of Mercury.
Sagittarius and Pisces, are the houses of Iupiter. Capricorne and Aquarius, are attri∣bute to Saturne. The Sunne hathe onlye one house, which is Leo. The Mone possesseth also Cancer. Euerye signe hath likewise his proper signification in the creation of the mē∣bers of mans bodye. Aries hathe of the bodye of man, the head and the face. Taurus the necke, and the throte bole. Gemini, the shoulders, armes, and handes. Cancer the brest, the heart, stomack & ribbes, splene, and longes. Leo the nether parte of the stomacke, backe, and sides. Virgo the belly or midriffe, Diaphrag∣ma and bowels. Libra the loynes, the nether parte of the belly and nauel. Scorpio the priuye members, stones, blather, and thighes.
Sagittarius the buttocks with the apper∣tenances. And Capricorne the knees. Aquarius the legges, Pisces the feete and soules. Certaine vvorthy notes concerning the sunne and Moone. LEaste that any shoulde herein be de∣ceiued, we thinke it not mete to be let passe, concerning the sunne and Mone, the which al be it they be the chiefe and princes of the Planettes: yet are they ne∣uer Lordes of the natiuity, as for exam∣ple. If ye Mone be in Gemini, or in Can∣cer, whiche is her owne house, when a childe is borne: yet shall not the Moone haue the dominion of the birthe, but it shalbe imputed to the Lord of the house folowing. So likewise, if a man be born the Sunne being in Leo, which is his pro¦per house: yet he loseth the dominion of the natiuity, and it is deriued vnto Mer∣cury being patrone of the next mansion Virgo. Againe, the Mone being in Vir∣go, Venus is Ladye of the birthe, because of Libra folowing which is the house of Venus. Neither is it vnprofitable to ad∣monish
you also of his, which I perceiue euery wher to be doubted of, that ye euel planets as Saturn and Mars, are not so hurtful & pernicious in their own proper houses, as thei be in ye mansiōs of others. I wil propound an example of the firste signe, wherby it may appeare more eui∣dent. We wil set the Sunne to be in the time of some natiuitye in Aries, whose nature you al ready know, and what ef∣fect he worketh being in the Horoscope. Then in therection of the figure, ioyne Mars with Aries beinge Lorde of the house: and therby iudge that he whiche is born shal liue long. Notwithstāding, Mars who although he be nought, & ill, yet he doth not so much pour out & shew his malice being in his own house; as if he were in another house, sacring that in stede of hurt by the sword, he threatneth sodene sickenesse, because Mars being in Scorpio, the .viii. house, neyther shall those sickenesse bring death. And this is for an eāple. The like is also to be vn∣derstād of Saturn, being in Capricorn or in Aquarius. And left we may seine here
vtterly to neglect artificial Astrology, ye which we do not denye, but to be requi∣ie, to the vnderstāding of the natural. Wherefore, we mindinge to declare the force & strēgth of the signes, we wil first do it by artificial Astrology: so that anye mā lacking Firmicus and his tables, ha∣uing a plaine Astrolobe, and beholding thascendent at thoure of ye natiuity: may by these smal instructions geue iudgmet. And after this in order, in another phrase I wil do the same by natural Astrology the which shal helpe the artificial. Of the first house and horoscope in Aries IF any man wil peraduenture demaūd what operation & effect the Horoscope in Aries doth worke in vs. First of all I admonish thē that the stars or signes do not {pro}uoke or force vs to any thing, but onlye doth make vs prone & apt: being so apt, they do moue stir vs vp vnto the things we are so prone vnto. Frō whose motion we are fre and oute of daunger, that folowing the rule and gouernāce of reasō, they shal haue no effect in vs. But if cōtraciwise, we onli folow our natural
stinction they shal worke the same effect in vs, that they do in a manner in brute beastes. Wherfore, this Horoscope ma∣keth them which are borne, florishing in youth, withoute brethren, or one at the most, if they be fortunate: hauing a mu∣table inheritance, now gotten, now lost, and now lost, and stait recouered again, inclined to the diseases of the hed, rather then to ani other sicknesse (because Aries hath chief respect to the hed). For ye most part bestowing his labor & good wil vp∣on vnthankful persons, & specially Aries being in the Horoscope. Nexte after the Horoscope, must hede be taken vnto the chiefe angles, & what signe is in eche an∣gle, which may easily be rekened, by the fingers or els bi a figure erect, as for ex∣ample. Aries being in the first house, Cā∣cer possesseth the nether part of the hea∣uen, Capricorne the midst, and Libra the west, and now we wil shew, what these principal angles do promisse. Capricorne in the midst of the heauen, doth discern honors, riches, promotions, secretes of religion, and a suttel wit.
astrological diagram Libra in the west sheweth the life and courtly maners, the which life few do a∣low: for it is vnconstant, casting down a man from honor and reputation, into in famy and reproche: fortune nowe flatte∣ring and laughing vpon him, and bi and by vering him with sondry miseries and calamities, so that he shal haue no como¦dity or gaine, withoute incomoditye and losse. Al this shal happen throughe emu∣lation or ye despite of his cōpanions. But
al these euils, whatsoeuer thei are Cācer in the nether part of the heauen doth a∣mend and recompence. We haue ioyned hereunto a figure, by the whiche as in a table you may perceiue all thinges per∣fectlye. Of the second house and Horos∣cope in Taurus. NExt after Aries, Taurus doth orderly follow, and is placed in the figure to the second house: the which, as we saide before, is the house of substāce or riches. If any man therfore wil know whether he shalbe rich in the first, second, or thirde age: let him iudge accordinge to ye lordes of the triplicities & their places. Whiche we wil do hereafter. Now we will only speake in general. The Horoscope or ascendent, beinge in Taurus, thou shalt iudge in this sort: that that mā shalbe painfully disquieted with sondry cares for getting of richesse, which he shal easely attain vnto, and be as apt to lose the same againe, and shall triumph ouer his enemies.
Aquarius also in the middest of heauē maketh him acceptable vnto Princes & great men, and geueth him rule in pub∣like affaires and offices, and peraduen∣ture in busines perteinynge to waters, because he semeth to be moste geuen to the nature of the water. Scorpius in the west causeth a harty & beneficial person, the which shal lose his wife, if it be a woman, she shal lose both her husband, and her sonne or childe. astrological diagram Leo in the nether parte of the heauen
causeth him to chalenge his patrimonie, the which (notwithstandynge al the en∣deuours & liyng in waite of his kinred) he shal obteine and get. Of the ascendent in Gemini. VVhosoeuer hathe this Horoscope, shal haue prosperitie & good fortune by his parentes, brethren, frendes, kins∣folke, and great menne. According vnto Firmicus Pisces being in the middest of the heauen, causeth thē which are so borne, to get their liuynge by moiste and watery thinges, howbeit for a tyme he shall not liue of his owne costes, but shal get the stipende or fee of some prince or citie. Sagittarius in the west doth contrari∣wise threaten destruction vnto his bre∣thren and kinred, whereby throughe di∣uers cares and vexations being put be∣sides his minde, he shal be a longe tyme tormented. After this his enemies wax∣inge fierce, and vyolentlye commynge vpon hym, and the waues of mischiefes styll increasynge: he shall be compelled to forsake hys owne natyue countrey,
and shal be banished & driuen awaye as Cain was, vntil at lengthe by the helpe of God, he shall be restored into his for∣mer estate and condition. Virgo likewise in the bottome of the heauen doth threaten the very same, but by chaunge and increase of time (accor∣dynge to the state of the incommodities and hurtes) it doth increase abundaunce and good fortune. ¶ Here you may behold the figure. astrological diagram
Of the Horoscope in Cancer. Cancer in the Horoscope doth dispose the natural disposition, and al other for∣tune in this sorte. It maketh a man of a quicke and subtile wit, albeit somewhat slowe, pleasaunt, quiet, and angry, ear∣nestly pursuynge all euil persons, whose anger is sone appeased. Also strong, mo∣derate, and graue, by the which gifts he shall be promoted vnto publike offices, & haue his liuing by them. Manye shal o∣bey him, and some by compulsion flatter him but fainedly and not hartely. Saturn is also hurtful vnto him, if that he be ei∣ther in the Horoscope or any near aspect For he dothe forshew not onely violente death, but also continual veration wyth sickenes, and the death of his brethren. Howbeit Aries beinge present in the midst of ye heauen, doth resist him al that he may, and maketh him also acceptable vnto princes and great men, desirous of good thinges, also wastyng and recoue∣ryng again his patrimony & inheritāce. With like clemency Capricorne in the occidēt shal cause him to be spotted with
infamy, which he shal shortly after wipe away, and many other misfortunes, and shal restore him into his former estate. And shal also encourage him to seke out hidden and secrete things, but not with∣out great vexation and trauaile. astrological diagram Libra in the bottome bringeth sorow vpon sorow, dispersying the patrimonye, and gettyng it againe, preferryng hym to publike or ciuil offices, whereby great and secreate affaires shall be commit∣ted
vnto hym, which are not accustomed to be committed, but onely vnto verye good menne. And where as Saturne before in the Horoscope doth threatē a violent death, Libra doth alienate the same, promising an honest death and burial. And if Iupi∣ter be in the signe folowynge, it causeth the first childe to be a sonne. Of the Horoscope in Leo. THey also which haue Leo in the Ho∣roscope for the moste parte are trou∣bled with businesse not perteinynge to them selues, whereby thei get them sel∣ues immortall name and fame, prefer∣ring them selues vnto other nacions, lo∣uing libertie, neither willynglye suffe∣ring subiection: bestowinge all their la∣boure and trauayle to prescribe lawes and ordinaunces to other. Mars in the artificial figure being opposite vnto Leo dothe to al effectes denye men children: except Iupiter beinge present do appease his rigour, who peraduenture wil geue a daughter.
Taurus in the middeste of Heauen, causeth hym to bee suspecte amongest Princes and greate menne, and ma∣keth hym a ruler of publyke offices. Al∣so promoted into dignityes by greate menne, wittye in all thinges, and like∣wyse fortunate in all thinges but one∣lye in mariage, for because he shal refuse the moste honest and beautifull women, and marrye either an olde woman, or a woman of euyll name, or els a wydow. Aquarius beynge in the occidente dooeth geue bothe increase and losses. Scorpius in the nether parte of the hea∣uen, maketh hym a ruler ouer certaine affayres. And they also haue Taurus in the middest of the heauen, whome Mars beholdynge wyth a contrarye a∣specte, dooeth threaten bothe imprison∣mente, and also death in a straunge place or contrey.
astrological diagram ¶ Of the Horescope in Virgo. THe Horoscope in Virgo dothe vehe∣mentlye prouoke a manne to lechery and riote, and causeth him to bee so farre in loue with women, that he wold abuse all women. It dothe also minister riches and religion, and maketh him ru∣ler ouer aunswers and oracles, so that he shal be thought to be of the noumber of the Goddes, wittye and cunnynge in all thynges, searchynge out al thinges
a good artificer, with aboundance of ri∣chesse, whether it happen by religion, by learning, or by marchandise. Gemini beinge in the middest of the heauen, dothe promisse in a manner the same effecte: howe be it, noc so sone, but doth adde a goodly wit and disposition in seking out of secrete thinges, and pre∣scribinge rules and preceptes of liuinge vnto others. Pisces also tending towardes the west doth not only for show the same: but also more plesāt and ioyful thinges, as beau∣ty or comlines, liberality, gentlenes and softnesse, with fauor & loue amongst mē. Sagittarius doth adde vnto this the fa∣uour and giftes of the goddes, as felicity and plenty of all thinges, as of children, ecclesiastical rule, and agility and quick∣nesse to do al these thinges. And this is the desteny of him, which hath Virgo in his Horoscope, the other thre signes be∣inge also gathered, as you maye here perceiue.
astrological diagram Of the Horoscope in Libra. LIbra being ascendente at the houre of natiuity, causeth sicknesse, daungers, enemies, & great strifes and debates, how be it, after all those daungers, it decreeth victory and triumphe. Also promotions, religion, sincerity, and integrity of iudg∣ment. In nothing so vnfortunate as in hauinge of children, for when he hathe gotten certaine children, and beginneth to put all his hole confidence and truste
in them by and by, they shall decaye and dye, euen those in whome he had set his ful hope and trust in. If any mā desire to know what digni∣ties he shal haue & in what place, ye may very wel be perceiued by Cācer being as¦cendēt in the midest of the heauen. Who promiseth ecclesiastical promotiōs or sti∣pend, and to haue his liuing oute of the common treasure. Hither also are to be referred the substance, nobility, and chil∣dren, which shal happen aboundantly in age: how be it he shal not be so fortunate in children, except Iupiter do behold him with some foundly aspecte. Aries being in the accident, shal mini∣ster all these thinges in watery places, or about the water: shal also bring him in∣to great daungers, lōg iourneys, and de∣sert places, into pearils by his wife: and peraduenture into a frensye or madnesse til he draw in age, and then he shal haue an end of all these miseries. Capriobrne shall tesse him hither and thither, and seldome suffer him to be in quiet, nether wil he suffer his patrimony
to be in suretie, but now vp, now down, now losse, now recouered again: because for the most parte they be wanton whi∣che haue Capricorne in the nether parte of the heauen. Also be shall haue a sonne by an vnlawfull woman. astrological diagram The Horroscope in Scorpio. I Iudge the nature of the Horroscope in Scorpio to be manifest, accordynge to the naturall guiding of the thing ta∣king life therin. For it maketh an angry
man, priuily pouring out his poison, and backbityng with his pestilent tong, ve∣ry rich, and tossed with many perils, and thereby almost brought to desperation: the which being somewhat quieted and pacified, he shal enioy a quiet fruite and vse of glorie, dignitie, ministration, and religion. It addeth also a liuely spirite & vigour of minde, with adournament of speache. Further, notwithstanding his former damages, it geueth increase of children, whiche shal recompence his so∣rowes passed. astrological diagram
For so much as it happeneth seldom but ye thother pricipall angles perform the same which the ascendent doth pro∣mise: so Leo possessyng the midste of the heuen, doth promisse that which is afore∣said, adding therunto fortitude & strēgth to perform the same withal, geuing also dignitie, as an imortal reward of vertue. Taurus in the accident geueth him vi∣ctory ouer his enemies, as wel priuy, as apert. Howheit he shal be infamed for lechery, the whiche he shal also wipe a∣way by little and little, now encreasyng and augmentyng his inheritaunce, and shortly dispersing and spoyling it again. Aquarius in the nether angle threate∣neth peryll and daunger by water, and ingratitude of them vnto whō he hath bene most beneficiall. Of the Horoscope in Sagittarius. THe Horoscope in Sagittarie is recke∣ned amongst them which wrappeth a mā in manifold daūgers & perils beinge ascendēt, for it doth allure them whiche are borne vnder it to trauayle longe iourneys, & to commit them selues to the
seas and great waters. It ministreth al∣so naturally a prompt and ready wit to all good learnyng and discipline, so that they folow nature. Wherfore, if Virgo happen to be in the middest of the heauen, it dothe aug∣ment his fortune, recompensyng the la∣bours of his minde and wit with some notable preferment, bi the which he shal excell others: vsing the same liberalitye in helpynge others, althoughe they bee vnthankefull. astrological diagram
Gemini in the west geueth children & neuewes by and by in the middle age, and shall geue hym rule or office ouer bokes and secrete thinges. Pisces in the nether part of the heauē gueth helpe out of watery places, ma∣keth him faithful, to whom secrets may be committed, noble, either by bloude or gentlenes: whome, if Iupiter do beholde with any meane aspect, he shal marye a wife which hath bene defiled before, or an adulterous woman. Of the Horroscope in Capricorne. CApricorne in the Horroscope is not altogither an ill signe, for it causeth a man to be louyng, mery, faithful, som∣what crafty, abundant, but faint harted, and very supersticious in prayer. Moreo∣uer, libidinous, and the pleasure beinge once paste, he wil straite be at defiaunce and mishandle the women. Also of a straunge life or liuing, and a secrete sen∣sore or iudge, and speciallye of religion, or such like maiters. Libra in the midst of the heauen brin∣geth in his gaine by the losse and deathe
of others, maketh him also honest, godly, acceptable, eloquent, and learned: and in his necessitie wowyng & praiynge vnto God, wherby after all euils and misfor∣tunes, he shall obteine a prosperous and happye age. Cancer in the occidente stirreth vp all his frendes against him, and increaseth innumerable perilles and daungers to∣wardes him. The same thing also Aries doth thretten in the bottome of the heuē, for al his substaunce, dignities, & offices astrological diagram
shal be tossed to and fro, nowe vp, nowe downe, vntil at the length as is said, Li∣bra shal moderate the same, yet shall be nor preserue his sonne or childe, but that he shal be greuously vexed with sicknes. Of the Horoscope in Aquarius. THe effect of this Horoscope is suche that it maketh them meanely riche, promoted them vnto great men, and ca∣steth them into manye daungers, out of the which, euen in the midst of despera∣tiō, he shal be releued by the holy of god. It maketh them also kepers of hospita∣litie, liberal, and prodigal, and a patrone to thē which seme to excel in good sciēces, handlyng & dispensing holy matters. Scorpius possessyng the midste of the heauen, geueth strengthe, and causeth a harde and vile lyfe, neuer permanent or abidyng in one place, hauyng ill fortune by his wiues. But last of al, he shal be de∣liuered out of al these euils by the helpe of good men. Leo in thoccidēt shal cause him to be often at variāce with his wife or concubine, he shal also mary with an olde woman, whyche shall flatter hym,
promisyng him great giftes, but in her hart she shal loue other better then him. His owne houshold shal be his enemies, by whose healpe his other enemies shal go aboute to destroye him. And he shal marie either another mans wyfe, or els a widdow. Taurus in the nether angle, encreseth his glory and pompe which he is geuen vnto, enrichynge hym also with other mennes goodes, and causynge hym to liue longe. astrological diagram
Of the Horoscope in Pisces. PIsces maketh them very witty, bold, harty, faithful, frēdly, & somwhat hie minded, promoting them also to honor. Sagittarius in the vpper angle, shal caste him headlonge into manye pearils and daugers. Notwithstanding, maketh him personable, and bold to moue debate and strife with great men, and shal bring o∣ther mens goodes in pearil and danger, and therby possesse that whiche is none of his owne. Virgo in the occidente, maketh him hartye, a keper of hospitalitye, secrete, a steward, and one louing his wife immo∣deratly, whom she contrariwise shal not loue, and al other vnto whome he hathe beneficial, shalbe vnthankeful. Wherby he shal be often vexed & troubled through his wife and children. Moreouer, he shall be troubled with sickenesse, by reason of Gemini in the nether angle. He shal also haue a disease whome none shal know but him self, he shal lose his substaunce, and recouer the same againe, and also be holpen by his
fredes, lest he might seme destitute. He shal surrendre his spirit to his maker in a strange land or place, out of his owne country by sodaine deathe. astrological diagram ¶ Hereafter folovveth the natural iudge∣mentes of Astrology, according to the re∣uolution of the Sunne, throughe the .xii. signes of the Zodiacke. HItherto we haue intreated ye obscure sayinges of others, concerninge the iudgementes of the Horoscope. But be∣cause we only promised to intreat briefli of those thinges, which others haue hād∣led
with long comentaries: some perad∣uēture wold impute theft vnto me, in ad∣ding other mens doing vnto mine. Of ye which theft I am nothing ashamed: for albeit ye theft in al thinges be reprehen∣sible, yet in learning only it is comenda∣ble and praise worthy, & especially when that a man goeth aboute by the same to enucleat and discusse the darke & obscure sayinges of others. This we speake vn∣to such as enuy al our doinges, like as ye barbarous people, whiche beinge nether apt, nether prompt to any kinde of good learninge: yet they iudge all thinges in their own tong & lāguage vile & nought. Thou, who so euer thou art, that readest these thinges, rather waye and consider our minde and intent, then our wordes, mindinge to teach and make euident all thinges vnto thee: which if it come other wise to passe, it is contrary to our minde and purpose. Nowe we wil enter vppon the natural iudgementes, wheras briefly concerning Aries, it is in this sort.
The Sunne in Aries. THe Sunne beinge in Aries, maketh thē which are born, nether riche, ne∣ther very pore. Also angry, but sone plea¦sed, studious, eloquent, diuerse, proude, liyng, and luxurious, promising (as they say) mountains of gold, and performing nothinge, euel reported of amongste his kinred, and shalbe broughte in daunger by his enemies, whiche shalbe men of power. He shall be burie by foure foted beastes, as being cast of a horse, he shal receiue great woundes with daunger of death. So much vnfortunate and aduers shal al kinde of hauking, hūting, fishing and al thinges to be done on horseback, be, & happen vnto him: in other things he shalbe more fortunate and happy, and also long liued. Also if it be maid which is born, she shalbe geuē to liyng, angry, faire, curious, deliting in new & strange thinges, enuious and fruteful in childrē, whose first childe shalbe slain: she shalbe in many pearils and daungers; whereby she shal get a marke or skar in the head, or elsse be naturally marked there, or in
the féete. This we haue noted also out of certayne authors, that the children of Aries, being borne in the day, shalbe for∣tunate and of greate reputation and re∣nowme amongste greate men and prin∣ces: contrariwise, they whiche are borne in the nighte, to be infortunate, and of no reputacion. astrological diagram The Sunne in Taurus.
TAurus doth make thē bold and fortu∣nate in attēpting hard and waightie affaires & businesse, a victor or conque∣rour of his enemies, a great trauailer, & banished from his natiue countrye. Also seruile, familiar, angrye, but more in youth thē in age for age shal take away al incōmodities and displeasures, & shal bringe richesse and mariage, by whiche meanes he shall be exhilerate and made ioyful & glad. For if he go about to ma∣ry in youth, he shal scarse attain vnto it, how be it age doth not take away sicke∣nesse, but increaseth sadnesse, melancho∣ly, blacke choler, and causeth hurt, as bi∣ting of a dogge, and that about the .xxviii or .xxxv. yeare of his age. These thinges once passed, he shal florish again & liue ve¦ry lōg. It maketh also the womē childrē wanton, painful, obediente, & ful of wor∣des: also infamed for whoredō, which in∣famy shal vanish away by litle and litle, whē she cometh to the age of .xxi. yeres, she shal haue many husbands & children, wise and witty in helping and counsai∣ling others also circumspect and rich.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Gemini. GEmini beinge naturallye faire, dothe cause also a fair childe, merciful, wise and wittye, liberall, a boaster, a runner and strayer about countries, taking smal regard to his owne busines, whereby he shall be neither riche, neither oppressed with pouerty, but of a meane estate. And of suche fidelitye and faythfulnesse, that he shall haue the rule of the common treasure, merye mineded, full of vnder∣standing, subtile, gentle to be spoken to,
& by a certain instructiō acceptable vnto men, as they whiche haue Venus in the rote of their natiuiti. Also fair of face, in∣dued with good learning and science: as Mathematical sciences, the lawes, and Arithmatick. This singuler gift he hath also before others, that being angrye, he can dissemble and couer his anger. He shalbe in great daūger about .xxiii. yeres of age, ether to be bitten of a dog, or hurt by fire, or els by Iron or weapon. astrological diagram
The Sunne in Cancer. CAncer being naturally cold & moiste, doth make grose the flesh, and doth al¦lure and prouoke to the loue and cōpany of women. Also it causeth a good wit, hu∣mility, and wisdome, ful of strife and de∣bate: & for the most part geuing victorye ouer al his enemies. Attemptinge many thinges, and specially on the sea, often in daūger, and vexed with manye incōmo∣dities, with much pouerty & misery. And al be it he be the causer of gaine, yet shal he be neuer a whitte the richer: he shall digge for treasure, and finde that, which he oked not for. But if it be a maid, she shalbe fat, beautifull, nimble, angry, and sone pleased, diligente, wise, ciuile and shamfast, witty, disceitful, and crafty, sai∣yng one thinge and doinge another: al∣waies careful and paineful, ordeyned to many dangers, as by water, by fallinge, by childe bearing, and by the clicke, ha∣uing her firste childe weake and tender, the other somewhat stronger. And if she happen to commit any faut of infamye, after the age of .xxvi. yeres it shalbe clene
abolished & put out of minde. After the which age, whether it be man or womā, it promiseth good successe & fortune. It maketh them also well heered, modest, faithful, painful, greadye of meate and drinke, acquainted with noble men, and fortunate in husbandrye. astrological diagram The Sunne in Leo. THe Sunne in Leo, maketh a stoute stomacke, bolde, arrogant, eloquent
and proud: a mocker & scorner, vnmerci∣full, cruel, harde, and harde to be intrea∣ted. Beset with manye miseries and pe∣rilles, out of the whiche he beinge esca∣ped, shall obtaine some cōmon office: as to be a centurion or a captaine ouer .v.c. lokinge for benefite at the hands of thre noble men, vnfortunate in children, & for thē susteininge muche laboure and af∣fliction, prone to anger, and putting him selfe in manye daungers, enflaminge cholere, promoting to honours and dig∣nities, and bringeth them in daunger of fire, sword, and violence of beasts, wher∣by he shal dye oute of his owne house or place. How be it by the helpe of God, he shall escape oute of all these daungers. Likewise, if it be a maid, she shalbe bold, haue a great and large breaste and slen∣der legges, whiche are tokens of stoute∣nesse and boldnesse, anger, slaunders and bablinge, albeit that the softnesse which is in women, dothe somwhat remit and asswage thexcesse of ye same. She ought also specially to take hede of hot water & fire, bi ye which she shalbe gretli in dāger
she shal also be much inclined to the sick∣nesse or knawinge of the stomacke. But after the age of .xx. or .xxi. yeres, she shal be fortunate in richesse, the whiche she shal obtaine by the helpe of greate men, and the vse of other mennes goodes: also in housekeping, beauty, and loue. Not∣withstandinge, she shall haue but fewe children. astrological diagram The Sunne in Virgo.
SO likewise Virgo dothe make them fortunate in housholde affaires, witty, true, stout, and ambitious. His wife shal die before he know of it, diuerse thinges also shalbe taken and stoine from him, and he shal be reuenged of his enemies. Moreouer, he shalbe so muche geuen to boastinge and bablinge, that he can not hide and keepe close his owne secreates, faire of face, well mannered, a louer of women, and deliting to be in the courtes of great men and princes. Moreouer, iust wise, good, and honourable, a patrne & defender of his frendes: also holy & mer∣ciful, comelye bodied and well frended. A maide of the same birthe, shalbe wittye, honest, and shamefaste, wel willinge, di∣ligente, circumspecte and angrye, she shall marrye aboute the age of sixtene yeares, and shall bringe forthe her firste begotten of an elogant and goodly form or shape. Howbeit, whether thei be men or women, they shalbe wrapped in ma∣ny pearils and daungers.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Libra. THe Sunne in Libra causeth the childe to bee libidinous, busye, fortunate, and specyallye vppon the waters, or things perteinyng to the water. Also by swete spices and precious stones, & suche like. It causeth likewise a comely bodye and nimble, a pleasant tongue or speche, a good name, sekinge oute secretes, but seldome stedfast in promises, althoughe he pretende otherwise. He shal put him
selfe in greate daungers and troubles. His firste wife shall not continue wyth him longe, he shal also haue enheritance of the goodes of deade men, and partely by his owne witte and industrye. Nei∣ther shall he bee altogether vnfortunate by foure foted beasts. He shal suffer ma∣nie and great things for womēs sakes, and shal be infamed for vnlawfull com∣paniynge with them. Also he shall be a good interpreter of dreames, whether his birthe be by daie or night. The wo∣men shall bee frendelie, merie, and io∣cunde, settinge her whole delite on the fieldes and hearbes, wanderinge into straunge places. Aboute the age of .xxiii. shee shal marie, whiche maxiage shal be fortunate: whose beautie, pleasant speche or tongue, and comelie behauiour, shall greately preferre and promote her. Nei∣ther are the children of Libra altogether vnapt to letters or good learnynge. But let them take heede of scaldinge water and of fire, for they shall receiue hurt by them, without great regard he had.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Scorpio. SCorpio dothe augmente the inheri∣tance, and addeth boldnes and stout∣nesse, also flatterie, by the which he shall disceiue manye, shewynge (as they say) breade in the one hande, and hidynge a Stone in the other: minglynge poyson with honye, perfourmynge almoste no∣thinge that he promiseth. Notwithstan∣dynge, merye, and iestynge, yght of be∣liefe, and a Conquerour of his enemies.
It causeth also the women to be frend∣lye, wyse, and craftye, whiche shall be disceyued of her firste hubande: her o∣ther husbande shee shal ioyfully vse, & ouercome her enemies. Shee shall also haue the paine of the splene, & bee mar∣ked either in the heade, or shoulders, or brawne of the arme. It maketh bothe kyndes bolde and rasshe to robbe and steale, and to searche oute forbidden thinges, and to make contractes or bar∣gaines. Also it maketh them wanton, fornicatours, vnstable, and full of euyll thoughtes and imaginations, babblyng and angrye, and sometyme very sadde and afflicte. Howbeit, there shall bee Princes and greate menne whiche shall esteme and sette muche by suche sorte of menne, and also of the common people whiche shall flatter them, whereby they shalbe hadde in reputation and honour.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Sagittarius. SAgittarius is not altogether euil, for the Sunne dwellyng in it dothe geue fortune, & ministreth a courage to take anie thinge in hande, whatsoeuer thou purposest: and specially to trauel straūge countreys, and to passe the seas, and not to returne without great gaine. He shal also get frendes to come into the houses and courtes of princes, (not to gather vp the trenchers, or licke the disshes as the
common and viler sorte of courtiers do: but to be put in some office, as to be ste∣ward or suche like, to the which promo∣tion his agility and strength shal great∣ly prefer him. Moreouer, he shalbe alto∣gether geuen to ridinge, haukinge, hun∣tinge, daunsinge, and leapinge, playes and games, combates and conflictes, for the whiche he shall haue many enemies whiche shal enuy him and impugn him greuously, whome he shal not withstan∣dinge vanquishe and ouercome. He shall also possesse his fathers inheritance, whi¦che hapneth not vnto al mē. And often∣times it maketh them iuste, wittye, stil, harty, ingenious, faithful, gentle, firme and stable, paineful and boastinge. The woman also shal not much differ: for she shalbe full of anxietie, painful, merciful, and muche enuied and lien in waite for by euel men: but she shal ouercome them and be fertile in childe bearing. She shal mary about the age of .xvii. yeares, but if that mariage procede not, she shall not mary vntil the age of .xxiiii. yeares.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Capricorne. CApricorne maketh the childe angrye and light, accompaniynge him selfe with vyle and suspicious persons. Also painefull, and distracte and vexed wyth diuerse variaunces, the whiche aduer∣sities he shall boldely and stoutlye beare out and sustaine. He shall be readye to dye for the loue of some pore aud simple
maide, the which at length shal cast hym into some disease and sickenes. It maketh them also meanelye riche, beneuolente, chearefull, and merye: but vnstedfaste, if the natiuitye be by night. In his age, when hee seeth his rychesse increase, he will beginne to loue mony, and decline from his former liberality, vnto couetousnesse, for in youth he was easye to be handeled. He shal prospere in nauigations, and speciallye towarde the East, for hys fortune shal come out of the Easte from greate menne. The Phisiognomye of these children for the moste parte is suche: a little heade, hol∣lowe eyes, and a meane voyce. Bathes be profitable vnto hym beynge sicke. The women are tymerous, and verye shamefast, and shal haue dominion and vyctorye ouer their ennemyes, and shall straye farre abroade.
astrological diagram The Sunne in Aquarius. AQuarius maketh the childe frendlye, but couetous, & apte to quotidian a∣gues, vnfortunate about waters, which naturally he shal abhorre. His good for∣tune shal begin to increase about thage of .xv. or .xvi. yeares, at the whiche time he shall beginne to wander and straye throughe diuers places, and waxe som∣what riche, whiche richesse shall neuer
come to aboundaunce, but shalbe disper∣sed againe vntil his latter yeares, which shall make amendes for that which hath bene ouer liberally spent afore. Neither shall his long iourneis turne him to any greate lucre or gaine, but he shal loke for, and obtaine greater profite at the hāds of others. Further, he shalbe vexed with sondry incommodities, losses, and pearils, and specially with his wife, and other women: for she shal fal into a pal∣sey, neyther shal he haue the fruition of her any long time, nether shal he prosper with other women, but she beinge once deade, al thinges shall come more fortu∣nate to passe. The maide borne in Aquarius shalbe proper and fine, true, and constant, and in these three pointes, she shall excell the man. She shal also be enriched by other mens goodes, and let her take heede of her childrē, for she shalbe vexed with ma∣ny incōmodities, and attempte straunge places, she shalbe but of a mene estate vn¦to thage of .xxii. yeares, and then fortune
shall begin somewhat to fauour her: and she shal optaine meane richesse. Often∣times bothe the men and wemen be soft of speche, wise, ingenious, faithfull, me∣rye, and continually angry with theyr enemies. astrological diagram The Sunne in Pisces. PIsces in youthe, dothe vere his children with many euils, and oftentimes with out deserte: and maketh them couetous, merye, diligente, players, neglecting for∣tune,
of a good disposition, louing the cō∣panye of good men. Also of a quicke and readye tonge, bolde, standinge muche in their owne conceite, and fortunate in se∣kinge oute treasures: for this is only ge∣uen vnto them, that they shal finde som∣thing vnloked for. Thei shal also be part¦ly enriched by other mens goodes. Thei shal not liue lōg, except they passe ye age of. 35. yeres, then ther is hope of lōg life: yet shal they neuer be very riche, al be it in their own opinion, they thinke to pos∣sesse the richesse of Cresus. Full of trou∣blous thoughtes, and shalbe brought in∣to captiuitye throughe women, and few thinges shal prosper with them in their childehode or youthe. They shalbe mar∣ked in the elbowe or fote, and their for∣tune is towardes the Southe. The mai∣den children shall be hote, bolde, of inso∣lente tonges, contumelious, and full of braulinge and scoldinge, beset with ma∣nye pearilles, (and puttinge all honestye aparte) she shall forsake her husbande: and if she be not let, she will marye her self vnto an aduoutrer. Also they shalbe
muche vexed with the tormentes of the belly and stomacke. And thus you haue the secōd time the influēces of the signes sufficiently spoken and intreated of. astrological diagram The nature of the houses. NOwe there dothe remaine to speake of the natures of the houses & signes howe and in what thinges they fauoure or helpe our doinges, and what is to be
done in euerie signe: whereby we may so ordre all our accions and doinges, that all thinges maie come prosperouslie and happelie to passe. For this is the onelye scope of Naturall Astrology, to the whi∣che if we do not attaine, I know not (as Alchabitius saith) to what ende it can o∣therwise be profitable vnto vs. THe first house is geuen vnto Aries, who also is the first signe in order, and is called of the Astronomers the house of life, and signifieth the begin∣ninge of all workes: and that whiche in the beginning of the life shall either de∣lite the childe, or els vexe him and trou∣ble him, also his strength and weaknes: and finally, al things that pertain to the natural life. The second house is of Taurus, and is the house of substaunce, liuinge, mi∣nistration, and seruauntes, and betoke∣neth the ende of youthe. In the which house if Iupiter and Venus happen to bee: they will chiefelye encrease those goodes which amongest the lawers are
called mouables, and also vnmouables, as gardens, fieldes, vineyardes and yere∣ly rentes, and what so euer dothe endure longe. Also if any man do hier any bond seruaunte vnder this signe, he shall be faithfull in all thinges he shalbe put in truste withal. The thirde house whiche signifieth successe by brethren, sisters, kinred, and smal iourneis, is attribute vnto Gemini. Wherefore if anye manne haue Aries in the Horoscope, you may pronoūce vnto him good fortune by his brethren & kin∣dred, by greate men, and his neighbours. It is good vnder this signe, to write and sende letters, to take in hande short iourneys, to begin frendship or brother∣hode, and sende letters, to take in hande short or such like. The fourthe house is called the man∣sion of parentes, inheritance, treasures, and secreates. In this house it is good to contract, bie and sell, & to chaunge vine∣yardes, fieldes, and possessions, to builde houses and engines, to lay foundations, to big the earth, & to chuse thy sepulchre, for al these things Cācer doth prosperate.
The fifte house, is the house of chil∣dren, and loue, legacies, and giftes, and of al those thinges whiche after deathe do pertaine either to praise or reproche. It is expedient therfore vnder this signe to take in hande all thinges that com∣meth in minde, to chearishe thy selfe, to banket and make good cheare, to straye abroade, to entre in couenauntes and frendship, because of Venus ministringe gladnesse. It is good also to put on newe garmentes, to write Epistles, to be me∣rye and playe, and to gette him faithful frendes, whiche maye defend him in his necessity and nede. The sixte is the house of infirmitie and sickenesse, sadnesse, and seruaunts, the delite of Mars, and is imputed vnto Virgo. It is not good herein neither to bie nor sel, because of vnfaithfulnesse, la∣bour, and sorow: and specially by Mercu∣rials and virgines, whome a man ought to eschue. For it heapeth against vs false witnesse, theues, and those whiche shal lie in wait for our life, menslears, & bloud sheders. Also tumultes, seditions, and
factions, and al these shall happen by the Virginistes, & Mercurials, because ye Mars as is aforsaid doth reioise ī these things. The .vii. is in Libra, which folowing by and by after the sicknesse, is the house of mariage, and of those thinges whiche are handled aboute the middle age, as it were in equal balance. In this it is good to amend and recouer things lost and in desperation: and because it is the house of perfit enmity, it is good to haue to do with thine enemies, to begin warres & debates, and speciallye for them whiche haue Aries in thascendent. The .viii. mansion is attribute vnto Scorpio, & is the house or portiō of death, feare, and inheritance of deade men, and of such thinges as are done after death. Wherfore take heede that in this signe thou take in hand nothing, nether entre vpon any iourney or cōmit thy self vnto waters, because that herein he shal easi∣ly take hurt. Wherfore al battailes, cō∣tentions, vniust causes, enmities, & euill wemen are to be eschued, and specially if they rise by meanes of inheritance.
The .ix. is in Sagittarius, the house of faithe, religion, long iourneys, wisdome, philosophy, Mathematical sciēces, bokes, epistles, narrations, messages, dreames, and rumoures, whiche euerye one haue their proper starre in the firmamente or heauen. Wherefore the Sunne or Mone beinge in that house, it is good to take in hande the thinges aforesaid, for because they shal soner take effecte at that time then at anye other, for it is the mansion of perfect frendship. The .x. house is in Capricorne, and is called the house of kingdome, rule, and office, and what so euer pertaineth to power. Wherfore, if thou wilt geue forth any precept or commaundemēt, or bryng any prouince or city in subiection, or at∣tain and get any rich kingdome, or haue to do with any iudge, or take in hand the defence of the poore, or haue conferens with great or noble men: al these things may haply & fortunately be done the Sun or Mone being in this house, cōmonlye called the house of Capricorne by the re∣guler order, Aries being in ye first house.
The .xi. is referred to Aquarius, and is the house of praise, of good Fortune, the delite of Iupiter, of seruauntes, and helpers in this māsion. It is good to set vpon thine ennemies, to get frendes, to praise them by whom thou lokest for re∣warde and gaine: and finally, to take in hande al thinges that wee woulde haue come wel to passe. The moste euill and pestilente house in a manner of all is the .xii. house, for it is the mansion of enemies, prisons, la∣bours, miseries, enuye, murmurations, and beastes, and is the ende of life. In this house let no goodnesse be loked for, but let him take hede of imprisonmente or fetters, the whiche (if he chaunce to come into in this signe) he shal be hardly deliuered oute. And if that Saturne the Lorde of the house, or Mars bee there: if woorketh deathe, and all kinde of mis∣chiefe. And thus successiuelye of al the other signes. Hitherto we haue spoken of the na∣ture and effectes of the signes, in what thinges thei beinge ascendente, do helpe
and furder vs. Nowe wee will call to minde againe somewhat whiche was spoken before concerninge the Planets, aboute the whiche, (as the matter dothe require) wee will not tarie with longe circumstaunce accordinge to the Pro∣uerbe, not mindynge to make an Ele∣phant of a flie: a great matter of a small. ❧ Saturne Lorde of the Birthe. SAturnus whersoeuer he be Lorde of birthe, doth draw the minde of those whiche are borne vnder him, hauing the bridle at libertie: to bee hie minded and stubburne, to malice, and to manie mise∣ries and calamityes. Howbeit, he ge∣ueth faieth and wisedome to perswade, and to discerne that whiche is iuste and true in all matters but in his owne, in the whiche he shal not be so circumspect. He shall trust muche vnto him selfe and to his owne witte, a small eater, but a
large drinker, not greatly affectioned to∣wardes his wife and children. Moreouer, he causeth the bodye to be leane, colde, and drie, filling it ful of euil humoures, maketh palenesse, bringeth sickenesse sone, and heapeth all diseases together; as the inflammations of the lunges, with a feruent ague, the dropsy, the gout, the kings euil, botches & biles, fallinge of the heere, and blindenesse, fal∣linge sickenesse: and finallye, the whole seas and floude of noughtye and vicious humours. He dothe also cut of and shor∣ten the life, either in a moiste place, or els in a straunge or deserte place, oute of his natiue countrye. It is also very euell if Mercury do fal in the house of Saturn, for he maketh an inchaunter, a coniurer, a Southsayer, a truse breaker, and an enemy of his parents and brethren, and of al other men. ❧ Iupiter Lorde of the birthe.
IVpiter doth euery wher deserue praise for there is no pointe of counsel, wise∣dome, knowledge, eloquence, and beau∣tye, whiche he dothe not liberallye mi∣nister and geue: so that if you will di∣scribe anye good manne, you maye wel faine him to be a Iouial. And brieflye, if thou wendicate vnto him al vertues and goodnesse, thou canste not erre. For the Iouialles be fullye replenished wyth all those thinges, so much lesse do they lacke anye thinge. To what ende shal I nede to commende and praise their magnani∣mitie, with their large honours and pro∣motions: whē as I saide before, there is nothinge founde to be wantinge or lac∣king in them. Mars Lord of the Birthe. COntrariwise, Mars beinge naturally euil, dothe make them disposed to all kinde of euell. And as we sayde, there was nothing in Iupiter blame worthy:
so wee do againe pronounce, that there is none so greate a mischiefe, but that the Martialistes dare boldly take in hād: nor none so foule a crime, wherewyth they are not contaminate and defiled. It is counted an heynous thinge amon∣gest them to be honest and good. And it is counted a greate vertue to robbe and steale, to kill, to burne, to lye, to disceaue, and delude. And to be shorte, it is natu∣rall vnto them to commit all vnlawful thinges. And if there be any thing more mischeuous then other, they thinke it lawfull for them to do it without shame or punishment. Venus ladie of the birthe. THe properties of Venus are so well knowen that I shal not nede to stand about it with greate circumstances: nei∣ther do I see why she should not be ioy∣ned with Iupiter. For vnto al the effects and workes, to al the vertues and scien∣ces, and finallye, to all the good thinges that Iupiter doth geue: she addeth splen∣doure
and renowme, and also riote, and specially if Iupiter be in any frendlye a∣specte with her: or that Mercurye be in coniunction with Saturne and Mars, her signification is well knowen. Mercuri lord of the birth VNto some Mercury semeth doubtful good with the good, & euill with the euil. Howbeit alone he is verye good in geuinge the dowries of the witte or dis∣position, in the which he doth excel Iupi∣ter and Venus. As for the sortes & kinds of sciences and learning, they are so wel knowen, that we shal not nede to repete them here againe. ¶ The Sunne vvith the lord of the birth. AL ye which is aforesaid of ye good pla¦nets, we wold also haue it vnderstād of the Sunne. For he is assured of a good planet which hath him, I mean not lord of yc birth: for that he is neuer. Likewise as the Moone being with the lord of the birthe semeth to me to bee (as it were) meane betwene Mars and Venus, and
therfore kepeth as it were a mean in the natural gifts. But if she happē to come in coniunction with Iupiter, Venus, and Mercurye: who wil not iudge that man most happye. ¶ The Mone vvith the lord of the birth. THe Mone onely for this cause is euyl reported, bicause it doth brede insta∣bilitie and vnstedfastnes, the which in a mā bringeth also al kind of mischiefe. Canons or rules for the erexion of the figure of the heauen. THE same order of the signes is ob∣serued herein that is in the artifici∣al, for what signe is ascendēt, euery pla∣net accordynge to the order, is to be put into euerie house. As if Aries be the as∣cendente of the birthe: place Aries in the firste house, Taurus in the seconde, Ge∣mini in the thirde, and Cancer in the
fourth. If the Sunne be in Cancer, short sha place Cancer in the first house, Leo in the seconde, Virgo in the thirde, Li∣bra in the fourth, Scorpio in the fift, Sa∣gittarius in the sixte, Capricorne in the seuenthe, whiche is opposite to Cancer, and the other in their order as you well knowe. But the Lordshippe and gouernours of the signes is cleane preposterous and contrarye to that whiche is alledged of Firmicus: for here onelye respecte is had to the Lorde of the ascendente, and after him the other Planettes in eche house are to bee placed accordynge to their na∣turall order. And in this onlye it agreeth with the artificial, that the Lord of the ascendent is placed with the ascendent of the other planets, there is no order but onlye the natural order. As for example, I desire to erect a figure of natiuity, the Sun be∣ing in Aries, I knowe the order of the houses. I will sette in the firste house Aries, in the seconde Taurus, in the eyght Scorpio, in the nynthe Sagittarius,
in the .x. Capricorne, in the .xi. Aquarius, in the .xii. Pisces. And the signes beinge thus sette, is almooste the whole order of them whiche iudge by the Horos∣cope. Nowe foloweth the order of the Planettes. Firste of al I appointe to the Lordship of Aries, Mars: for he is Lorde of the sign, to the second house I ascribe the Sunne, to the thirde Venus, to the fourthe Mercurye, to the fifte the Mone, to the sixthe Saturne, to the seuenthe Iu∣piter, to the eighte Mars, to the ninthe the Sunne, to the tenthe Venus, to the leuenth Mercury, to the .xii. the Mone. Thus you see the Lorde of the ascen∣dente onlye, excepte al other planets, to be placed according to their natural or∣der. I wold not that any man shuld vn∣derstand me herein, that when I speake of the ascendente, that I meane the as∣cendente of the houre or Horoscope: but of the signe in the whiche the Sunne is at that time. Likewise, in the seconde reuolution, thou shal set Saturne in the firste house, and shalbe the Lorde of life at the age of
xiii. yeares. In the seconde house Iupiter, and accordynge to his nature iudge the substaunce of the childe. To the thirde house adde Mars, and by him iudge con∣cerninge brethren and kinred, and short ournets. To the fourth house, the sunne, and accordinge to his Nature, haue re∣spect to the parentes and inheritance at xvi. yeres of age. And by this example you maie raise to anye man a like reuo∣lation, and perceiue thereby what shall happen yerelye. For this house doth not signifie that shorte reuolution wherein the Sunne is euery two hours: but a yere∣lye reuolution. Wherfore we haue ad∣ded a reuolution, stretching to. 84. yeres, accordyng to the ascendent in Aries: but if that any other signe be ascendent, you must fourme an other reuolutiō, but ac∣cordyng to this tipe or rule. If thou wilt iudge of children, loke to ye fift house. For sicknes, smal beastes, or seruants: behold the sixte house. For mariages and open enemies, the seuenth house. For deathe and inheritance by deade men, and such kinds of thinges: geue iudgement by the
eight house, and so likewise of all the o∣ther houses. Neither do I vnderstande and perceiue what ether ought or can be furder spokē or said herein. The summe of this art is to know the natures of the signes & planets, & then to erect a figure, & to exercise that which you haue reade. Proue it who will, and he shal see it not onely to agree with the artificial: but al∣so for to excel it, as wel for the easinesse, as also for the certainetie of the same. Thou seest (as we said before in our pre∣face, & now againe without shame) that there is nothing so much to be takē hde of, as a few things which are taken out of the artificial. Neither is it vnknowen yt Liechtenbergius the best learned of his time in naturall Mathematical sciences, by this onely Arte to haue made all the astronomers astonied, & to haue wrought straungs thinges. Wherfore it shoulde feme very euill, if that we shoulde suffer the learnyng and cunning of such a man to be obscured & kept close, for these oure doinges wee haue drawen out of him. Wherfore we are the lesse to be blamed
if that we haue not satisfied eueri mans mind: except you wil count it faut wor∣thye, that we haue expounded and sette oute other mens good workes, vnto the posteritye, and preferre them before our owne. The whiche thinge if it be culpa∣ble, who is then withoute shame or re∣proche, euen they whiche are counted best learned in this time and seasō. We haue added hereunto a figure of the reuolution: he that will knowe thother reuolutiōs, let him read the tables folowinge.
A Figure of the reuolution of the Signes and Planettes accordynge to Naturall Astrologye, whose ascendente is ♈, and the Lorde of the same ♂. astrological diagram A continuation or prolongyng of the figure aforesaide, from the first yeare of the Horoscope in ♈, vnto the ende of .84. yeres.
1 ♈ ♂ 13 ♄ 25 ☿ 37 ☉ 49 ♃ 61 ☽ 73 ♀ 2 ♉ ☉ 14 ♃ 26 ☽ 38 ♀ 50 ♂ 62 ♄ 74 ☿ 3 ♊ ♀ 15 ♂ 27 ♄ 39 ☿ 51 ☉ 63 ♃ 75 ☽ 4 ♋ ☿ 16 ☉ 28 ♃ 40 ☽ 52 ♀ 64 ♂ 76 ♄ 5 ♌ ☽ 17 ♀ 29 ♂ 41 ♄ 53 ☿ 65 ☉ 77 ♃ 6 ♍ ♄ 18 ☿ 30 ☉ 42 ♃ 54 ☽ 66 ♀ 78 ♂ 7 ♎ ♃ 19 ☽ 31 ♀ 43 ♂ 55 ♄ 67 ☿ 79 ☉ 8 ♐ ♂ 20 ♄ 32 ☿ 44 ☉ 56 ♃ 68 ☽ 80 ♀ 9 ♑ ☉ 21 ♃ 33 ☽ 45 ♀ 57 ♂ 69 ♄ 81 ☿ 10 ♀ 22 ♂ 34 ♄ 46 ☿ 58 ☉ 70 ♃ 82 ☽ 11 ☿ 23 ☉ 35 ♃ 47 ☽ 59 ♀ 71 ♂ 83 ♄ 12 ☽ 24 ♀ 36 ♂ 48 ♄ 60 ☿ 72 ☉ 84 ♃ ¶ By this order (gentle Reader) you may multiply your reuolu∣tion into an infinite number. FINIS.
❧ Imprinted at London by Ihon Daie, for Richarde Iugge, dvvellinge at the Northe dore of Poules Churche, at the signe of the Bible.
