18053 99850219 15406
HONOVRS ACADEMIE. OR THE FAMOVS PASTORALL, of the faire Shepheardesse, IVLIETTA. A worke admirable, and rare, Senten∣tious and graue: and no lesse profitable, then pleasant to pervse. Wherein are many notable Discour∣ses, as well Philosophicall, as Diuine: Most part of the Seuen Liberall Sciences, being comprehended therein: with diuers Comicall, and Tragi∣call Histories, in Prose, and Verse, of all sorts. Done into English, by R. T. Gentleman. printer's device of Thomas Creede BELLVM HIT AVARITIA CONTRA Imprinted at London by Thomas Creede, 1610.
TO THE TRVLIE HO∣NORABLE, AS WELL FOR VERTVE, AS NOBILITIE, THE LADIE ANNE HERNE: Wife to that worthie and gene∣rous Gentleman, Syr EDVVARD HERNE, of the thrice Auncient and Noble ORDER of the BATHE, KNIGHT. BOund by desert, not meriting the same, Words (still) to giue for deeds, doth make me shame. Yet (Beautious) pardon, since the pouer Man Giues, (thogh not what he should) yet what he can. Thanks yeeld I you, (the pay of younger Brother) Let Heyres be franke, and not their Riches smother. What you request, I wish you would commaund, For so my dutie to your Vertue's paund. Vouchsafe this modest Booke, fraught full of wit, A subiect chaste, a Ladie chaste doth fit. Then, honored ANNE, grace HONORS ACADEMIE, Since HONOR honoreth you, as much as anie. Your Eglets high Conceit, too well doth know, My Swallow MVSE, flies (for your pitch) too low. This stuffe is SHEPHARDS GRAY, spunne course and plaine, Vnlesse that you this worke, (to grace) shall daigne. But as your outward shape is louely faire, So inwardly, you'ar Curteous, Debonaire. Your disposition milde, all faults will couer, And (as vnseene) you gentlie them do smother.
My hope is then, that you will sweetly looke, With your all-pleasing Eye, vpon this Booke. Resolu'de whereon, your Votarie I rest, Liue happie, since manie through you are blest. The Phoenix faire, sprung from your Ashes sweete, As you, so her, in dutious sort I greete. Euer deuoted vnto your matchlesse Vertues, Robert Tofte.
TO THE CVRTEOVS AND IVDICIOVS READER, AND TO NONE OTHER. PArdon to craue of Sottish MVLTITVDE, That saucie giddie-headed Monster rude. Who knowes not when ought well is, or amis, Of shallowe shickle Braine, a token is. Ile not so much, as (winde to begge it) spend, None grosely more, then Find-faults do offend. A golden Calse, I cannot worship, I, An Ape in purple, Asse in skarlet Die. My Muse (as yet) I neuer Marchant made, Who fells s wit for Golde, is LEARNINGS IADE. My Scope is faire, and vertuous is my Feeld, Then pleasure great, this subiect needs must yeeld. Nor I, of anie, feare to be disgrac're, As is my Muse, so is my Mistris chaste. No word obscene, o phrase lasciuious, You (here) shall reade, to tainte a Virgins blush. Hence (Enuie) then, goe get thee downe to hell, My Sunn's so oright, all mist it doth expell. (LEARNED) to you, my Booke, and selfe I yeeld, Against those Gorgons, holde forth Pallas Shield. Chiefly against an other worser Crue, (Oh pardon passion, when it speaketh true) Against such ydle Theeues, as doe purloyne, From others Minte, what's none of their owne Coyne. These buz about, like Drones, and Beetles blinde, Whilst (in them) Hunnie none, but gaule you finde. Against these Cheaters, and their shifting Rout, Vouchsafe your Cristall Shield for to hold out. Yee, royall Marchants-like, in th'Ocean deepe, Of endlesse Knowledge, venture, wealth to seeke. Nor feare you (when you vtter it at home) Those barbarous BROKERS, that each where doe rome.
And do their force (though weake God knowes) aduance, Conducted by their blinde guide Ignorance. Base Ignorance, the Foe most capitall, To Wisedome, Learning, and good Manners all: Oh doe but you, in your RIALTO rich, Of CVRTESIE, (nor is this Fauour mich.) Giue out, this Trash of mine, is like (no Like's the same) Your precious Wares, and I, shall malice shame. Do you (but once) commend this my poore wealth, And MOMVS straite (for griefe) will hang himselfe. Yours euermore, R. T.
THE PRINTER TO THE READERS IN GENERALL. GEntle Readers, brieflie and ingeniouslie (in a word) thus. This Booke hath beene kept from the Translator heereof a long time, since when (vntill it was in a manner throughlie Printed) hee neuer had sight of it, and therefore could not possiblie pervse it ouer, as his desire was, meaning to haue corrected, what you perhaps may finde amisse. Some faults (no doubt there be) especially in the Verses, and to speake truth, how could it be other∣wise, when he wrote all this Volume, (as it were) Cursorily, and in hast: Neuer hauing so much leisure, as to ouer-looke one leafe, after he had scribbled out the same. It therefore must needs be lit∣tle better then a confused Chaos, Rudis indigesta{que} Moles, not much vn∣like the Beares vglie whelpe, before it be licked ouer by the dambe. But there is no remedie now, but patience, hee can be but sorie for the same. And yet to speake indifferently, the errours heere∣in committed, are not so grosse and so many, but that they may be easily let slippe, and passe vnespied: and this is the petition, which I am bold to put vp vnto you; which if my Fortune be so good, as it may passe, and be graunted amongst you, you shall animate the Gentleman hence-forward, to be more carefull to please you, and binde me in double bands with him, to labour hereafter, in what I may, to make some better satisfaction, for this your kinde pati∣ence towards vs both. And so I rest, Alwayes yours to by poore power, T. C.
THE FIRST PART OF IVLIETTAS PASTORALLS. A MOST EXQVISITE PIECE OF VVORKE, wherein are set downe, diuers excellent Discourses, as well Mo∣rall, as Philosophicall: Intermixed with many Histories, both pleasant and Tragicall: set forth in sundrie sorts of verses fitting the Humor of euerie one whatsoeuer. AFTER so many strange cruelties, inflicted vp∣on the wretched Shepheard A RCAS, by vn∣pitifull Fortune, in the end, he found himself all alone, in the middest of a most fearefull desart, being a place, agreeable to his griefe, and not a little fit for his sharpe and stinging miserie. Horror, in steed of light, made there her abode, neither did any other comfortable Beame of pleasure shine there, then such as ioylesse soli∣tarines draweth from pining sorrow. No cheer∣full Sunne in this place vsed to cast forth his gladsome raies, it being the ordinarie abiding of the blacke daughters of fatall death. The chiefest riches, the poore Shepheard found there, was Bushes, Thornes, Brambles, and Bri∣ers, hard flintie Rocks, and huge senselesse stones. No other creatures entertained he for his Guests, but brute Beastes, withdraw∣ing himselfe from the companie of men, as if they had bin diuels. Thousands of Rocks, of which, some being eaten with time, other some blasted with lightning, and some set out with sharpe pointed Thornes, kept him as a Bulwarke, safe on the one side, and the periurde waters of the changing Sea, growing white with stormie Billows, preseru'd him secure on the other. There sometimes was the melancolike abode of still sleepe, there the resting place of pale death, and there the lodge of such Spirits, as like vacabonds, wandred vp and downe the world, being worthily punished by the great and iust Gods. Many gastly Caues, were (there) to be found, but so horrible were they, as the onely sight of them brought trembling feare to the mindes, and sudden amazement to the eyes of such as should behold them. No running Fountaine was there that gaue forth cristall water; no shadowing groue, to keepe men from parching heate; nor any greene coolie grasse with faire coloured flowers, to delight the sences: onely in this vncoth wil∣dernesse, did soiourne such sad, and old angrie men, as by there nightly Charmes forced the Spirites of the earth to obey their wills and to be at their command. In steede of Nightingale and Lark, was there found the Scritching Owle and night Rauen, with such
other dismall Birdes, whose flight, nature, and crie, did serue for sinister prophesies vnto the miserable Inhabitants thereof. All thrise wofull and lamentable dwelling, in compa∣rison of the ioyfull woods of Arcadia, the first witnesses of the chast Loues of this dis∣astred Shepheard: and yet fortunate inough for him, seeing, that he being depriued of all his wisht for hopes, soughtby many pittilesse Accidents, to ende his loathed life. Those faire and goodly troupes of Shepheards, and Shepheardesses, which were wont hereto∣fore to be a comfort vnto him, were now most pittifully taken from his sight. There the learned Iultta was not to be found, neither there could his deare friend Philas be heard of, who, with others were wont most sweetly to record and sing of their ouerhard for∣tunes in their loyall Loues. O poore Shepheard, if solitarines may bring to the male∣contented, any delight at all, no doubt but then, thou doest participate with the same; for amongst millions of sauadge beastes, thou liuest alone; amongst thousands of gast∣ly rocks, and amongst infinites of desarts, without any cleare light, or cheareful Sunne: And yet the sharpe feeling of his inward griefes, ouercame and drowned the sad appre∣hension of this solitarie seate:A Similie. no otherwise, then great and desperate mischances, slake, and quench those that are little: or as most violent diseases, hinder the feeling of such as are lesse vnrecouerable. Not smally fortunate did he thinke himselfe, to haue found this vnluckie Rceptakle, making vnto himselfe a false ioy of that sower Subiect, which was the case of heause sorrow vnto others. And herein might he witnesse full well, that in respect of the ll that happeneth in Loue, all other euils are right pleasures, and that, that onely torment, brought with it a certaine sure knowledge of misfortunes vnto men. O how easie a matter is it to resist all worldly troubles, and to passe through the pikes of the same But how hard or rather impossible a thing is it, to vanquish and ouer∣come loue?A Sentence. Of all the fanites that wise men commit, none is more excusable, then such as Loue forceth then, to doe. Who was more learned then Plato, who more inditiall then Aristotle, who more godly then Daad, who more wise then Salomon, and who more strong then Sampson? Surely none: and yet neuer haue any bin more ouercome by loue, then they, of which Tirants slaush yoke, this poore Shepheard also had felt the heauie burthen. His rare constancie bare patiently the losse of his goods, tooke gently his banishment from his countrie, endured quietly the crueltie of time, and brooked wise∣ly, the iniuries of the enuious; but vnto this Loue, it yeelded quickly, and as it were with∣out constraint. Thrise blessed was he, in that be knew how to make choise of so beauti∣ous and rare Subiects, but yet quadruple vnfortunate, for that he could not reape the sweete fruites of the same in this world.A Sentence. The remembrance of things lost, is forgotten through length of time, the paine of deadliest sicknesses, is appeased by Phisicke, and the deepest conceited sorrow, weareth away with often sighing; but alas, his loue was al∣waies liuing, without ende, and without truce, as a substance euerlasting. Too, too cruell was that star, that shonne at his birth, but farre more remorslesse, the care and griefe of his continuall vexed life. And in respect of him, happie are all other whatsoeuer, who are tormented with the losse of their kinde friends, deare countrie, louing families and acquaintance, all which though they be much grieuous to support and suffer, yet are they not to be compared in rigor, vnto the least passion of Loue; for the Soule findeth in them, some one comfort or other, and the bodie some ease of griefe, or (at the least) an ende of all: but in the pangs of Loue, neither the one nor the other are euer out of trouble. Wretched then is the man that leueth, therefore, wretched this Shepheard, and yet more happie then such contented persons, who liue alwaies fearing death: whereas, the approach of the same, was the onely hauen and heauen of his vnhappines, Such, and so great was the extremities of his woes, as it hindred him, to marke or conceiue the fearefulnes of this desart, & to apprehend the horror of so frightfull a dwelling. He thin∣keth of nothing lesse, then of the horriblenes of the same. Such condemned Soules, as are drawne vnto the place of execution, dreame not of any thing else, then of the bitter death they goe to suffer. Euē so, sought not he any other iourney in this wildernesse, then such as his passion led him on to take, his eyes not being employed in any office at all, whilest he himselfe seemed to be both deafe, blinde, and dumme. O sage and prudent Poets, who to expresse the nature and effects of Loue most properly, faine Louers to haue bin changed into insensible shapes: for certainely, they are but Stones, Trees, and
Rocks, in their actions and behauiour, although they retaine and keepe with them a humane shape. A long time did this miserable Shepheard walke thus, without know∣ing which way he went, vntill at the last for verie wearines, he was forced to rest himselfe at the foote of a mightie high Rocke. There, being set vpon the ground, his armes a crosse, his eyes lifted vp, his lips close shut together, leaning his head vpon the stone, which hung on the one side, he seemed as if he had bin another very Rocke; for, as a Rocke, so were his gestures, moue-lesse, his spirits gone, and all the partes of his bodie without force and vigor. And to say the truth indeede, how could he once stirre, if his Soule being the life of his bodie, was as then absent, and at that time retired into the bo∣some of his faire Mistris? Thus sat he senselesse a great while, with a heauie setled coun∣tenance, vntill at last, looking downe lowe with his eyes, he espied certaine verses to be carued most curiously within the Rocke, which made him resemble the Hunter,A Similie. who dispairing of his Prey, and hauing (as it were) quite forgotten the same, vpon the soden spieth his game, which forceth him to begin a fresh the pursuite thereof, and so followeth the chase againe. O how great power hath our desire ouer our Soules, that it is of force presently to reuiue our senses, to awaken our thoughts, to plucke vp our Spirits, and to change and alter our countenances! The great longing he had to reade that large wri∣ting, awaked him out of his dreame, recalled home his former wits, & brought him again to be a right man. He turned his eyes too and fro, busying himsefe, about the reading of those lines, but little pleasure conceiued he of the same, because he could not vnder∣stand them, by reason they were carued in letters of Arabia, which made him fret and fume; Not vnlike vnto one, who seeking to passe ouer a Riuer,A Compari∣son. cannot find the lowest and shallow est place through which he might wade most safest; so as, being in great coller against Nature, he burst out into these speeches. Ah cruell Stepdame, when wilt thou be glutted with the miseries of mortall men? At too high a rate doest thou sell that little aduantage and benefit, which they haue ouer other liuing creatures. To what ende serues it them to be more perfect then beastes, if this perfection, taketh from them their most desired rest? and what profit is it for one to be rich, if that treasure of his, engen∣dreth trauaile, and care, which most cruelly weareth away his life? Farre happier by ods are the bruite beastes, for ignorance taketh away from them the apprehension of mis∣fortunes, the thought of riches, and the sorrow that is incident vnto this life: whereas the minde of man, is tossed too and fro, not onely with vnquietnes of such things as are present, but also for such as are before passed, and are yet to come: yea (and that in such strange wise, as man is thought to be still miserable, excepting onely, in that small time, wherein he is freed and released from those mortall cares and knawing Corsiues. Alack,A Similie. alack, as with the tree, the rinde groweth, and sprowteth vp, the one not being able to continue without the other; so with Man, is carefulnes ingendred, which as a most vn∣fortunate euill Angell, followeth him in all his actions he taketh in hand. Who is he, that euer hath bin liuing without the feeling of griefe or sorrow, or without the tast of vexation and vnquietnes? The mornings houre frameth and plotteth one miserie or other against the euening, as the extreame rage of ardent heate maketh a storme, or tempest, which halleth fire and water together. For one tast of pleasure which he enioy∣eth, a thousand desires of death seaze on his spirits, to the ende he might quench all his heauie disasters, by such a speedie meanes: for more happier are senselesse creatures, then they, whose bodies are onely put to trauaile, and not their mindes at all: and in respect of the vnfortunate plagues of this life, a thrise blessed companion is death, who ought to be counted a remedie and helpe, rather then any paine, or trouble. And there∣fore thrise happie indeede, are you most valiant Spirits, who of your owne braue coura∣ges, haue dared to shorten by violence the miseries of your loathed liues, thereby to a∣bridge and cut off the multitude of sorrowes belonging vnto the same. Vnkinde Nature, what gifts doest thou prodigally bestowe vpon man, but bitter wailings and salt teares? No sooner are we borne, but teares come forth with vs, following vs in all the course of our liues, and not leauing vs vntill our latest death. Of earth doest thou frame our bo∣dies, and to earth doest thou turne the same againe; And yet alas, not before thou hast made vs to take the aslay of many miserable calamities. Neither hast thou made rightly perfect any one man, there being alwaies in his life, one fault, or another; for seldome or
neuer find we an excellent and quick Spirit, in a well shaped and comely bodie, nor an exquisite well made bodie to containe in the same a rare and admirable minde. But it is no wonder at all, that those, who are thy Subiects, children, and vassals, want their perfec∣tion, when thou thine owne selfe,A Similie. hast failed and doest come behind of the same. Hardly can the people of a cruell king, be brought to be gentle and milde, and as hardly can men thy creatures attaine to come to be perfect, when thou thy selfe, on whom they de∣pend, art naturally full of defects and wants. I pray thee tell me, what charges had it bin vnto thee, if thou hadst giuen vnto euery one an insight and skill in forraigne languages? and why doest thou depriue so many mindes desirous of knowledge in all things, for want of vnderstanding strange tongues, in which thou giuest a plaine testimome, either of thine owne imperfection, or else of thy ouermuch crueltie? if thou art imperfect, then can nothing, that is faire, excellent, or perfect, be found amongst vs: for of the seedes of thistles, can neuer corne spring: and if thou be cruell, then miserable is the estate of man, to be gouerned and subiugated vnder the yoke of such a bloudie and inhumane Step∣mother. Both which vices (I doubt not) but abound in thee; Certainly thou art imperfect, rendring so many bodies emptie and voyd of all perfection, as Monsters, fashioned without forme; And cruell thou art, making men more wretched, or rather farreworse, then rude and sauadge beastes. Thus exclaimed the poore Pilgrime, mad for anger that he could not vnderstand that strange writing. And as a small matter of losse bringeth more dammage vnto him, who commeth from going about a farre greater, whilst the same is a doing, and feeleth the crosse thereof, to be more then if the said little mis∣chance had hapned whilst he was in prosperitie; So this pettie despite galled the Shep∣heard more, by reason he was as thē plunged in a bottomles pit of discōtentments, thē if it had chaunced when he had liued most at ease and pleasure. But now, as he was laying himselfe downe to make his praiers vnto the morning sleepe, to charme and close vp his eyes and trauaile for a while, he might perceiue on the sudden a certaine aged man, standing hard behind him. This good old Father, had a long beard, as white as snowe, his haire of his head was hoarie and graie, his forehead wrinkled, his face furrowed, his eyes sunke in his head, his lippes great and blacke, his eye-browes thicke as bristles, his hands riueled, and nothing but skinne and bone, his apparell a beares case, his feete bare and naked, hauing in his right hand a staffe, and in his left a booke. The complaint of the Shepheard had, he heard, and he being one that was assisted and holpen by the be∣nefit of Nature, in the charmes and enchantments which he vsed, was not a little moued to heare her so sharpely blamed. Whereupon he resolued to take her cause in hand, and as a friendly counseller to pleade in her behalfe, insomuch as without once saluting or greeting the discontented Arcas, in a friendly manner he thus began to answere him. Alas poore silly soule, to what ende doest thou shew thy selfe to be like vnto the fire, that burneth that that nourisheth her, or to the viper that knaweth her mother in pieces, or to the vngratefull churle, that murdereth his best benefactor? Darest thou so impu∣dently speake again st her, that is the Mother, the Queene, and the Nurse of all things? Most mortall enemie of the Gods, who acknowledge her for their vaiuersall Mother, whom thou blamest, with so great blasphemie. Who giueth their essence and Being, vn∣to liuing creatures, but she? who maketh them to liue, and moue but she? Should not this great obscure Caos, (but for her) turne againe into his confused forme, & the Elements be confusedly mingled one with another? Who hath giuen Soule and life vnto man, but she? When the expert Physition hath done all he can to the vttermost of his Art, to heale the sicke patients; if he then casteth away his medicine, and refuseth wilfully his owne health, is it the Doctors fault if he be taken away by death? If thou hast recei∣ued both a soule and sufficient vigor and force of Nature, and for default of vsing the same wisely, ill fortune hath seazed and taken hold vpon thee: canst thou iustly lay the cause of thy mishap vpon Nature? O foole as thou art, know thou, that our Spirits and our bodies haue receiued all perfection that may be, and the very best of euery vertue that is in any other liuing creature,A Sentence. is bestowed vpon vs. Vnto a wise man nothing is vnpossible, neither can the stars themselues preuaile ought against him. But if he will needes lose himselfe, if he will imploy his good gifts, against his owne selfe, as the suri∣ous man, who woundeth his heart with his ownesword, can the blame thereof be attri∣buted
vnto Nature? That vassall that hath receiued all good and kinde entertainement and vsage of his Lord, and yet afterward will faile of his duetic,A Similie. doth he bring his Mai∣ster to be guiltie of his offence, or can he make him to be the Author of this his so grosse tollie? I think not. If so, why hast thou then suffered thy selfe so foolishly to be de∣ceiued, cheated, and depriued of that force, and vertue, that Nature hath lent thee, laying vpon her, all the blame for the losse of the same? Thou affirmest that man is miserable, and therefore little beholding vnto Nature, but vpon what Foundation, vpon what Rocke, or vpon what sure ground canst thou proue her to be the cause of his miserie? Doth he want any thing that is conuenient and fit for him? hath he not the forme and shape of the Gods? Is not his Soule diuine? and doth it not participate with wisedome, knowledge, and vnderstanding? and if thou wilt not allow, Wisedome, Knowledge, and Science, to be in the number of the best things, then dost thou deface euery vertue, and by this meanes thou makest men, to be no better then brute and senselesse beastes. But knowledge (saiest thou) bringeth vnto man, care, and vexation of mind, which like a worme, eateth and knaweth him continually, and (yet) doth the same vnderstanding, make him to approach nigh vnto the Gods, bringing him to be farre more perfect, then when he knew nothing. O what an vnspeakable ioy doth he conceiue in his soule, when he is once able to attaine vnto the discouerie of those admirable effects of God? being able through his knowledge to preuent such mischiefes as are at hand, and to de∣liuer others from present shipwracks of imminent misfortunes? Thou addest, that these things encrease and ingender sad thoughts in his minde: but what paine, what griefe, what molestation, or trouble, is there found (be it neuer so sharpe & stinging) which can once counteruaile, or compare, with the ambrosiall sweetnes of that renowned glory, which that man swalloweth downe along time, who rightly and perfectly doth but iudge & conceiue of celestiall actiōs, & by his prudencie & skill, maketh himselfe most profitable and necessarie vnto his common-wealth? All those other bad conceites, passe and vanish away, as a sudden storme, but most durable and for euerlasting, is that glory, which man buildeth and establisheth vpon the rockie ground of neuer failing vertue. Great Hercules, (as now,An example.) feeleth no more the paine of all those hugie labors which he once endured in this world, for that is dead and gone, but his glorious renowne, his worthy name and fame endureth still, and shall for euermore. But thou castest thine eyes, vpon such things onely as are present, which are flitting and not durable, fortify∣ing thy complaint vpon a vaine and light shadow, without bethinking thee once of that substance of Eternitie, that is to come hereafter.A Sentence. True glorie is neuer gotten but by great labour and trauaile; and vertue best shineth through deadliest dangers, as the Sunne showeth clearest, amongst the darkest cloudes. Hadst thou but any high courage in thee, or wert thou brauely pricked forward with the spur of honour, thou wouldst neuer re∣gard so much as thou dost this present time, but wouldst rather haue respect to what is like to come hereafter; for right wretched is he, that with his dying body encloseth and burieth his name, his glory, and all his exploytes, all within one obscure tombe. Blame not Nature then, who hath made man perfect in all parts and compliments, and hath gi∣uen him the direct meanes to enter into the right way which leadeth him vnto the place of Eternitie. And if thou canst not vnderstand these Arbique letters, the fault is thine owne, and not Natures, who hath giuen thee a mind to conceiue, and a tongue, to learne to practise and speake. But there is no reason, that without labour and taking of paine, we should come to purchase our desires, since through this trauaile, the perfecti∣on of Nature is the better knowne, producing many faire effects within our soules, first formed and inuented by her, which without industrie would remaine quite extinguisht, and of no force, not vnlike vnto senselesse stones. The Shepheard wakened with this biting discourse, began to take heart at grasse, replying vpon the old man in this sort. Whatsoeuer thou art, that shewest thy selfe so charitable and deuout, in thy deuoyre and dutie towards Nature, christning her with the name of perfect; I must needes tell thee, thou art wonderfull wide from the truth, and not a little deceiued in this matter; For if such perfection were found in her (as thou speakest) why then doth she not make eue∣ry man perfect alike? whereas (quite contrarie) from some, she taketh away their health, through long and strange Maladies, which by her owne name, are tearmed naturall;
from others, she curtalleth and loppeth off their best members, whereby they growe deformed and misshapen; some others she abridgeth, and taketh away from them their right wits, and senses, making them become innocents, and fooles; and from others a∣gaine, she withdraweth her liberall hand of plentie, forcing them to liue in great want and beggerie. Now what perfection is here found in these so diuers contrarie effects? for of that thing which is perfect, nothing can proceede but what is perfect, like vnto it selfe; As it happeneth amongst Lions & Lionesses, which alwaies resemble one another: but from Nature, diuers effects doe happen vnperfect, and therefore is not she her selfe perfect. Now, badly (quoth the old man) herein doe you conclude, for both Nature her selfe is perfect, and so are her workes also. Perfect are her workes, in that she doth distribute vnto euery one, that which she knoweth to be most necessarie for him. Some doth she cause to be sicke, to the ende she may smoother and kill the force and power of such vices, as they haue ouer greedily swallowed downe. From others she taketh away their right wits and memorie, to make them forget the conceit and thought of high and aspiring designes, and to bring them to thinke of base and lowe matters; vpon the conseruation of which, dependeth the estate and safetie of their Superious: and from o∣thers, she keepeth backe her treasures, to the ende she might acquaint them with the or∣dinarie labour and tillage of the earth; which rendereth a most sacred and diume testi∣monie of her perfection, without which, the most worthiest Spirits, addicted wholly vnto glory, should be constrained to forsake and yeelde their bodies vnto death, as be∣ing famished for want of sustenance: and as her perfection is exquisite, so is her puissance incomprehensible, and the effects of the same most admirable; so as who solloweth her steps alwaies orderly, shall neuer grosely erre, nor offend shamefully. And yet (replied the Shepheard) diuers that haue offended, erring through Nature, haue by Art much amended their defects: whereas neuer hath there bin knonwe any one that hath bin found to be perfect, through the benefit of Nature: As we see the Sages & wise men, (that liued heretofore in the olde world,) spent many yeares to correct, by knowledge and experience, the defaults of lame Nature. But that knowledge (answered the old man) proceeded from the selfe same Nature, in such wise, as she is not to be blamed at all for the same, nor to be thought any thing the more vnperfect for it; seeing that as she was the cause of that ill, so she brought a remedie for the same; and that so holesome a one, as the wound being once cured,A Similie. the whole body euer after was the better, being cleare purged of all his defects. Not vnlike vnto the body of man, which being purified, through a comfortable potion, is not onely freed of that disease which as then infected him, but euer after is the better in health for that holesome Phisicke. We see that some∣times the Surgion maketh incision, and cutteth off flesh, to the ende the whole body may be the more healthfull and sound: so this experieece which Nature hath bestowed vpon man, is so perfect and necessarie, as he may iudge himselfe to be right happie, to haue found some such small defect of Nature in himselfe, since they haue bin of force to learne him how to helpe himselfe, and how to vse this excellent knowledge vnto his great aduantage, which not onely cleanseth him from his faults present, but from such likewise as are to come hereafter. What is that you said (answered Arcas) as though there be not many faults and imperfections of Nature, and those of so high a qualitie, as no experience nor skill, be it neuer so great, can euer amend them, or once be able to doe good of them: how many incurable diseases are there that no Phisicke can helpe them? and how many cruell and desperate inconueniences, that no Art can withstand them? No, no: Nature her selfe can neuer deliuer vnto man any one knowledge sufficient, (no, although we would graunt that wisedome proceeded from her, as it doth not) which were of force and power enough to amend and correct her owne faults, and imperfecti∣ons. I will demaund but this one question of you, whether you thinke there be any na∣turall prudence, or foresight strong enough, to helpe that sicknes which proceedeth from Loue? and whether Louers haue not good reason, iustly to complaine of Nature, who without any succour or helpe, halleth thēso cruelly vnto such inexpiable miseries? Nay then (quoth the old man) if you come to encounter against me, with the power of Loue, I must needs haue the field, and yeeld the prize vnto you. For I my selfe, although I haue drawne thousands of treasures from Nature, all which are sufficient proofes of her
beautifulnes, of her power & vertue; yet could I neuer find by her meanes any remedie against this incurable disease. Incurable, may I call it, since it hath made me to abandon the world, to liue this solitarie kinde of life, whereby I might beguile my vnsupportable paines, and so (in the ende) finde death the onely right Soueraigne cordiall and helpe to ease and ende this hellish disease. And if the selfesame accident, hath brought thee hi∣ther to be a companion vnto me in my miseries: I shall be very willing to discourse vn∣to thee, the disastred aduentures of my Loue; and as gladly euery way to vnderstand the haplesse course of thine owne. It is the onely thing I most desire (replied Arcas) al∣though I doubt shrodely, that the memorie of my bitter troubles, will hardly afford me free vtterance of speech, to recite and repeate at full, the discourse of mine infinite mis∣fortunes; and, I feare me, least the sadde remembrance of my renewed griefes, will inter∣rupt and breake the slender threed of my feeble voice. But before I begin, let me intreat you to expound and to enterpret vnto me, these Arabique verses, & the substance of the same. Withall my hart answered the old man, but first let vs take our places for our more ease, vnder the shade of this coolie rocke, that the faire coloured greene of these sight pleasing odoriferous hearbes, may be partakers of so lamentable an Historie. Whereup∣on, the old man (with Arcas) sat him downe, where he thought fittest for himselfe, when hauing now alreadie cast his eyes vpon the Caracters, readie to report them in the French language) a sad accent of a heauie voice, caused him (on the soden) to stop, & be silent: not vnlike that Marchant, who trauailing on the way to goe his voyage,A Compari∣son. sodenly turneth backe, leauing his companie, with whome (before) he had iournied, being gi∣uen by the way as he passed to vnderstand, of the too too vntimely death of his deare & louing Spouse. This voice rauished the soules of both our Pilgrimes, reuiuing a fresh memorie of their loues within their hearts, tooke away from them all other thoughs, the better to make them dreame of their passions, and brought them into their former estates of their Loues, in which they were at the first. And this following, was the Song, which that sweete breast breathed forth most sweetely, accompanied with thousands of deepe and profound sighes. WHen wilt thou wearie be, of sighing forth my paines, Poore heauie heart? whose teares extinguisht haue thy heate Why doth not this strange fire, which filleth all my vaines, My griefe consume (my coarse consuming) though tis great? With care and cries, to feede my soule, is my desire, No hope to heale my wounds within me bide: Alas I curse my selfe, yet honor I the fire, See then how farre, Loue drawes me on from Reason wide. Thrise happie Nature, of each mortall man in this, For they (in dying) of their ils, an ende doe gaine: But Spirits diuine cannot; Diuine their essence is, Venus immortall was, immortall was her paine. What said I? No. LOVE cannot die through deaths despire, For in the soule he liues, and soule can neuer die: On earth below, no creature is that takes in Loue delight, And Ioue (himselfe) his awfull power hath felt on hie. Woe is me in this strange sort, I perish (languishing,) I wish for death, yet how to perish doe not know: Wretched that wight, whose burning griefes aie doth him wring. Nor can them quench, nor die, to ridde himselfe from woe. But since, I to this mischiefe am predestined, Nor can death, to remorse, or pittie nothing moue: Of Gods ile craue, I may be metamorphosed Into those haplesse Birds, that still bewaile their Loue. Thus sung the troubled Nimph Orithia, amorous of the foresaid ARCAS; who passing on her way, sweetly held on her dulcet tune: but she being gone, the old man
once more began to report what he before intended, reaccounting this Historie fol∣lowing. Most vniust lawe of partiall LOVE,The lamenta∣ble Tragedie of chast Flo∣retta, and kind Plaindor. which with thy malice slie, Thousands of faults with iustice vaile, dost hide malitiously. Thou that thy traiterous selfe, dost faine, to be asacred thing, And by a coloured greement, thousands vnto death dost bring. Most cruell law of loathed LOVE, that vnder friendships showe, Dost paint thy bloodie Massakers, and makst them holy goe. Thou that with vaine allurements fond, and with faire smiling glose, So many faithfull Louers in their fatall tombes dost close. Who cuttest off so soone of men on earth the vitall thred, Of such as for their loyaltie, and faiths, are honored. Who (fiend-like) suckst their blood, and as if thou still destned were To plague the world; the flesh of these poore murthred soules dost teare. Hast thou then this faire worthy Brace of constant Louers slaine? Whose memorie still flourishing for euer shall remaine. Hast thou them stifled through mischance, without remorse or ruth? Their flowring yeares, their daies, their yeares, in prime of their green youth. Ah too too cruell law of thine, and happie thrise our life, If that it were not subiect to thy ouer-ragings rife. But what is he can liue exempt, from these thy amorous lawes? When euery puissant God what ere, this yoke as forced drawes. Then who can Loue commaund, when Ioue himselfe full oftentime, By him hath roughly bin controld, although his powers, diuine? And yet some comfort small it is to vs, though little gaine, The Gods to haue companions with vs, in this our paine. Then reade this more then wofull verse, beleeue it as your Creede, True Herolds of a message such, as hearts to heare will bleede. Though in this vncoth desart colde, LOVES hatefull enemie, Death keepeth his abode and court, and sleepe doth here abie. Where horror doth inhabit still, and fat all sisters three, Who to vntwist our threed of life, most willingly agree. Where hundred thousand hugie Rocks, sore bruisde with thunders might, And torne through long continuance, of times iniurious spite. Are to this place chiefe ornaments; though many a hollow caue, And deepelesse ditches, soundlesse pitts, as glories chiefe it haue. Although in steed of corne, with thornes & brambles it be sowen, And with the chillie spring of Isie waters tis ore-flowen. Although it be inuironed, with monsterous hedges thicke, Of blood drawing brambles, and although wild beasts abound in it. And that the sweelling periurde sea, most fearefull to our eyes, The same doth compasse round about, with fome which thicke doth rise. So as no one delight at all (though little) doth appeare, Or seemes that euer Venus sowed her seede immortall here. That neuer here for to repose, did rest the beautious sunne, When he his daily course, in course, with Maiestie had runne. In briefe, although this Iland be, of gastfull lands the worst, Where onely damnd dispaire doth seeke for to abide accurst. Yet liude there (here) not long agoe) a louely Shepheard faire, Whome cruell Loue, did vex and gripe, more then with monstrous care. A Shepheard sweete in euery point he was, and complete right, But that too soone his tender yeares cut off, were through despite. A perfect Shepheard faire he was, his mind and valour such, As all the rest of Swaines that liude in woods, he past, by much.
The spoyl of  Beares, the rough sharpe skin of tusked Bores, O Lions sell and greedie Woolues, hang vp, vpon his dores. Strange hidious Serpents vgly heads, and Griffons Tallent clawes, Sharpe poysonous teeth of Dragons huge, with their most vgly pawes. About the little closing walls of his small house was set, As honorable witnesse of his valour more then great. Those were his hangings rich, and these his pictures set in gold, Which intermixt in sundrie sort, you still might fresh behold. A Sentence.No such braue furniture as is a deadly enemies spoyle, 'Whose colour nere is marde with dust, nor length of time can foyle. 'So is the battered harnesse rich wonne from our vanquisht foe, 'Which hung vpon our walls more faire, then gold doth make them showe. 'For with the same the honour of the owners victorie 'Is there enstald and registred, nor can it euer die. Thus, then this gallant Shepheard faire, not little to his fame, Adornd his house with sauadge spoyle, which he abroad had slaine. His armour, was his bowe, his clubbe, his She pheards wreathed hooke, For harneis he of musket proofe, a leathren brestplate tooke. Yet nothing couldore-cme, his more then vsuall common power, Still from the chase, and fighting he returned conquerour. Thrise happie, fortunate was his first bringing vp and birth, Not any gifts more excellent, Nature gaue on this earth. Valiant he was, and strong in limmes, well made and trimme withall, So faire as euery Shepheardesse in loue with him did fall. Blest therefore was he in his first greene youth as he deseru'd, Whome honour did accompanie, whom fortune alwaies seru'd. Thrise happie he, in his young yeares, till twas his lucklesse sate, That dismall Loue, his reason and his sense did captiuate. For then he lost his wonted force, and courage euery waies, And of his more then braue exployts, the memorable praise. He onely studied then alone, to nourish his sad griefe, To sighthe his secret sorrowes forth, and waile without reliefe. An Inuec∣tiue against Loue.O more then cursed caitife Loue, thou wisedoms dost annoy, Debashest reason sound from minde, and valour dost destroy. Wise men, thou makest worse then fooles, and makst them onely fit To hurt themselues, whilst obstinate, they stand well pleas'd in it. No pleasing obiect likes their eyes, but what doth threat them ill, What euill is, that loue they best, their ruine fostring still. They blowe the glowing coales, that burnes them with ore what desire, As doth the foolish slie, that spoyles himselfe within the fie. Poore soules bewitcht a thousand times, each man in carefull wise, Doth seeke to shunne what may him hurt, and from the same he flies. Each one doth deadly poyson hate, which doth abridge his life, And being pained, strait doth hunt with speede for succour rife. The true dis∣position of a right Louer.Onely, the peruerse Louer doth all hope of helpe refuse, He likes his pining griefe, and what doth hurt him still doth chuse. He blest himselfe accounteth that, not heald is his disease, His sicknes he doth honour, and to die it doth him please. Hard fortune, is this to him, yet his haps farre harder more, He waileth his mischance, and yet, his griefe he doth adore. His woes nere die, but still reuiue; Then happier liue you faire, You that be dead, in better case, then Louers plag'd, you are. LOVE then our Shepheards courage stout, did weaken with his rage, And reapt the sprouting fruit, scarse ripe, of his first happie age. Rauisht his senses, and to thousand dangerous harmes him drew, And after these disasters all, most cruellie him slew.
This Shepheard, Plaindor called was, no creature like to him For force of arm s for beautious shape, or vertues, halfe so trim. But heare I pray, how Cupid proud, in most malitious wise, Transformes himselfe to poyson strong for to deceiue our eyes. Who though he seemeth vnto vs as courteous, meeke and kinde, Yet but a poysoned wine (though sweete in tast) you shall him finde. Which we no sooner drinke, but that it doth vs mickle harme, Bereaues vs of our vitall spirits, and doth our Reason charme. This deadly draft who doth but tast, to die is certaine sure, And yet before his death longtime, he must strange griefes endure. Hara by this darkesome desart sad, there was a place most daintie, Where Autumne, in his season brought forth fruits, great store and plenti, Rich was it of all worldly things, but yet amongst the rest, For richest good, a Damsell faire surpassing, it possest. Most famous (for this beautious maid) was registred this place, Though at that time fewe men had had the hap to see her face. Her stature tall, made her in shewe like to a Princely Queene, Rather then one that in the woods and groues brought vp had beene. Her flaxen haire which calmi windes did gently blow full soft,A description of a beautifull maide. Hung dangling downe, more fine then golde, in thousand curlings wrought. Oft (when she any leisure had) she twisted in the shade Those haires as nets, which mry soules (to bow vnto her,) made. Her forhead of faire Iuorie, was, euen, pure, and large, No furrow there (dgrace to forme) the flesh dia frowning charge. No bending wrinkle there was seene, nor painting to deface, The snowy whitenes, which is vsde to make more faire the face. Her eyebrowes, purest Ebonie, kept their proportion right, No plasing show so prettily, the fancie did delight. Sweete shadowes for her sphere-like eyes which with their twincklings calme, From sunn beames did them defend, which burned ouerwarme. Her diamond sparkling ys were such, and did so brightly shine, As those two lamps h Sunne and Moone most glorious and diuine. Her piercing glaunces full of power, like to swift lightning were, When as the slash inslam'd from heauen, it selfe on th'earth both beare. So rolde they in her head, as greatest hearts they forct decay, And valiant spirits of men as slaues did bring vnto their bay. Dan Cupids darts they were, with which he vsed men to crosse, Who being vassels made most bate, did glorie in their losse. Dire Comets were they, like to such that danger do portend, And such were hers, for death they gaue to her and to her friend. Yet they of shame fastns did show to be the bashfull Call, Where chast delight did dly vse for his disport to dwell. Her pure vermilion shts, when she did smile had force and power, To show more perfect faire by odds then daintiest gilliflower. How sweet and cruell wast at once to touch so holy thing? What mortall griefe was it that tooke (but once asay) to him? Poore Plaindor can true witnes be, one kisse vnto his cost, Was cause that he his pretious life, and all his good daies lost. Her chrrie lipps, did closely hid, right Grient Pearle of Inde, No pretious lls hlfe so rich, you in that land can finde. From which Prculs vaiuls, a pleasing sent did come, More sweet then Muske, more daintie sarre then rightest Sinamum. Her louely cheekes (Sunes blemish) were as Alablaster faire, Whose roseall colour mixt with creame, did show beyond compare. Her dimpled chinne was full and round; her brest the milkie way, Where Cupid, (when that he was hot,) a bathing often lay.
Two Apples faire thereby was seene, as sprung from paradise, The Graces, in that garden vsde to sport in wanton-wise. Her matchlesse hand was long and strait; her fingers white and small, The mountaine snow refin'd, to them, was nothing white at all. Such was this peerlesse virgins faire, and she FLORETTA hight, Blest perfectly, but onely that bad destnie ded her spight. One day as in the warming sunne, with mickle curious care, She did diuide and tide in knots, her shining bright gold haire. The harts of worthiest Demigods, here on the earth to trap, As Plaindor came from woods, to view her (thus,) t'was his hard hap. And being wearie, thought a while to rest him by her side, But this reposing afterward be dearely did abide. For vading pleasure ouer small, he too too deere did pay, But t'was his fortune bad, and downe along by her, he lay. Where he such poyson suckt, as t'was, within a while his bane, And where he rest did thinke to find, he found recurelesse paine. Thrise happie he, had he not laid himselfe vpon that greene, Or if that forward he had gone, or, her he had not seene. For though his wearie coarse did rest, his mind did trauaile sore, Whilst his bewitched eyes, apace downe swallowed venim store. His gazing eyes nre from her face, one iot at all did stir, His eyes made onely to behold, and gaze on none but her. He markes with more then curious view, her for head and her cheeke, Her haire, her brest, and other parts which hee too well did leeke. So rests atteniuely and still, leaping as t'were for ioy The conqueror proud, when he beholds his prey which him did noy. So standeth still the greedie Iewe, to marke with heedfull eye Such pretious lewells, passing rare, which he doth long to buy. Then, then, the haplesse Shepheard (first) perceiu'd the flame begin, To spred alongst his heart, and to consume his soule within. He then perceiu'd, of libertie he was depriu'd and sence, By those bright beames of that strange glittering beauties excellence. Then of his ill, the sillie wretch, had knowledge at that hower, Yet to resist, or to withstand the same, he had no power. He felt his captiue heart attacht, and roughly raught away, And yet for all this would he not, make of the same a stay. All meanes of helpe he banisht thence, and yet he felt the griefe, He saw, he was as one vndone, yet would not seeke reliefe. He was in prison, yet he did refuse his libertie, He found his error, yet not once (Peccauie) would he crie. He neuer sought to driue from him, this ill iueuitable, Though, through the same, he found himselfe (for euer) miserable. Cruell effects of Loue; such Louers, as quite senselesse bee, Cannot auoid their hurt, although with eyes they doe it see. So in Florettas beautious eyes, Plaindor now captiuate, Where he should haue resisted, is proud of his lost estate. He counts himselfe thrise fortunate, that he thus vanquisht is, By so diuine a beautie, which he vowes his chiefest blisse. He, this his hurt doth better loue, then all his former health, His bondage, fore his libertie, he doth preferre and wealth. Ah Louers more then wretched right, worse, hundred times then hell Is your estates, and worse then death, (were it but death t'were well). To th'enemie of your sweet liues, your selues you doe deuote, Your hang-man you doe honour still, who seekes to cut your throte. You are not able once to shunne, to hate or to detest, That which doth make you languish, and you, tortureth with vnrest.
You loue, what workes your miseries, and beautie (chiefest sore, To peacefull mindes of worthiest men) as Goddes you adore. Each one (excepting Louers) wrongd, reuengement seekes by lawe, Defends himselfe, and (being hurt) vpon his foe doth drawe. Each one (except the Louer) wars, against his Enemie makes, Hath reason to detest him, and against him vantage takes. He onely yeelds himselfe as slaue, vnto his owne distresse, He honoreth his tormentor fierce; his prison he doth blesse. Who remedie doth seeke for him, him he accounts no friend, He rather hates him mortally, as if he were a fiende. But were not Louers obstinate,Good counsell vnto Louers. did reason rule their minde, Thus peruerse still gainst their owne good, they would not be vnkinde. And thus doth Plaindor now quite change, from his first happie state, That beautie, worshipping, which he ought rather for to hate. As sensuall beast bereft of sense, his heart he offereth free, To her who seekes for to abridge his ioyfull libertie. As sacred, her, he doth account, and holdes her for a Saint, Who is the motiue of his mone, and subiect of his plaint. With great deuotion dotarde like, he vowes to reuerence That, which vnto his life doth seeke to offer violence. Thus from a man vnto a beast, he is transformed right, Whilst he doth seeke to gaine by losse, and Loue, which he should spight. Yet onely in this thing, his lucke was not ore passing bad, Since one, to beare him companie, he in his sorrow had. Floretta felt somewhat the darts of Loue, though not so keene, Which iustly seem'd diuided right, these two young soules betweene. A little she did feele the heate, of this hot amorous fire, Which in the loyall Shepheards heart was kindled through desire. His personage, and valour now, her libertie had wonne, And as she, him, before, so now, he, her, had ouercome. Her milde behauiour showed the same; her colour, and her grace, And her two eyes which still were sixt vpon his manly face. Which rauished with selfe-like Loue, like to a mirror true, The one the others heauie case beheld, and sad did view. The stealing glaunces which they both cast forth alike did showe, That in one selfe-same Sea of Loue their hearts were dround with woe. Their vncoth heates, their scalding sighes, their amorous soundings sweete, Foretold that of one selfe-same cup, they both had drunken deepe. Shame onely then withheld their tongues from silence to vntie, And feare, least one, the others sute, vnkindly should denie. Both knewe they lou'de, yet, both did doubt, least they not loued were, They onely thought vpon that Loue, which both did willing beare. No signes betweene them yet had force (although) enough were showen,) To make the truth of both their mindes vnto their soules be knowen. Floretta building on her beautie faire, thought Plaindor lou'de, And that to yeeld himselfe her thrall, he casily might be mou'de. Her greatest doubt was, least he should not constant be, nor true, But in the ende would giue her o're, and cause her so to rue. Plaindor, againe could not perswade, himselfe so blest to be. As for to be belou'd of her, he thought she nere would gree. He not so much, as thinke so, durst, but rather did dispaire, Ere to enioy the thing he held, so deare, and thought so rare. He durst not oncedesire't, for feare, least being the same denide, He therefore should the greater griefe, in his successe haue tride. Yet in the ende this Shepheah poore, quite wearied with his paine, Tooke heart at grasse, though little lif within m did remaine.
His eyes fixt on the ground full sad, his eyelidds closed tho, And in his gesture many sighes forct from him too and fro. His mbling soule full of pale dread, teares trickling downe ore warme, His mind trmented diuersely with many a fierce alarme. His bling heart prest downe with woe, which throbd and sobd through feare. And gainst all hope of future good, in combat as it were. His armes a crosse in wofull wise, (vnarmed he alone; Thus to Floretta in few words, his case he doth bemone. Diuine and rarest beautie; if the Gods haue heretofore Bin as I am of libertie, depriude, and which is more, Lft their chiefe rest, whilst in themselues they bare as open signe, Such earthly beautie, as did seeme more like themselues diuine. Leauing the heauens, their darts and fires, their fortunes for to proue, Disdaining nought as souldiers braue, to march in Campe of Loue. If that their soules were scorched with this Archers fire so whot, As for their wounds to finde some salue, to seeke they shamed not. If they, as I felt thousand plagues, for louing as I doe, DEARE, then, that I endure the like, let not be straunge to you. Each seekes the steppes of these great Gods to follow, and though he, Doe somewhat erre in following them, yet ought he pardoned be. My heart (as theirs) I wounded finde, with darts most mortally, Which thou gainst me discharged hast from thy commanding eye. The selfe same fire that was in them, is seazde vpon my soule, From sparkels now, tis growen to flames, and lord-like doth controule. Burnt are my senses all, my powers consumed vnto nought, My reason is enchaunted sore, and I to ruine brought. If thee I see, I die, If not, I then doe pine a way, Thus by no meanes my sicknes strange, I swage can or allay. To quench this raging fire, I done haue what I can, alasse, But twill not be, although I would, I cannot bring't to passe. This onely now remaines for me, my life is in thy hand, If I shall liue, or die, the power as now, within thee stands. By thee alone I hold this life, for thee I die as now, That hope I haue thou nourishest, my feare engendrest thou. Sweete then take pittie of this Loue, like Caos so confuse, And graunt my hearts request, who there his aduocate doth chuse. Mine, ist not any more, thine eyes from me the same did take, Then being thine doe pittie it, and much of it doe make. Destroy not what is in thy power, but rather it preserue, In man, great wisedome tis, what is his owne, for to conserue. I craue not that thou me my captiue heart againe restore, To liue with so braue conquerour as thou, tis happier more. My wils (if any interest, longes to me in the same,) (As much I doubt since it I lost, no more I may it claime.) It still within thy louely bands, as prisoner true be bound, Nor in my brest his wonted place no more henceforth be found. Then since it is thine owne, and that an amorous sweete desire, To haue respect vnto his health and life doth thee require. Vnlesse thou on his fortune hard, dost take some kinde remorse, In thy chast amities pure heate, he needes must die of force. Ah then relent, be pittifull, in fauourable wise, And daine for to accept from him, this dutious sacrifice. For what can I offer more deare to thee, then my deere heart, Which nere would yeelde to Loue before, he felt this bitter smart. Which scornd his vtmost force, and lawes did vtterly reiect, And of his manly stomack stout, did showe full many effect.
Then of so braue a vanquisht Foe, ore-come by beautie thine, Take pittie, and him gently vse, in this his captiue time. Such gallant souldiers as be tooke in field by chaunce of warre,A Similie. Be much respected; kindly vsde, and honoured much they are. And whilst as prisoners they remaine, and till their ransome come, All friendly courtesie to them in louing sort is done. Then to my humble heart (faire Dame) who thee doth honour deere, Not cruell be, as if thy foe whome thou should'st hate, he were. Ah gently vse him, or without thus suffering him to lie Still languishing, giue verdit strait, and he shall willing die. For if thy grace he may not gaine, he cannot liue on earth, Whose wounds are deadly, happie he, if ease he finds by death.A Sentence. Speake then Floretta faire to me, nor by thine answere sower, Be thou the cruell cause to force me leaue my life this hower. SWEET speake, for by their Oracles, contented are the Gods To answere men, yet greater farre then men they are by ods. So said the Shepheard, who in feare the summons did attend, Offortune good or bad, if he should liue, or life should end. Like to the guiltie criminall, who is of hope depriu'd,A Compari∣sion. Whilst iudgement with great terror he expects to be disliu'd. His heart did paint full sore and fast, his face for feare did sweat, Mistrust did show in his sad eyes; feare in his soule was set. Disgrace and shame to be denide, his bodie gauld throughout, Who doth attend for what he longes, and languisheth in doubt. Thus wandred too and fro his vitall spirits in this state, Whilst that his life did seeme to him as ouer desperate. Tide was his tongue, and now it irke him that he ought had said, Wishing that he his secret wound to her had not bewraide. So doth a braue and gallant mind, by famine forct to beg Repent him, after that an almes, demanded thus he had. But at the last, the Shepheardesse dissolu'd these doubts confuse, Chearing somewhat the Shepheard, by these words which she did vse. The time hath bin, that Venus (though Loues mothers she) hath lou'd, Whilst selfe same plagues which she inflicts, on others she hath prou'd. Great Ioue, the President and chiefe, of all the Gods aboue, Did thinke it no disparagement at all to be in loue. Both Gods and Goddesse haue lou'd, then why should I be blam'd, Since but with selfesame spot I am (as they haue all bin) staind. Ioue, life hath giuen vnto vs, that we should follow him, To erre as Gods,A Sentence. is no offence, so praise, not blame, we winne. Then may I without scandall loue, as they before haue done, So as my loue in chastest path of loyaltie doe come. With such loue (Plaindor) thee I like, and hope this loue so strong, Shall be of force thy constancie to make endure more long. I loue thee; yet no power thou hast ore body mine at all, If once presume vnmodestly,A Sentence. ought to request thou shall. For no loue is that loue indeed, but rather furious rage, That seekes our honour with disgrace, or infamie t'engage. Then I will loue thee, yet of me, thy selfe nought else assure But my chast faith, which ile reserue to thee vnspotted pure. Vntill that happie time shall chance to hap to vs at last, When we by sacred marriage rights, may coupled be more fast. And with this Plaindor, be content, for what more canst require, Then of my loue to be assur'd, which is thy chiefe desire. The loyall wish of Louers true, is loue reciprocall, For where good meaning is and plaine, there, none is mockt at all.
But for to  for plure send alone, in sensuall wise, Is brutish,  to bests who show all reason to despise. Did I but thinks (Shepheard) thy Loue, not sober were, or chast, Or that within thy brest blak thoughts (staine to my state) were plast. That from thy heart all honour thou and credit didst reiect, And more of  (mt nlike) then vertue didst respect, Assure thy selfe I will rung myself on thee, so sore, As for thy boldnes thou shouldst di, although I dide therefore. And I soone pish would my  for that I was so vaine, To loue a friend, so small of worth a my chast minde to staine. My blood shed by my hands should wash my fault and error baed, Since I to maker hoyce of my Loue, no better foresight had. Floretta, nere shall liue to morne, by taking such disgrace, Floretta, sooner flourish shall by death, which ile imbrace. Then Plaindor, liue, and thinke thy selfe, thrise happie for to be, Since of a vertuous Loue, thy selfe assured thou dost see. Ma time, looke to thy selfe, (attending that same blessed day, The harust of our hastest Loue, when Hymen gather may.) To die, or say ought that vnto discredit mine may turne, For which death purging me, too late, thou then for me shalt mourne. He, that is wise, seekes to be Lord ore his affections, And he a conquerour is right, that conquers his passions. Be thou such one (deare friend) for who with prudencie doth cope, Findes his desires soone riin dare, and nourished his hope. Thus wisely spake Floretta faire whose golden speech so graue, Made Plaindor in his entrailes hot, a greater burning haue. Her sage discretion he admires her faith he doth adore, As sacred, he doth honour her, and likes her chast loue more. He could not st, nor rightly giue a gesse, which did surmount, Of these two so re qualities in her, if so great count. Her beautie faire, or wisedome graue, which most did her aduance, He was with them so ravished and out of countenance. For heauenly Alrs we de vse, to vertue to erect, And so, cause beautie conquereth mens spirits, we respect. Each of these twaine,  by themselues, or, by themselues diuided, By men are raisde to highest rate, and as diuine are praised. But in one body, when alone this Twinne of vertue light, That coarse the beautie of the Gods, as then resembleth right. Tis heauenly, then, as they, and for to Loue doth willing draw The hardest hearts, and senselest Rocks of Epyr with great awe. With this rich Iewell pretious, is Plaindor rauished, And without stirring, thinkes that he vp to the heauens is fled. Immortall, and most i finit his glorie he doth thinke, More then the Gods themselues which do of flowing Nectar drinke. His heart in pleasures sea swimmes fast, as he himselfe requires, His soule doth melt through sweet conceit, in flames of his desires. His ioy doth keep him tongue tide, and he thinkes he dreames as tho, Whilst in his minde, he diuers thoughts doth canuas too and fro. What he doth see, he credits not, nor can he easily deeme, That so rare beautie once will daine of him for to esteeme. He stands amazde like to that Prince from captiue bonds vnthrald, Who is from prison tooke to Throne, and there, anew enstald. He thought Floretta, flower of all, would nere haue stoopt so base, Nor that she ere ment him to write in Checkroll of her grace. Sad sorrow oft the constancie of man doth much annoy, And good things vnexpected, quite confound the minde with ioy.
Thrise happie who the Center keepe, nor nere exceed the meane, Where neither good nor bad doth them torment with such extreame. Plaindor, then wakt out of his trase, with louely discreet cheere, Million of condigne thankes doth giue, to his Floretta deere. Dently, he his faith protests, strictly to keepe to her, And that beyond Loues sacred bonds he neuer meanes to stir; To serue her faithfully, and that himselfe heele sooner slaie, Then to commit what should offend her humor any way. Faire flower, quoth he, light of my life, doe not me doubt at all, Thy will a Ln, thy word, command, be vnto me still shall. Thy wish my chiefe desire Ile hold, thy glorie shall be mine, Thou wholly shalt be vnto me, and my soule onely thine. I neuer will forget my selfe, and when I first offend Against thy daintie selfe, I pray my life haue shamefull end. When, as vnconstant wauering wight, I shall like Haggard range, Of all the hellish torments fierce, then let me haue the change. Most wicked I, and most vnfit to liue vpon the earth, If when thou life to me hast giuen, I should thee quite with death. 'A sowler fault cannot be nam'd, nor that deserues more shame,A Sentence. 'Then th'ungrate Luer, when he is vnthankefull to his dame. 'For ther's no euill that so much craues succours speedie neede, 'Then that which Louers doth molest, and makes their hearts to bleede. 'Nor is there any cruell paine, as is the louing griefe, 'For Loue consumes both soule and coarse, vnlesse it finde reliefe. Then (Ladie) as thou mercifull hast bin thus vnto me, So I my seruice dutifull, for die assure to thee. And if my fortune chaunce to prooue (by enuious destenie set) That I my selfe by doing what vndecent is forget) My blood shall wash my fault away, and rather this offence Shall ende my life, then periurde like with fault I will dispence. Doe so (replide) Ploretta, and thou soone shalt see the day, When as our Loues shall happie preouc, though now they vs delay. But chiefely haue regard (boue all) that thou the cause be not, That my chast meaning through thy fault be staind with vitious blot. For should this ill chaunce hap, thou then (as I before said) soone, Shall seem (slaine by mine owne hands) to sleepe within my Tombe. Thus did these Louers twaine, themselues, one th'other oft coniure, And thus betweene themselues, their faithes (in secret) did assure. As whilom was Dan Paris,An example. with forsooks Enone seene, To plight their Loues most couertlie amongst the leaues so greene, But after they had to idea while, with many a pleasing word, After a thousand pstimes as the yeare did then afford; With thousand louely glaunces quick, one to the other cast, Which forst the amorus fire within their entrailes burne more fast. After a thousand petite Oathes with sports before nere found, To see, if of their fancies fit a like were not the ground. After a thousand sugred smiles, and toyings delicate, Which more the mindes of Louers true doth rightly recreate. After a thousand small disdnes. d for the nonce, And discontents, prou'd mrits, betweene these Doue-like ones. By which, from cinders, vnto flames, there heate did more encrease, By reason of this wnton warre, and amorous angrie peace. After much woing (but no doing) the euening being come, And that the Sre of Pheon, his course that day had runne; At last, Plaindor, nigh surfetting, with ioy and meere content, Kist her faire hand with much adoe, yet prettily was shent.
That done, (though loth) he bids adue vnto his Ladie bright, Being angrie not a little, that so soone was come the night. And laden richly thus with hope of her, whome he lou'd best, He home doth goe, where quietly he takes his wished rest. O rare beginning, faire commencement of two Loues so chast, O happie couple, whilst their daies so luckily were gract. O blessed Louers, if against your fortunes, heauens rage Not trauerst had to ruine you, in your best youthfull age. But when we thinke (puft vp with hope) that we doe flie aloft, Then soonest clipped are our wings, by angrie stars full oft. Then iealous of our glory, they doe seeke vs to destroy, Thinking, they gaine chiefe victorie when vs they can annoy. Thus, these two Louers vnto dire misfortune destined, By cruell Fates, in middest of their ioyes were ruined. Yet heare this wofull tale of them, and you will iustly say, That nothing long in this vaine world, continueth at one stay. Because Plaindor, for propernes, and strength, others did passe, He of another Shepheardesse, extreamely liked was. His two blacke eyes, made her eyes show, how nigh she was to death, Her colour for the loue of him, was like the fall of leafe. She fancied none but him alone, he was her onely treasure. And that she was thus thrald for him, she counted it a pleasure. But Plaindor, neuer thought on her, nor, for her ought did care, Alreadie all his Rest was vp, to like none but his FAIRE. He had no leisure for to iudge, if she did loue or no, So much for faire Floretta, did his strange affection growe. And so should be true Loue indeed, where two, should be but one, A loyall Louer should but serue his mistris, sole alone. For neuer hath it yet bin seene, that constant amitie Would ere disgest, that in the midst it should diuided be. This caused Plaindor not to loue, this wretched maiden poore, Who for his sake, perplexed was, and well nie at deaths doore. Thus languishing, she followeth him, with pale and pitteous looke, Still seeking for to take that course which she should haue forsooke. She followeth him in Quest, and still she after him doth trace, Like to the Blood-hound good, the deare that followeth with great pace. Whilst he (good soule) full little thought that she ought to him ment, He, on his owne affection, so earnestly was bent. Nor could he scarce endure to heare her speake, or talke to him, Nor once to looke on her, although she proper was and trim. None but Florettas stainlesse shape, as beautifull he deem'd, All other fauours whatsoere, as Maskes vnto him seem'd. His soules sole ioy, and lifes delight, she was, and chiefe repose, She was his first choyse, and the last, that he through fancie chose. Yet in the end, this pleasure, which him lik't so, him deceiu'd, For she whome he did thus contemne, at last his loue perceiu'd. Seeing her selfe disdaind so oft by him, now growne so quaint, She doubted lest (whome he did serue) he had some other Saint. Which was the cause that hindred her, his fauour to obtaine, Resoluing with her selfe to seeke, till she had found the same. Imagining (but to no end) by some deuise herein To wade so far, as at the last, she Plaindors grace would win. But t'was the ruine of the one, and th'others ouerthrow, By too too soone vntimely death, as I to you will show. Plaindor expecting still the houre, when stormes should once be past, To repe with ioy (what he had sowen with sorrow) at the last.
Building vpon Florettos faith, as on a rockie shelfe, Whome he more then the better part accounted of himselfe; Did yeeld his heart into her hands, in most obsequious wise, Breathing by her sweet breath, and taking life by her bright eyes. So as that houre he saw her not, he found himselfe to die, For then, the Louers chear'd, when as his Mistris he is by. Sometimes he would be with her, in the thicke and muddie shade, Sometime sit with her by some spring, which prettie murmuring made. And there while by fountaine coole, the heate from them to keepe, Or in some groue be tapistred, with flowers surpassing sweete. Then, in some Bower, by Nature fram'd, where they did often vse, Vpon the grsse in steed of beds, their lodgings for to chuse. Or (for to see the wanton fish) about some cristall poole, Or by some Isie riuer cleere, the mor themselues to coole. Or in some hodow Rocke, the heate of scorching sunne t'auoid, Whose sparkling beames their tender flesh, too much oft times annoid. Or in some fresh and low deepe Caue, enuironed about, Like Baricados made for fence) with brier sweet throughout. In such like place as these they vsde, without suspect alwaies, In this same sort, to spend of their greene youth full many daies. Deuising many a louing toy, as harmelesse wantons doe, Which honour doth permit, whilst they their honour, honour toe. One while they merrie Rundelaies together both doe sing, And with their cheerfull chaunting, make the woods throughout to ring. An other while with blushing cheekes, like to two Turtle Doues, One doth vnto the other tell, their first chast modest Loues. Then one the others beautie doth commend, and then againe They praise their plighted constancie, exempt and free from staine. And now, they prettie Babies looke, one, in the others eyes, Whilst loue, new subiects still of sport, to please them doth deuise. For bearing alwaies, nerethelesse, by proffer, or by showe, Once to attempt, what any way might to dishonour growe. Whilst they poore soules, bare burning coales, yet quench them durst they not, Lest their good fame they should abuse, and their pure honour, spot. This made them sound through hope, and sigh for want of their desire, Not daring reape their loues sweet fruites, as much they did require. They wish and yet are wide from it; faine, if they durst, they would, They will not doe (through vertue) what they thinke in sense they should. Sweet thoughts they haue, they sweat for hope, and yet they die through griefe. They haue at hand the remedie, yet will not take reliefe. Halfe dead, halfe liue, they gasping stand, disiesting this sower drench, Whilst water in their hands they haue, this fire yet will not quench. Bright mirrours of rare modestie, crown'd glory you haue wonne, That hauing time and place so fit, your passions did orecome. And now they fell to their repast, which was of sauadge Bore, Which Plaindor had in hunting slaine, with cheese and fruit good store. In steed of daintie wine full strong, to drinke glad were they than, The water of a riuer cleare, which from a Rocke forth ran. But their chiefe foode and daintiest meate, were louely glaunces cast, Which from their eyes like swiftest shafts, were shot and darted fast. Thrise blessed they;A Sentence. No fortune like,  although they feele some smart, 'To such true Louers, as in bodies twaine, haue but one heart. 'The wealth of all this hugie world, not worth the halfe of this, 'None, (lest they haue experience had) can comprehend such blisse. 'But as we see, the sunne oft times, through ouer sweltrie heate, Changing the weather faire, great stormes, and thundercraks doth threat;
So likewise we do finde full oft, that of most pretious things Some great misfortune groweth, which vs to our destructions brings. For euery thing is framed so, and in such fashion'd guise, That what is good, here on the earth, doth finde his contraries. Of perfect Elements of diuers natures, here vnnam'de, Are bodies formde and fashioned, and liuing Creatures framde. The heate engendreth chillie cold, cold water, Thunders cracke, Warre, Concord, Concord Peace, & Peace War, where all goeth to wracke. So, of the pleasant sweet successe, of Louers these, did come That which did breed their dismall ends, and layd them in their Tombe. The Shepheardesse, which Plaindor lou'd, disdaining in her minde, To be disdaind, and reape repulse, where she thought Loue to finde; Did dogge him as an enuious Spie, that no way he could walke, In wood, nor groue, but after him, full slylie she would stalke. And one day (by ill luck) it was, her fortune to espie, How (with Floretta) he a Caue did enter secretlie. Which, when she saw, her loue she curst, the author of her strise, She band the day of her sad byrth, detesting sore her life. She saw her labor all was lost, her time was spent in vaine, And there withall she well perceiu'd, recurelesse was her paine. Yet, thought she, she would see the ende, of this their Loue so chast, And their discourse to heare, herselfe close in a bush, she plac't. Who, thinking they were (then) alone, for so they made account, Th'one toying with the other stood, as was their vsuall wont. And after many louely tricks, Loue from their eyes did thrill So many Darts, hitting their soules, more heate increasing still. That Plaindor, being ouerchaft with this fierce amorous rage, His lippes vpon the cheekes and mouth, of his faire Saint did gage. Now, of himselfe not master, he, her in his armes doth take, And thousand times did kisse her, though resistance she did make. As hard it is for him that dyeth through thyrst, and want of drinke,A Similie. For to abstaine, when he drawes nigh, the Cristall riuers brinke. So, t'is as insupportable, for any Louer much To be in presence of the Dame he loues, and her not touch. When he hath Fortune time, and place, the leisure and the meane, He cannot hold, his blood's so hot, his heate is so extreame. When he is neere his health, his health to haue, he needs must seeke, When he seeth what he longeth for, he needs the same must like. were he senslesse as a stone, and liuelesse as a blocke, Like to a lumpe of heauie earth, and worse then flintie rocke. So Plaindor takes his pleasure then, forgetfull of his oth, Whilst he, her lips with kisses seales, respecting nought his troth. But weladay; those kisses sweet, to poyson sower did turne, And was the cause, that to his death, they forc't him for to mourne. Floretta chaft apace, that he, thus on her lips had seasde, But Plaindor, this her rage, at last, in sugred-wise appeasde. The sneaking Shepheardesse, the while, withdrawne her selfe now had Out from her hole, where she did see, what made her welnigh mad. And seeing that so many kisses twixt them giuen had bin, These Louers, lou'd but wantonlie, she strait begun to win. Away she goeth, nor for to see the ende she durst be bold, But much astonisht did depart, then frosty Ice more cold. She is resolu'd to be reueng'd, and vexed mightily, With sundry passions, her hote loue, doth turne to crueltie. The Loue of these two soules, she meanes to taxe with foule repriefe, And of the kissing close, to cast Floretta in the teeth.
Her Honor to accuse, and of these vertuous Louers twaine To seeke with infamie, and with reproch, their liues to staine. O how disdaine is (in her kinde) more violent of force: And what great dammage hath it brought to men without remorse? O how it power hath for to change the hearts of vanquishers, And how to alter dearest Friends in minde, shee her bestirs. Meane time Floretta vnderstands, that her Renoum's disgrac't, And that her Honor (vndeseru'd) is wrongfullie defac't. Her Fault, (if chaste loue may be term'd a Fault) this woman base One morning fore the Sheapheards all, reprocheth to her face. Which when Floretta heard, she vowes, ore-charg'de with furious Ire, Against her selfe, against her health, and life for to conspire. No longer will she liue (as now) reuenged for to bee, For Honor hers, by Treason stainde, as she with griefe doth see. So for to purge her selfe of fault,An Example. (not faultie) nerethelesse In ancient Time, vnto her Fame, did die the chaste Lucresse. Thus doth Floretta, destined too hard, with heauy looke, Sweare with her selfe, vpon her selfe, Murther to execute. Her daintie hands, she aymeth now, against her proper corse, Her hands, which too too hastie were, to wrong, without remorse. Ah, how much, Honor's deare vnto a chaste and modest spright, Who seeks by vice, to slaunder such, accursed be that Wight. The feare of Death can neuer coole Desire,A Sentence. that's resolet, To saue his good name, by his life, if he thereon be set. Floretta, then changing her former vse, from sweetest ioy, To vncoth plaint, and passions sad, surcharged with annoy. Bewailing her disaster hard, and sighing forth her paine, Vnto a sauadge Mountaines toppe, gets vp with speed amaine. Where sprang a certaine Water strange, or rather poyson fell, By which strong venim, she did meane, her woes for to expell. This water of such nature was, as nothing could it hold, It brake Glasse, Iron, Brasse, Leade, Steele, it was so deadly cold. But she that knew the propertie thereof, in hoofe of Asse, Close did the same conserue, and then away from thence did passe. And carrying it about her still (vntill she Plaindor found She neuer left, that done, she downe sits, by him on the ground. Where she withouten shewe of griefe, like Cignet that doth sing Before her death) these words worth Note did vse, thus greeting him. Ah Plaindor deare, deare may I say, if thy Floretta poore, Hath giuen thee any proofe of Loue, most perfect, or most sure; If euer of her friendship kinde, thou care hadst heretofore, As not long since, she in thy Loue, with pitty thee did store. By that same loyall loue of thine, she now coniureth thee, Permit her Honor, to reuenge her on her iniurie. Floretta (now) can liue no more, since that she, through thy selfe, Hath lost her good Fame, which she priz'de aboue all worldly wealth. Ah Plaindor, t'is (for euer) lost, and by like lucklesse Fate, Floretta thine, now goeth the way, her life to ruinate. Alas, how often told I thee, when first thou didst me woe, That still, mine Honor to preserue, thou shouldst respect haue due. Mine Honor, which Florettas life, after the same doth draw, And which I iustly forced am, to follow now by Law. How we do liue, here in this world, God knoweth is reckning small, Nor flourish can our Names,A Sentence. or deeds, immortally at all. Vnlesse our Honor, mongst our selues, doe liue immortallie, For that alone keeps vs aliue, that we can neuer die.
But if the selfe same blood as yet, remaineth in thy heart Of such, so many sauadge beasts, by which thou richer art; If in the prime of thy best Age, and pride of thy youths flower, Thou hast not lost thy courage olde, through Loues ore-conquering power; Then Plaindor, I pray heartily, nay more, beseechen thee, To liue, when I am dead, and that thou wilt suruiuen me. And thinke deare Friend, I merit not the halfe part of the griefe Which for my death, I know that thou wilt take without reliefe. For I was, but a shadow plaine, trans-form'd in body thine, Besides, fairer then I, thee loues, whose beautie is diuine. Who, with affection like to thine, in fancie being set, The thought of me, and memorie, shall make thee soone forget. So that no sooner Death shall me, from my liues chaines dislinke, As thou stalt forced be, no more on me at all to thinke. Meane time, since hasty Death, doth me, of all my hopes depriue, To haue for my sore wound a Salue, whilst I shall be aliue; And that (sweet Shepheard) I no more (shall now) of thee haue need, Ile thee acquaint, how much, how deare, I loued thee indeed. Most zealous, yet more chast, I lou'd, such was mine amorous flame, My heart was thine, and in thy breast, mine owne Soule did remaine. My thoughts, did wholly run on thee, my bodie aye was thine, Thy will, as t'were, a penalt Lawe, to thee, did me combine. To please thee (not my selfe, (I liu'd, nor did I thinke at all, That ere my credit had receiu'd a foyle, much more a fall. Nav more, I could haue bene content, that thou shouldst tasted haue, That sweetest sweet, that Louers seeke, and still is, that they craue. But that mine Honor did ore me, with greater puissance seaze, Then my desire, ore senses had, (as sensuall) them to please. This selfe-same honor (now) although some (wrongfully) haue toucht, Because it too much honor'd thee, and suffered thee, too much. Demaunds, my bodie offered be, to him, my fault to purge, And for to haue it sacrifiz'de most bloodie, doth it vrge. And so it shall; Floretta, (then courage) take heart at grace, And this vile blot of hatefull shame, let's wipe from off our face. For though I through this poyson strong, of life depriued be, Yet my good Fame, taxt wrongfully, it shall restore to me. Adiew, my dearest Plaindor, but must I, my selfe absent From thee? and from thy presence, needs must I alack be sent? I, I; Ah, hellish griefe, yet me my heart againe restore, That I may liue below this earth, with quiet minde the more. Ah, render me, my heart againe, which Ile in pieces teare, Nor for to see the same to die, be thou abasht with feare. Sweete Plaindor, if that ere thou lou'dst Floretta, thou mayst vaunt, Vouchsafe this one request to her, (now dying) for to graunt, Which is, me to suruiue, that thou, as Testis, witnesse may, How wrongfully some thought (too much) my Glories pride to slay. I call thee, for to speake the truth, of my chaste Innocence, And to the Heauens I doe appeale, who knows my true pretence. Then (Friend) if euer in that sight of thine, this body haue Bene gratious, when it dead shall be, prouide for it, a graue. Close these mine eyes, cashirde from light; shut fast this mouth so pale, And this my Coarse, below in ground, to burie, do not faile. (Deare, this is all I craue of thee, since now my course is runne, That kindnes, is but worth small praise, that by the halues is done, But, how now Plaindor? what? do'st weepe? thou sigh'st amaine, me thinke, Nay, then thy grieuous Martyrdome, I soone will ease and stint.
Lets dye, lets dye, more then high time t'is, I were gone from hence, And saying so, she swalloweth downe, that hatefull poysonous drench. That done, vppon the greeny grasse, her selfe she softly throwes. And holding of her armes acrosse, her prettie mouth doth close. When lifting vp her last seene eyes, she Plaindor might behold, How he his manly brest for griefe, did beate with courage bold. Whereat she weeps afresh, so great a Corsie to her t'is, And dying now, she striues to giue to him her latest kisse. That done, she yeeldeth vp the Ghost; Ah heauie spectakell, But now the dire Catastrophe, of this sad tale, Ile tell. When Plaindor saw his Mistres dead, with lookes most furious He draweth his sword, which gainst himselfe, he bends as barbarous. And raging like a bedlem mad, distraught of wit through wroth, Minding himselfe to massacre, these words he sigheth forth. Floretta, ah Floretta, speake, speake fairest of all Faire, Where's now thy faith, that did protest, of me to haue such care? Where's now thy oaths and promises? They (now) haue me deceiu'd, And my greene youth, long fed with hope, they haue of ioy bereau'd. Cruell Floretta, and yet cruell, to none, except vnto Thy selfe, when for anothers fault, thy selfe thou didst vndo. To bring me to my dismall ende no way couldst thou deuise, But for to slaughter thus thy selfe, in such a monstrous guise? O, faire, but chaster Coarse by farre, what hast thou done or sed, To be, vntimely, fore thy time, consorted with the dead? And thou pure soule, within that Coarse, what sinne didst thou commit, That thou so soone, from that faire Inne, away shouldst passe and flit? Thine Honor th'ast kept vndefil'd, then if you this, doe call A fault, how then hast thou offended? Else hast thou not at all. Faire beauties spotlesse Temple, thou doest dye for mine effence. And I, the essence of thy ill, to liue seeke to dispence. Ah wretched me, and which is worse, white liuered soppe I am, Vnworthie of such calling, as to beare thy Seruants name. No, no, I needs must dye, my blood, pardon, for fault shall win, And I will satisfaction make, for this my cruell sin. Yet fore I die, I humbly grace, and pardon, begge of thee, Who hast the power, that this my soule, remaineth thus in me. Ah pardon me, what ist I say? this pardon which I craue, Argues my fault, more monsterous, that worse I sinned haue. I see, the Murtherer I haue bin, of thy fresh flowring youth, Thy healths, chiefe Homicide, and foe, vnto thy faith some ruth. For me, (not for thy selfe) thou dyest, and shall I then be cause, To see those eyes & mouth clos'd vp, which Death vnto them drawes? O, of all vertue, golden meane, of loyaltie, bright sonne, Whome as my Saint I haue ador'd, must thou for me be vndone? O hell, O black dispaire, of Starres most spitefull in such wise, To incense so many boysterous stormes, gainst my small barke to rise; Ay me, why dy'de I not, when first I saw this face of hern, Then lyke an exile. from all ioy to be exposde and driuen? But soft, my Toung runs too too fast, and words be nought but winde, I know not where I am, nor am I now in my right minde. Yet at the least, let me once bid my deerest Dame adieu, And let me of her take my leaue; Ah speake; what, will not you? No, no, I am vnworthy I, vnworthy of her grace, I not deserue, that haue destroyd such fauour, so suire face. And hast thou then, the heart to see, that beautie be disliu'de, The onely cause, that thou long since, of life wort not depriu'de!
And canst thou breathe without her sight? thou canst not I doe know, Vnto Th'Elizian golden fieldes, thou needes with her must goe. My selfe, my young yeares cutting off, will rid me of annoy, Since such a blacke tempestious storme, hath shipwrackt all my ioy. Ile die, ile di; but yet what kind of death might I inuent Cruell enough for my vile fact; me iustly to torment? Since that the fait! falst mde aliue, through me her death hath found, To whome, more then to all the world, I was obligde and bound. Diuinest beautie, thou, through me, doest perish, and doest die, Whose chiefe delight was to restore, my nie lost libertie. Plaindor, thy deaths wound hath thee giuen, whilst he forgot himselfe, To whome he owed his life and goods, and more then all his wealth. Ah haplesse man, ah louely Nymphe, great reason sure thou hast To giue m ore, since ouer thee, so small care I haue pla'te. And misely didst thou gesse, that I vnto thy glorious fame, Should be small credit, rather one, that thee and thine should shame. But woe is me, thou wrongest me, if so of me thou iudge, Since for thy sake nought to attempt, as yet I re did grudge. Faire, thou shalt know, that since my heart, a widower is through thee, He can no ioy what euer take, nor longer liuing bee. Much lesse, that I can like againe, I am no Louer such, If so thou thinkst, thou art deceiu'd, and wrongest me oremuch. Thy seruant, whilst I liu'd I was, dying ile be thy slaue, To make some mends for mine offence, thou readie me shalt haue. Ile die, as thou hast done, as one, of thy praise enuious, Because thou purchast hast for me, thy rest from sorrow thus. I will not beg, that I may touch, that prettie cherrie lip, Whilst I am dying, I confesse, my selfe deserue not it. Yet gratious Goddesse of my thoughs, if those thine eyes so bright, Haue not alreadie quite forsooke their wonted cleerfull light; Ah then, doe but once open them and Plaindor thine regard, With one small glaunce, who now doth leaue his life through fortune hard. Bright starres, your Plaindor, you shall see, loow quickly he will die, If you so much doe grace him, as to ope but halfe an eye. And now in leiu of recompence, for wrong that done I haue, This blood accept, my hainous crime, to purifie and laue. Sweete Ladie, now at last receiue this blood, this blood of mine, And suffer my dead coarse, repose and rest it selfe by thine. Thus said, with courage great, his sword, he thrusts into his side, And being dead vpon the ground, his bodie faint doth glide. Which with his lukewarme struaming blood, the ground did make to fa Of colour, whilst it flowing ratine, and dide it ouer all. Floretta all this while was not starke dead, the poyson strong Was not enough, which was the cause, her life it did prolong. Her he auie eyes she casteth vp, and rolleth here and there, Whilst in her face, a show of death, halfe smiling doth appeare. And seeing Plaindor, falne by her, she, him doth fast imbrace, And with her feeble force doth wipe, the blood from off his face. His head, with dying hand she doth hold vp, to ease his paine, And hauing giuen to him a kisse, rekisseth him againe. Wherewith he gaspeth, yet once more, and thinkes himselfe the most Blessed, that in his Mistris armes he yeeldeth vp his ghost. Thrise happie Plaindor, fortunate, eternall is thy glorie, For thou hast gained ouer death, a pretious victorie. Thou diest in the clasped armes, of faire Floretta thine, Whilst with her eyes, thine eyes, thy face with hers doe close conioyne.
She striuing for to die, that she amaine might thee pursue, Whom thou doest see, though gainst her will, thee to suruiue so true. And now death had alreadie tane her speech, nor could she speake, Yet these few words she sighthed forth, with hollow voice most weake. O Plaindor, sweet friend, Shepheard mine, our Loues though miserable, To ages that hereafter come, to liue shall aie be able. Since through the vertuous paths they trod, vntainted chastitie Serues vnto them to be the ground, to their Eternitie. And though we now die, yet our selues, thus let vs comfort rife, Thou diest forme, and I for thee, am pleasde to end my life. Like faithfull friends we die, the one forth' other's well apaid, And in one Tombe our bodies both shall be enterd and laid. Thou goest (my Loue) before me, and I follow thee most blithe, As fast, as fast I can, for, thee I meane not to suruiue. Yet happie we in dying thus, since (kissing) we embrace, Which (liuing) we durst not attempt, for fere to haue disgrace. But now I come to thee; Thus said she, on the face doth fall Of her blest Plaindor, whilst her soule, doth, lit away withall. Their coarses be within one graue, where the  doe quiet sleepe, And in this Rocke, vnto their fame, this verse was grauen deepe. ARCAS, hauing heard this pittios Tragedie, could not chuse but weepe, drea∣ming a fresh vpon his auncient Loues, when the old man, thus awaked him. Shep∣heard, Shepheard, loue is neuer satisfied, nor appeased with teares, which is an or dinarie vse with him, being alwaies a child, as he is. In the teares of Louers, doth he temper his Arrowes, the harder to freese the hearts of their Ladies against them. The more he fin∣deth vs to waile, and want courage, the more he doth taunt and reuile vs: Not vnlike vn∣to that Generall of a field,A Similie. who more hostly pursueth his enemies when they begin to shrinke backe and recoyle, then when they valiantly and stoutly stand to beare out the brunt. If Cupid hath not yeelded vnto the teares of his Mother, much lesse will he be moued at thine. True Louers, sildome or neuer weepe, because their heate consumeth the moysture which is within them;A Sentence. no more then drie wood can yeeld forth wet water. Cease then to waile, and in steed of these teares, take courage against this fierce enemie. If the Gods themselues (replied the Shepheard) could not resist him, how then shall any man be able to encounter with him? And what other thing can such miserable wretches doe, as be out of all hope, but bewaile and lament their vntimely misfortunes? It is for hearts of steele, resembling blades ouer hardly tempred, which rather breake then bowe, not to be moued with griefe at all. Teares are signes of a pitifull Nature: whereas such as are cruell, neuer weepe, because they are quite voyd of all compassion. Though Loue hereat will not be moued, yet will gentle hearts relent at the same. I knowe, he maketh no account hereof, neither doe I pretend to sacrifice vnto him with them, but rather with mine owne decrest blood. How wonderfully art thou deceiued quoth the old man. The Alters of Loue, as those of the Gods ere vpon the earth, neuer distill nor drop with blood: for can Loue, be encountered and met withall, amongst braules, quarrels, and bloodshed? No, no: but where amitie and friendship is, there doth he frequent and keepe companie:An excellent discourse of the mightines and power of Loue. such onely being to be counted right Louers indeed, and worthy to enioy Loue it selfe, who beare no malice, nor seeke one anothers death. O, how sweete, and pleasing a thing, is this kind of amitie, which keepeth the Gods in perfect vnitie, and vnder whose puissance, is the hollow giuing vault of heauen guided? Men, (after the example of the Gods) by the aduise of Loue, first assem bled themselues together, vniting and incorporating themselues, within Cities, and walled Townes, lea∣uing the sauadge wildernesses vnto wilde beasts, wherein, they before did inhabit. Why then doest thou offer blood vnto him? O Father of these nocturnall Desarts (answered the Shepheard) I know thou thinkest otherwise then thou speakest. Canst thou com∣pose, and frame a gentle and milde Nature,An example. of nothing but murther and crueltie? How many massacres loue hath commenced, Troy can witnesse. How many cruell griefes, and
insupportable miseries are in the hearts of Louers Ariadne knoweth; And how many false Treasons, and blasphemous periuries, Oenone feeleth. Why then wilt thou iustifie him, he hauing these foule faults? Euerie bodie that lodgeth not reason within it selfe, is blame-worthie. And what reason I pray you, is their found in Loue? He is a traiterous Drogerar, and a Physition of mens hearts, for some he healeth and comforteth, and other-some, he vexeth, killeth, and tormenteth; He is blind-folded, which is enough and sufficient proofe to make thee know his imperfections. Thinke not the worse of him for that (said the old man) for Iustice is vnited, which brooketh no comparison, in per∣fection, and vertue. Loue is blinded, because he should haue no respect of persons, to the ende, greatest Kings may be no more exempted from his power, then the poorest beg∣gers. He is blind, to shew, that he walketh without craft or dissimulation: for that is no true and sincere amitie, where falsenes of heart lodgeth, and where treason and disloyal∣tie lurketh. If Loue, (seeing clearely with his eyes) should spare Princes and Potentates, what profit then should the poorer sort receiue through this friendship? For Loue com∣pelleth the rich, and haughtiest courages, to affect and honour the poore & basest crea∣tures, and to doe them all seruice possible they can; And this is the reason that Loue is vailed, and not meere folly. For he shall neuer be counted vnwise, who without any sud∣den alteration, or passion whatsoeuer, taketh his way and course directly and iustly, without sparing great personages, who are made for the support and helpe of the mea∣nest and poorest sort of people. Yet this vaile (answered Arcas) taketh away the light of knowledge, hindring him from seeing, what he ought to doe; So that as a blinde man (without a guide) falleth into the ditch. Euen so Cupid for want of sight, committeth many thousands of grose enormities, which being put in practise, christen him with the name of a furie, in steed of Loue. Is that right loue, which altereth the minds of mē, quite topsic turuie in all their proceedings? in such wise, as one shalbe forced to loue her, who hateth him; and another, shall be beloued of her, whome he cannot in any wise abide? Are not these effects, meere enmities & despights, plaine rage, and furie? If so, why then, most vnworthie is Loue of this name, attributed vnto him. Thogh Iustice be vailed, yet most loyall, iust, vnpartiall, and sacred, are her proceedings: whereas those of Loue, are quite contrarie. Therefore you conclude ill, to affirme that Loue is blinded, like vnto Iustice, which though it be all one thing, yet is the cause different, for the one carrieth her vaile to a good ende, and the other to a bad purpose; I report me vnto the vniust be∣hauiour of this little blind Infant. Alas poore soules (replied the old man) what more sheweth the admirable puissance of God, then the diuersitie of effects, proceeding from himselfe? what giueth so much glorie vnto the Painter, as the varietie of faire Pictures, which he doth most cunningly portray forth and embollish? Euen so, why, doth Loue bring forth so many and contrarie causes, but onely to shew himselfe the more wonder∣full? & to lay strong, the diuine foundations of his mightie power? He bringeth forth ef∣fects, which, althogh they are all differing, yet be they alwaies such, as are agreeable with the diuersitie of the natures of man, gouerning euery thing with a kind of prudent poli∣cie vnknowne, far aboue our reaches. For else, it might peraduenture so fall out, that it might be more worse for him that loueth to be beloued againe, then if he should be ha∣ted; the wisedome of the Gods, cannot be comprehended within our feeble spirits. But this is the shallow conceit that mortall men haue, rather then to thinke that to be firme, holy, iust, and good, which the Gods themselues goe about to enterprise: For it is not to be thought otherwise, but that they who are perfect, (as the Gods themselues) and are no way spotted or polluted with vice, can doe any thing, that is vniust, imperfect, or foolish. In respect of the Gods (answered the Shepheard) I auow, what you affirme: yet by your leaue, I denie that loue may be admitted amongst this troope. Those insolent Tyrants, who vse their licentious will, in steed of rightfull Loue, (whose constraining force, maketh them to be feared,) although they be puissant & mightie, yet cannot they entitle themselues with the names of iust and prudent Princes. And so, I allow of the greatnes of the power of Loue, but not of his Deitie. God taketh no pleasure in the fal of man, his creature, but Loue seeketh the same; God establisheth all things in good securi∣tie, by a certaine sacred order: but Loue dismembreth, scattereth, separateth & breaketh the peace and quietnes of man, and therefore he is no God. Most damnable persons are
those who being troubled, with some supernaturall and violent power, attribute most wickedly vnto the Iust, Sacred, and diuine God, the furious and raging fittes of braine∣sicke Loue. Therefore, let vs neuer pronounce this broad blasphemie; for so farre off is Loue, from being a God, that mortall men are able to conquere and take him (as it were) prisoner. If this be true (replyed the olde Sire) who then is it, that maketh thee thus to stoope? who hath yoked thee, and made thee bowe thy necke vnto this God? and wherefore doest not thou trample and treade vpon him, he being but a man? That Captaine that is conquered by a braue victorious enemy, is worthie of blame, but farre more is he to be condemned, that suffereth himselfe to be ledde away Captiue by a weake & feeble aduersarie. If Loue be a thing of so small worth, why then, doest thou not chase him away from thee? In vaine therfore be these teares, which thou now sheddest: in vaine thy complaints, and in vaine these sorrowes, which thou stil makest. Fond is that sicke bodie that may helpe himselfe, and who (because as one selfe-wild, will not) suffereth himselfe to be infected with a disease, too weake for him, if he were willing to striue & wrastle with the same Euen so art thou fond, to languish as a vassaile vnto this God, so long a time in this maner, when (if thou wilt) thou canst vāquish him. O foolish Slaue,A Sentence. that being able to free himselfe without danger, from seruitude, yet neuerthelesse, continueth so, all his life! But the bragging Souldier may alwayes threa∣ten, his foe being absent, against whom appearing once in sight, he dareth not once so much as drawe his sword. So thou seemest to contemne Loue, yet in the meane time, darest not for thy life to resist him: and beeing valiant a farre off, thou yeeldest at the first encountring together. But this one thing I will tell thee, that amongst all the deadly passions, that doe ruinate and ouerthrow man, there is none so strong, nor vio∣lent, as this of Loue; death it selfe being farre more sweeter then that is. How often doe we see men sing, when they are at point of death, esteeming them∣selues right blessed for to die? whereas the Louer (not beloued againe) butchereth and killeth himselfe, running headlong into all dangers, and as one furious, looseth all pa∣tience, and all good hopes to come. Man endureth resolutely, all other accidents of misfortunes, which ordinarily hap∣pen vnto him, but being plagued with Loue, it rauisheth and bereaueth him, of his ver∣tue and valour, and of his constancie and welfare. Therfore is he more mighty then all other things, which eyther descend from Heauen, or proceed from forth the earth. Mightie indeed, must I needes say hee is, (quoth the Shepheard) yet I esteeme him but as vnwise, that maketh any account of vniust puissance. Without Iustice, king∣domes are but robberies, and without reason, the Gods also, are but sinners: and there∣fore vnworthie of that name. If euery one were iust, what neede should we haue then, of Lawes and compulsions? Doest thou make account of Loue, because hee is strong and violent? why so is the Sea, tempestuous, strong, violent, rough, and of great power: but are his waters, as wholesome, fresh, sweet, and good, as are those of springs and lesser fountaines. Knowledge is a glorie to him that possesseth the same, in seruing himselfe wisely and discreetely, but as hee maketh it a refuge for vice, and a support to such wrongs and iniuries, as he putteth in practise, it is his vtter ruine and ouerthrowe. Bad force for a time, may compell to be obeyed, but it is quickly gone, the feare thereof also, dy∣ing with the same: where contrariwise, Iustice purchased without compulsion, to Signo∣rise, and dominere ouer mens soules, is alwayes highly honored. Nothing that is built vpon rigor, can long endure, the self-same force, driuing forcibly away the first violence: but Iustice neuer ouerthroweth the works of Iustice,An Example. for that they are vpright and wor∣thy of life. I confesse indeed, not a little to my griefe, that I am the slaue of Loue, for sometimes a Prince hapneth to be the vassaile of a simple & meane Captaine, and in as much as men (borne to suffer) are bondmen by Fortune, & vassels of the earth, God dis∣poseth of them according vnto his owne will. But the sick patient often blameth his dis∣case, which he feeleth, & imagineth, to be little or nothing dangerous at all; and yet ne∣urethelesse, cannot he rid himselfe of the same, when hee fainest would. The Beare, for want of knowing his owne strength, yeeldeth vnto a lesse force, for
man is perfect in knowledge, yet because bee wants the right vse thereof, hee is but as a burning Candle vnder a bushell. And as for Loue, my conceit is, that yeel∣ding vnto him, I obey the least power that is in heauen, or on earth. And I am of an other opinion, answered the olde man, for I thinke it can no way turne vnto discredit, to render seruice vnto him, whom the greatest Gods deuoutly honour. The Seruant ought not to scorne to attend vpon him, to whome his Maister himselfe doth belong. The Gods (replied the Shepheard) honored Loue, whil'st he lent them his hand,A Sentence. and assisted them in their voluptuous pastimes. Profit, oftentimes is the cause, that a man doth reuerence vnto such a one, as he esteemeth to be a farre worse man then himselfe. We cannot (said the olde man) tearme that thing lesse then our selues, which hath po∣wer to command ouer vs; And if wee be obedient vnto Loue, then is he more diuine and great then wee our selues are. Indeed (replyed the Shepheard) he is mightier in malice, but leaude behauiour and mischieuousnes, cannot be registred amongst the Catalogue of Famous enterprises. Then is not he mightie, that maketh men illustrious in this pointe, but rather weake, and of no reckening, inas-much as puissance, with the defect, is as drosse, and base trash: and Vertue, though it be poore, is an eternall treasure. And yet for all this (answered the olde man) the most learned erected Altars heereto∣fore vnto him, enterprising more for his honor, then for any other Celestial God what∣soeuer. And wee being lesse wise then they, wee cannot as I gesse, much faile, to followe their foot-steps. The propertie of gold (replyed the Shepheard) is sometimes changed. Suger, now and then becommeth bitter and sower, and the brightest day, is often darkened with thicke clouds: euen so, the wisest, now and then forget themselues, yet their faults ought not to be, as a warrant vnto the posteritie hereafter to come; because, that vice, which the ministers of any vertue doe commit, shall neuer be allowed of by her voyce, the same being as personall, and not publike. The Sages, then hauing erred, wee must likewise needes acknowledge their offence, which taxeth them, for committing the same. Yet in the meane time (saide the olde man) see how Loue is here noted, to be ouer-powerfull and mighty, seeing he forceth and compelleth the wisest to doe amisse. Truth (quoth the Shepheard) but as out of a heapeof corne, we make choyce of our wheate, and leaue the cockle: So of the actions and proceedings of most discreet per∣sons, wee should chuse the best, and leaue the worst. For as they are men, they are sub∣iect to erre, and wander astray. Vertue, being alwayes a good president vnto vs, but not vice: In asmuch as such as follow the vertuous shall be commended, where those that imitate the bad, shall be as much blamed and condemned. Well then, my good Shepheard (answered the old man) let vs giue ouer, from argu∣ing any further about this LOVE, & recount vnto me the subiect of thy griefe, & the cause of this thy strange wandring, or miserable exile, amongst these solitary dwellings. Ah my deare Father (replyed Arcas) more dangerous is the second sicknesse, then the first, it being of the selfe same qualitie, and happening not long after; and so cru∣ell shall I finde my troubles, in imparting vnto thee my misfortunes, as I haue hereto∣fore, felt bloody, the effects of the same. Cease therefore, to enquire of mee about that, where of the remembrance alone killeth me to thinke therevpon: For what good can it doe vnto the whole, to demand of the diseased, the cause of his sicknesse? and what profit will it be vnto thee, to heare me recite my drerie Fortunes? No, no, rather doe I thinke it meetest to conceale them, least I should prouoke men, to exclaime a∣gainst the Gods, when they shall perceiue how partiall, and vnnaturall, they haue bene alwaies against mee. Woe is me, excepting my mischance, euery maladie, all paine, and euery sorrowe, haue their proper remedie. The Eternitie of the Gods, is not more sure, then my haples disaster, (still to continue) is most certaine. It is far from the nature of all other diseases, for that which healeth others, woundeth me. O Heauens, what hope of health resteth for that miserable wretch, who when he hath embraced all the wholsom Altars of the Gods, is yet as vnfortunate, as euer he was before? But what is violent, cannot by the course of Nature be long permanent: And if it be so, why then am I exempted
from this rule? Neuer was any euill more violent then mine, and yet in the meane time, it thus continueth still extreame. O deceitfull sentence! Alack, alack, double doe I feele my griefe, the one, in suffe∣ring it, & the other, in liuing to endure it: and yet what should let me from murthering of mine owne selfe, but euen the selfe-same charge, which the Maister gineth vnto his slaue, ouer whom he hath command, both of life and death? The onely Physitions which carefully assist me in my disease, are Death and Dispaire: Comfortable is the re∣medie of Death, but damnable is the syrup of Dispaire. The one hindreth the other, not vnlike vnto two contrary windes, which hold and keepe in, a tottering Ship in the maine Sea, it being not able to saile, neither of the one side, nor of the other. Thrice welcome should death be vnto me, if naturally, and without dispaire, it would come on the sodaine, to rid me from this trouble: So thrice happie dispaire, if with∣out death, it could chase away this my more then intollerable anguish from mee. Betweene these two contrary windes doe I flote, not that I will denie, but that some∣times, the Sunne-shine of my soule, hath made mine eyes cleare and bright, but yet in such sort hath it bene, as the light thereof presently after, hath caused my darknesse to shew more gastly, fearefull, and horrible. Ah sweetest Sunne of my soule, where doest thou now at this present, dart and cast forth thy heauenly bearnes? And what happie Countrey is at this houre, warmed with the gladsome Luster of thy beautious light? In respect of the faire continuing day, long and tedious are the nights, though short and in Sommer, vnto the sickly creature, euen so long and rksome is my darknes, in respect of the cheerfull day of thy oft-wisht for presence. Wretch that I am, I wander without thee, in middest of the horror of a continuall euening, whilst black and gloo∣my shadowes are alwayes before mine eyes. O God, if our sinnes inflict vpon vs these plagues, wherewith wee are tortured, yet at the least, when wee haue patiently endured them, drawe vs from out this heauie yoke. The guiltie person, condemned to die, conceiueth no greater disquietnes in his minde, then to thinke of that kinde of punishment, which shall take away his life from him. Ah then, take him away, take him away, I beseech you, out of this world, who can doe nothing but cast forth complaints and laments, and whose importunate voice, pestereth without intercession both heauen and earth, calling still to minde the afflicti∣ons without number, which he is forced ouermuch to beare. But I see I must yet lan∣guish somewhat longer, if so, what remedie, but compeld content? Let me then languish thus, and pine away, and let mine vsuall sorrowfull tune, pur∣sue my dayes, euen vnto my very graue, to the ende, that so bewailing my crosse desti∣nie, I may at last giue vp my wearied Ghost. But I see deare Father, I doe but trouble thee, and therefore in respect of thee, I will giue ouer this mournefull melodie, onely I will recite vnto thee an answere of a cer∣taine false Ecco, who not long since decciued my hopefull expectation. And thus it was. ECCO Great Goddesse of these woods, that in these woods art honored right, Speake, wilt thou lend thine eares to one, that is in wofull plight? With thy last sweete sound amorous, wilt thou my griefe abate? Importuning my Fortune hard, to mee vnfortunate? O Goddesse answere my complaints, which I before thee powre, And pittie my outragious paine, by sweetning of my sowre. Comfort me in my torments and my griefes, that choketh mee, With hope that from this dismall plague, I one day may be free; To th'ende that I deuoutly may, blesse thy thrice blessed Grace, Ah, then if thou (as now) within these hollow Rocks hast place, Answere my Cryes: say, which of these two shall I prooue, To make an end of all my woes, or Death, or Loue?  LOVE.
After so many crosses, which we force and driue, Shall I then die, or they being dead, shall I suruiue?  SVRVIVE. But, shall I stilithen liue, depriued of my pleasure? In ponsiuenes thus languishing, and in displeasure.  PLEASVRE. May it be, I should be grac't, with her, who doth excell, In all rare showes, so base as I, can I deserue so well?  SO WELL. But, in meane space, for these my griefes, I haue no other scope, But death to ende them, since I liue without all hope.  HOPE. Alas dispaire encour treth still, my rising hope, and truth, And ore me this proud power, will raigne and rage sans ruth.  SANS RVTH. If so, thrice miserable is the wretched Louers state, And mine what can it be, but most vnfortunate?  FORTVNATE. After so many brunts, borne, which in my soule breedes strife, Which shall I call to helpe me then, or death, or life?  LIFE. But if I vnder this hard law shall liue most cruelly, Who, then will pittie me, whilst in these panges I lie?  Ecco. I. If so, then still ile hope, and O yee Gods I you adiure, Not to deceiue my future hopes, nor glories mine obscure. Ah, keepe your promise vnto me, and after so much griefe, Extinguish quite, the furie of my cares which beg reliefe. So will I blesse for euermore, your Deites most true, And mongst, the most renowm'd in world sing praises still of you. See (my good Father) the cosoning hope, that the Goddes of the Forrests bestowed vpon me, or rather to say more truly, abused my wretched life. O notable false & deceit∣full Oracles of the Gods, as Pirrhus, and others may well testifie the same. But why should men be condemned for deceiuing one another, when they are cosoned by the Gods themselues? Long time, did I hope well of this mine answere, but in the end I found it had deluded my conceit, by which my sorrow encreased not a little the more. Alacke, if it be so, that I am altogether vnworthie of this good, why then should the Gods thus promise me the same? He that hopeth for nothing, languisheth but little, but hope, deferred, most mortally afflicteth the soule. Besides, I haue (long since that time) found by experience, not smally to my cost, that the will of the Gods, is called backe, either by reason of our sinnes, or for our vertues sake. Because of our sinnes, they de∣face and blot out the good entended vnto vs, perceiuing that our faults, make vs vn∣worthy of them: and for our vertues, they call backe their cruell executioners, finding vs to be worthy of grace, for that we repent vs. And certainely, I belieue they pronoun∣ced the best for me, but my default afterward, made me vnmeete to enioy the benefit of their sentence, which they haue now raced out, and out quite in peeces, continuing still my misfortune against me. But I commit all vnto their graue and secret prouidence. Meane space, heare I pray you the first borne song of my wailing Muse, since my first arriuall into this darkesome tabernacle. And thus it begins. Since, from my sad life, taken is my cleere light, What should I liue now, longer in this bad world? Faint hearts, their deaths waile, where the brauer courage Glad to their endes, runnes. What serues this light me, if what most mine eies pleased, Flies like a shadow, when I seeke the substance? LOVE, not the day, but that rare beautie seeketh Which makes him more shine. Starres, by their Insluence, ioy and griefe doe bring vs, Whereas that beautie which our soules doth worship Is our sweet Mistris neuer working vs ill, But pleasure euer.
Ah how I feele this paine for to torment me, Being depriu'd of this so worthy beautie, When that I found my libertie so deere, lost, And from me taken. Kept from thy faire sight, which my soule did nourish, Thinkst thou (sweet Ladie) that I longer can liue? Being but a picture, where thy beautie's painted For to please LOVES eye. Like to a pale coarse doe I seeme, in shape, now, Laid all along right, in a Tombe or Graue lowe, Whilst to my losse, I stray like him that wanders Darke in a Desart. Not any pleasure in the hugie Heauens, Can my misfortune, (nere so little) sweeten, Lost haue I her that was mine onely solace. Woe to me therefore. I without life doe liue, for that I want her, All that I haue, she seazeth on, as her owne. Now my Phisition I doe want, I needes must Be very sickly. In the respect of this so liuely hot flame, Which heretofore, hath burnt mine inward intrailes, Darke seemes the Sunne, so gloomie are my sad thoughts, Fit for dispairing. But if I long must liue, without her presence, Sweet death dspatch me, let me no more linger, For, far more blessed is the dead, then he that Wants his faire Mistris. See, here my first Notes, in which I haue imployed my voice, since my first comming into this wildernes. But if my verse, runne not smoothly, excuse I beseech you mine in∣uention, from whence, the discontinuance, for want of exercise, hath reft (what was best before) from her. I commend thee Sonne (replied the old man) the matter whereof, not being (in my minde) altogether vnsauorie. But to what purpose doth the Louer sing, being disioynd, far off from his Mistris? Songs & Dances, were appointed (long agone) to be vsed, in certaine solemne publike Feastes, onely to breed contentment and plea∣sure, and not to increase sorrow,A Compari∣son. as are these of Louers. For I account that sicke man but a sot, who through bad medicines, nourisheth his disease the more; and for that he will not loose the remembrance thereof, taketh a toy to continue the same still in his body. And so I esteeme that Louer but foolish, that encreaseth his cōsuming cares, by his pas∣sionate complaints and sighing Sonnets: For such kind of fuell, doth but encrease the fire: The onely forgetting of griefe, being that, which deliuereth vs from the same; Inas∣much, as those, that neuer thinke of their hurt, are soonest freed from the apprehension and feeling of the harme it selfe. (Father) answered the Shepheard) can it be, that the fettered prisoner, (bound and laden with chaines, and cast into a deepe dungeon) should
exempt himselfe, from thinking of his hellish seruitude? Or can the eyes, see any thing that is supernaturall, and yet neuer loue it, nor once as much as thinke of it? This is for bruite beastes to doe, and not for man, who being beautified with the knowledge of all things, cannot escape without the apprehēsion of such, as are most like to him, & touch him nighest. Either he must bring himself vnto this point, in despite of his wil, or else he must needes fall out of his right witts. But we will not now dispute, whether fooles, free from apprehensions, humane, and void of sence of any euill, are to be thought more happie, then laudable, or allowable. But we will come vnto the Songs of Louers, which are two waies profitable vnto them. The one, because of the comfort which they bring vnto their mindes; the other, by reason of the pleasure, which their Ladies take in hea∣ring the same, who by nature are giuen to be greedie of honourable praise. For although these kind of Sonnets yeeld forth, a heauie, and not a ioyfull sound, yet in some sort, doe they seeme to accord, and to haue a kind of affinitie, and agreement with those that sing them; as well, in respect that they be sad and mournfull, as their Maisters themselues are; As also, because they renew afresh, the memorie of their sweete Mistresses. We must then (quoth the old man) change this name of Sonet, into wofull sorrowing, although in this wise to lament for the griefes of Louers, doth lessen the same no more, then the pittious cries of the poore Bond-slaue doth helpe him, in importuning the aire with his continuall howlings. This Rocke, which thou seest without ceasing, to weepe vpon the Mountaine Cyrillus, doth teach vs, that teares are vnnecessarie, and weeping without profit; for his continuall teares doe no good vnto him, nor his vsuall weeping auaile him ought, which distilleth, without any profit at all. The ancient Sages, iested at those faint-hearted & white-liuered men, that vsed to be∣waile their disasters, because a right couragious minde indeede, will rather die, then be forced to weepe one drop, it being in the libertie of man, to shorten and to out off either his griefes, or his life, as best him liketh. And I againe (replied the Shepheard) imagine quite contrarie, esteeming it not to be any exployt, either of honour or vertue, of cou∣rage, or Magnanimitie, for a man in miserie to kill himselfe. For if vertue, proceedeth from patience, (as it doth indeede) and that one be borne, to endure the crosses and troubles of this world, why then will you repute him to be valorous, who for want of constancie to endure these bitter brunts, goeth about to massacre himselfe. The least anguish of the heart which men feele, seemes as forcible in the tempest thereof, as the panges of death, & he that with a Magnanimious, and couragious spirit, and by the forti∣tude of his actiōs, resisteth not the violent assaults, of his inward & outward passiōs, can be reputed no other but a coward, and not seemely to be registred in the Chronicles of honour. All the actions of our mind, if not tempered and husbanded by reason, doe presently mutinie, against the faculties and noble empire of the body, forsaking their obedience, making miserie of that, was instituted for mankind: and so bearing vp their violence, against the supreme power of the soule, they combat against vertue, vnder the ensigne of vice, & neuer see the deformitie of her colours, vnder whō they serue. If Cato had suruiued, valiantly encountring with his hard fortune, opposing himselfe, withall the vtmost of his power, against the dammage of the Romane common-wealth; Had he not bin far more commended, then for want of courage to haue slaine himselfe so time∣rously as he did. Indeed, he wrought his own happines, as he thought, but this his happines, because it was hatefull vnto his owne natiue countrie, ought rather to haue bin counted vnhappi∣nes, then any felicitie at all: for where the publique good is extended, not any man there should seeke his owne particular quiet, but rather most cheerfully endure the selfesame torment, with which his countrie is afflicted. But, O how worthy of all praise are such, who as resolute Saylors, shew like courage and cheere, as well in aduersitie as in prospe∣ritie, being euery way throughly armed, and resolued to abide the very shocke & push of fortune, not loosing their spirits or stomacks any thing at all, at the first arriuall of the same, but rather are the more strengthened and animated thereby, yeelding through their inuincible patience, infinit rich testimonies of a most perfect and obsolute ver∣tue indeed? Amongst which number, wel may Louers be admitted, who being at libertie to kill themselues (as infamous, and degenerate mindes doe) and hauing the selfe same
meanes and excuses that they haue;) yet will not perpetrate nor put in practise, so vile and horrible a fact; to the ende, they may the better shew the fruites of their constancie, and perptuall vertue, in all places wheresoeuer they shall chaunce to come. For as he is not excuseable from blame, who because he cannot be good, therefore giueth himselfe to what is bad, inasmuch, as (herein) it is our parts, to force our nature it selfe. No more is he to be commended, who, for that he can no longer bandie with his afflictions, and with the painefull labours of this world, maketh away his owne selfe; because we being the creatures of God, are bound to take part of all such sinister accidents, as it shall please him to send vpon vs, without shaking off the same from vs, by destroying our selues; which the diuine lawe forbiddeth vs to doe: As that of the ciuill, prohibiteth Bond∣slaues to flie from the hands of their Lords and Maisters.A Sentence. They therefore, are more to be commended, who suffer and sigh forth their griefes, then those, who because they want force to resist the violence therof, slay themselues; For vertue shineth most, amidst hard and difficult matters, no glory at all harbouring amongst base and abiect spirits. Whats that you say (answered the old man?) Tell me I pray you, is there any thing more sweet, or deerer vnto man then life? What can make him more renowmed, thē to loose that, which he holdeth most dearest, to follow vertue, and to doe nothing vnwor∣thy of his owne honour? And if your speech were true, then, O yee braue martiall spi∣rits, and Captaines of warre, most miserable, and far from glory are you, who for the publique benefit and good, amongst thousand battailes, haue yeelded forth your blood and soules together. What worthy exploytes had men shewed abroad? what generous acts? what valiant deeds, and what workes of Eternitie? If they had bin such diligent pre∣seruers of their liues, when for feare of loosing the same, they should haue left behind them, millions of vertuous stratagems, being the children of praise, & Fathers of com∣mon-wealths; in the enterprising of which, they stand in perill of their most pretious liues. A great credit is it for a man to giue ouer all desire of riches, of greatnesse, of all pompe and estate, and to depriue himselfe, of all delicate and delitious kind of liuing; but far greater commendation is it vnto him, to abandon all these foresaid pleasures, to follow vertue in quest, and to giue ouer that, which is more neare vnto vs, then all these worldly felicities, I meane, our sweet life; for not to be borne at all, is the greatest ill for∣tune, that can commonly happen vnto men: as to haue life, is the sweetest and most comfortablest thing,A Sentence. that can be imagined. That it is happines to be borne, and to liue in this world, I denie (said the Shepheard) for how blessed had it bin, and far better for many a one, neuer to haue tasted of this life at all, as by their lucklesse endes hath well appeared? Life is good, and pleasant, to such as know how to vse it well, but most misera∣ble vnto others; for the ende of euery action, doth crowne and make perfect the same: and no man is said rightly to be fortunate, vntill his death be come. What happie, good, or vertuous ende, can such make, who haue alwaies liued most vngodly, when by being so borne, they become most wicked sinners, being continually troubled in their con∣science, which like a worme, still gnaweth their soules? whereas those that liue well and iustly, and whose behauiour is holy and vnspotted, make most happie endes. I say therefore, euery mans birth is not happie, but rather that it is oft times more miserable vnto some men, then pleasant or fortunate: for better were it for such a one neuer to be at all, then to be borne, and so to loose his soule and glory, his name and memorie, through his leaude and wretched misdemenor.An example. The Spartans (far wiser then we) were of mine aduise, who made so light account of life, as the least naturall imperfection that their children brought with them into this world, was the cause they threw them into their common shore, or priuies, thereby taking from them their humane essence, and their liues. How many miserable wretches shall a man find in this world, to liue in such extremitie and want, as they wish they neuer had bin borne, desiring nothing so much as to haue their daies abridged and out off, and to lie full low in their quiet graues? Therefore to be borne, and to liue in this world, are not such pretious things as you ac∣count them, but rather most grieuous and troublesome: so as a man, comming to loose the same, looseth no great matter; Vertue being his pledge for so small a losse. Neither will I denie the worthy deedes which the vertuous bring to passe, they not standing any thing at all in feare to loose their liues: and yet the very selfe-same consideration, which
maketh them esteme so little of their health, witnesse sufficiently enough, that it is not prized by them at any high rate, seeing they are content to exchange it for death. If the good Iob, (before he had suffered what he did) had ended his life, he then had bene de∣priued of that prayse, which his rare patience, purchased vnto him,An Example. as we finde in the sacred Scriptures. And yet (quoth the old man) what good did all these complaints vn∣to Iob, which he so often repeated in his miseries, they not being any thing lessened or asswaged by the same? And so, to begin where we first left: What auaileth the miserable to lament? For more is he to be commended, that with discretion concealeth his greife, and with milde constancie, beareth out the same, then he that maketh proclamation of it by wailing, bewraieth it by sighing, and by his condoling, maketh it more apparant euery way. Not so neither (replied the Shepheard) but rather it is quite contrarie:A Sentence. For is not that sick patient to be noted for vnwise, who will not disclose vnto his Phisition the cause of his disease, but persisting most obstinately, rather to feele the pangs of death, then to declare where his griefe is? And so hee, that manifesteth his sorrowes by la∣menting, receiueth some kinde of consolation, if not present remedie. For as the small droppes of water, falling by little and little vpon the harde Rocke, in time, doe make it hollow; So likewise the hearts of women, be they neuer so stronglie ar∣med with the splints of Steele, and Adamant: yet in the ende they will waxe tender and soft, as the harde Iron is made to bowe, by the stroke of the hammer. Besides, oftentimes the peruerse Iudge doth Iustice rightlie, through verie importunitie, which by no other meanes, he could euer haue bene brought to haue done. It is a thing that I haue seene Louers ordinarily put in practise; of whom the passions are so violent, as they haue not bene able, nether to conceale nor to restraine them within them∣selues, when they haue most coueted to doe the same? I my selfe haue made tryall of this remedie, haue passed this straight, ventured this hazard, and in conclusion, haue found to haue done good of it. In witnesse whereof, I beseech you, once more to giue me the hearing of another of my passionate Sonnets. With right good will (answered the old man) vpon condition, that thou wilt promise me afterward, to vnwinde the Bothome of thy Loues threed. Wherevppon the Shepheard began to sing in this sort. Before my selfe I doe disliue, heare these my plaints O FAIRE, which rauisht hast my sweetest libertie, If thou before, hast dainde of my religious Loue; My loyaltie (after my death then honor thou. Nor feare that Heauens, shall by my death be proud, Because (ending my dayes) extinguisht is my Fire, Death onely can cashere mee from this wretched life, Where, in the sacred Throne of Loue, seates my pure Soule, Whilst I doe breath, whilst hart, through 1000. sorrowes sobs, It shall be seruile vassaile to thy Deitie. And, mongst the Ghosts (being dead) thou shalt my Lady be, For in my soule, thy Beautie is caractered; There do I see thee still, and as mine Idol chiefe Ile sacrifice to thee, great store of cries, and teares: Ah, then plight me thy faith, for to accept my vowes As late thou seemdst to rewe, at my sad heauie griefs, Leaue him to dye, to dye, who liues withouten life Being far from thine Eyes, his chiefe diuinest light. For say, (alas) wherein can I stand thee in steed, When I am but a shadow in a withered Corse? Spent haue I all my teares, bewailing thy long absence, In loosing thee, the Heauens haue reft my vigor quite; I nothing am become; Most wretched he that thinks To liue, depriu'd of that chiefe good his heart doth nourish. Then whilst I looke my fatall day of death to see.
No voyce, sounds in mine eares, but of laments and cries, Mirth is for those are fortunate, rot for a soule That feeles more horrors strange then Limbos frightfull Ghosts, Then welcome pining Care, and sorrow sower to me, For with my thoughts, dispairing still, you best agree. Thus haue you heard another of my wofull ditties. O happie Arcas, if being depri∣ued of so sorrowfull a subiect of lamenting as this is, thou couldest enioy the sight of thy faire and deere Diana, as heretofore thou hast done. Alas, that the separation of the soule, from a faire body, should be far more pleasing, then that of two loyall harts, most stricklie chained, with the strong bond of faithfull loue; for with this first disso∣lution the remembrance of all greife and doller passeth away, like a flash of lighte∣ning that is sodenly come and gone. But alack, how long are the sorrowes, how weari∣some the troubles, & how vnsupportable the miseries that the separation of his Mistris, bringeth vnto the wretched Louers? Poore Oenone, too well knowest thou this to be true, who diddest die for verie heauines, because thou wert disioyned and withheld from thy deere Paris. Death it selfe is more welcome vnto Louers, then the long absence of their Ladies, and yet dare they not die, because they feare their displeasures: which (when they goe about to free themselues from this bondage) snatcheth the weapon out of their hands, whilest the hope which they conceiued once to behold them, delayeth from day to day the execution of this cruell arrest of death,A Similie. being so profitable vnto all Louers. That traueller findeth himselfe in great perplexitie, and is not a little pensiue and angrie, who after he hath iournied all the day long, by the comfortable light of the Sunne, is constrained to wander in the darke all the night after. For as the com∣ming forth out of bad into good, is luckie, sweete, and fortunate; so harde and trou∣blesome is the losse of ioy, to enter from thence into miserie, and as it were into the verie gates of destruction. And as mortall mē desist not from offering sacrifice vnto the Gods, although they be far off from their sacred presence; So my deere and diuine Diana, though my fortune hath remoued me far from thy beautious sight, yet will I not leaue to dedicate all my writings vnto thee, to present my sighes vnto thee, and to render thousand pitti∣ous oblations of my teares, as vnto my chiefe Goddesse, whose I whollie am; my ver∣ses, my cries, and my complaints, shall all be addressed vnto thee. O faire Diana, in what place soeuer thou now displaiest forth thy radiant beames, doe not I besech thee, despise the slender vowes of the religious votary, who liuing only through thee, oweth vnto thee, both his labors and his life. How wiselie haue the learned set downe, that the onely presence of the Diuine Es∣sence, bringeth all contentment that may be, vnto those blessed spirits that continual∣ly behold the same, seeing the onely countenance of my Mistris, brought my soule to be happie, and satisfied mine eyes at full, with perfect ioy? I now excuse you, O yee leane and yet rich couetous churles, who content your minds with often gazing vpon your rustie old gold; because there is nothing comparable vnto that pleasure, which the sight bringeth vnto the soule, in respect of that thing which so much delighteth him. And who then with reason may blame me to loue so faire a Iewell, seeing beautie, is found to be a gift come from God, made onely to render himselfe the more ad∣mirable in the eyes of the world? Who can iustlie finde fault with that man, that shall loue a thing rare, perfect, and surpassing in perfection, such as are ordinarie and common? So likewise, who can rightly condemne men for honoring such a one, as beautie her selfe, yeeldeth a most excellent perfection, amongst those that are most perfect of all? Then thee O Diana doe I honor: thee doe I loue: thee do I respect: sorrowing alway for the want of thee: and whilst my vital blood shall boyle within my veines, will I wor∣ship thee: as long as my bones shall be ioyned vnto this flesh, will I reuerence thee:
as long as my soule shall be martyred within this bodie, will I dutiously regard thee, bewailing thy losse, whilst I shall haue libertie to breath, and to be able to make sensible things gentle, giue eare vnto my complaints. But I see (reuerend Sire) that I doe but wearie thee, and trouble thine eares ouermuch, to importune them with these pittious discourses of my hard fortune; now therefore will I change my note, resoluing to doe, what it shall please thee to command me. Yet before we proceede any further, spare me I pray thee, so much leisure, as to heare a Sonet of mine, which (I, being depriued of my Ladie, cast off, and quite left of mortall men, & cleane for gotten of such as haue bin be∣holding vnto me) my sad or rather colericke Muse endited for me, whilst I wandered vp and downe this darkesome Forrest. Reade it quoth the old man, for both thy prose, and verse, are pleasing vnto me: seruing me, in steed of sweet Roses, to reuiue and re∣fresh mine ancient heate: And thinke not, but that thy speeches, are worthy to be hark∣ned vnto. Whereupon the Shepheard red this Sonet following. Beyond the Stigian Stix, hath Caron reft Thee, O diuine Faith, and for company, Friendship with thee, who must not here be left, For faith is nothing without amitie. Alas, why let'st thy Muse liue in disdaine, To thee and her (a fortune vsuall seene,) Thou men beleeu'st, tis they that thee haue slaine, Abusing her through othes, as thou hast bin. Thy comforts this, thou diest at this hower, Her ende was languishing, long ere she dide, A speedie death is sweete, a lingring, sower, She starued died, by flowing plenties side. You Mortals then, let in one Tombe remaine, Faith, Loue, and Muses, since they were of prise: For, fond is he that calls them backe againe, And you not Loyall are, friendly, nor wise. This Dittie of thine (said the old man) is pithie, and graue, but yet the Subiect thereof is somewhat displeasing vnto me. For I cannot doe men that iniurie, as to thinke or imagine, that they should become enemies vnto the Muses, considering, but for them, their memories and names, should rest and lie buried with their bodies in the selfesame graue. And although age hath cooled, and frozen in me my first Tragick furie, (Mother of all good verses); yet will I answere thee as well as I may. Heare me then awhile. Whereupon he began thus. If in one coffin, FAITH, LOVE, and the MVSES graue, By earthly creatures hand, enformed close doe lie: And thinke their deedes and name, immortall so to haue, They doe abuse themselues, with ore much Surquedrie. If FAITH no more liues, and if (hence we banish LOVE, If MVSES, haue on earth, no sacred Altars here; Heauens then must (perish;) And the supreme Gods aboue With essence their's (diuine) confused must appeare: But heauens (as yet) stand firmely, Gods doe raigne, And mortall men, by liuing on the earth belowe, So, FAITH, LOVE, and the MVSES, still aliue remaine, The sinnes of men cannot exile them vnto woe. Astormie Tempest, may the Sunne, sometimes obscure, Yet afterward, his Beames shew forth more bright and graue.
See (Shepheard) quoth the old man) if this Sonnet hath as yet any smacke of this gallant heate, which en flameth youthfull spirits with the hot cinders of glory. And if my Muse, shall so much vouchsafe, as to fauour me, with some small conceit to ac∣companie my trembling old age, which although she doe not, and that my verses be rude and ill shapen: yet of this, I am well assured, that the Subiect is both good and true. For how (O Shepheard,) can heauens and earth continue without Loue? If the Gods should fall at variance, and Loue should be driuen away from them, who then, during this confused dissension, and tempestuous hurly-burly, should guide the course of the heauens, and giue order about the gouernment of terrestiall matters? What good rule and order, and what vpright Iustice or policie, is there found in that cittie,An example. wherein the Magistrates are at variance, diuided into factions, and quite discrepant in opinions? No no, Loue of necessitie must liue amongst the Gods, to the ende he may maintaine vnion, amitie and friendship one with the other; he giuing directions as well for diuine, as earthly businesses. Father (answered the Shepheard,) this question of thine is verie easilie resolued, and thou as quickly to be contented, and satsfied in this poynt: There is no neede at all, to haue the companie of Loue, in the heauens, to be as an assistance or helper, in the maintaining and gouerning of celestiall causes: seeing amongst vs, there is but one God, whose onely diuine prouidence alone, ruleth both heauen and earth, he being not disvnited at all; for it is a Substance simple, not subiect vnto diuision, and there∣fore hath nothing to doe with Loue, to bring him to agreement, seeing he can neuer be diuided. And this is for the auncient Paynims to discourse vpon these naturall reasons. God then,A similie. doth not meddle, nor hath not to deale with this Loue (I meane such as is wanton) but dearely doth he affect perfect amitie, inasmuch as he loueth man∣kinde, which are his children, he demaunding the selfe-same loue of them a∣gaine. The Soueraigne Magistrate, vpon whose commaundements, the gouernment of the whole cittie dependeth, cannot be at controuersie with his Subiects about the ordering thereof, (because they doe not participate with his power) he himselfe com∣manding alone, by his absolute will and authoritie. So God, being without equall, and onely perfectly puissaunt, and mightie, can∣not fall at square with any of his seruants; which thing if it be so, he then hath no neede of Loue to make them agree together againe. Thy reason is (good replied the old man) in respect of that which belongeth vn∣to God, but as concerning men how can they liue without Loue? For if a building cannot remaine firme and sure without a strong foundation, how then may men continue without Loue? which serueth as a fortresse, vnto their rest and pleasure, and as a chiefe nourishment vnto their liues. For can men liue quietly, who are alwaies quarrelling, and as it were at daggers-drawing, and who for want of Loue, are still rea∣die to stabbe one another? What assurance of life can that souldier promise vnto himselfe, who most couragiously goeth to the field to combat with his enemie, man to man,An example. alone? Euen so, what kind of life should men leade, one with an other, if their quarrells should cause them trie their valours with their swords, staining the ground with the losse of their dearest blood? For into what bottomlesse gulfes of misfortune and ouerthrow, did ciuill dissension for want of Loue and friendship, bring the Ro∣manes, who with their owne proper weapons, reuenged the iniuries and wrongs, they had done vnto forraigne Nations, vpon their owne selues, which those barborous strangers, with all their force could neuer haue bin able to haue done? Into what great losses and dammages, did the quarrells of the Spartaines and the Atheniaus plunge all Greece? And what monstrous crueltie (for default of Loue) did those two Theban bre∣thren, exercise one against the other, who with one stroke, stabbing one another, and cast into one, and the selfe-same fire (so mortall was their hatred) as the verie flame thereof diuided it selfe, till it consumed those bodies (which whilst they liued were diuided) and sundred in disagreement alwaies? I say therefore, that men can∣not liue without amitie, and that the Sonet is false in that point: for either Loue must
yet be liuing, or else the world must perish: mortall men must be swallowed vp, and the earth be left fruitlesse and barraine. Reuerend Father (answered the Shepheard) I will make thee a short answere, which is, that Friendship as thou affirmest, is most necessarie, for man who cannot liue with∣out it; no more then the fish can be without the water: which was the reason induced me to say, that Loue was dead amongst them. For what doe wee see nowe a dayes, but murders, troubles, controuersies, debates, quarrels, and peruerse opinions, which after the chasing away of Amitie, with the same whip, haue also driuen away men out of the worlde, being rooted out, with continuall brawling and fighting, whilst they wanted the comfortable support of Frienship to as∣sist them. The golden world of our Forefathers is gone and past, and that of Iron is come in his place: so that we may truely say; All Curtesie, all kindnesse, all Iustice, and all Pietie, are dead and extinct, and so by the same meanes, the Essence of all mortall men must needes decay and die. The chiefe Gouernour of an Armie Royall, minding to chaunge his place, and to remoue all his Camp, sendeth his Marshall of the fielde before,A Simily. to prouide conuenient lodgings for him. So earthly men, entending to change this field of the world, haue sent before them (as their Harbinger) milde Amitie, to prouide better dwellings for them in another Climat. And surely, surely, most happie art thou, that thine eyes haue bene kept from the viewe of so manie miseries, that thy toung is seene to be exempt and free from recoun∣ting so many mischiefs, vsually lighting vpon men, and that thine eares are found to be shut close from the cryes and complaintes of afflicted persons, in this most wret∣ched Age. For amongst worldlings, fortunate now are Fooles, blessed are the blinde, and rightly contented are onely such as be deafe. I speake by experience, who most miserably euerie way, haue found so little com∣miseration and comfort, in these my calamities amongst men, as I perswade my selfe verily, that Friendship liueth no more amongst them. Although thy speech (sayd the olde man) as touching the first be found to be true, yet cannot I beleeue, that the like may be prooued in Faith: For I confesse, it may be that Amitie peraduenture, is wanting amongst men, which is the occasion of so manie dissentions, quarrells, and debates. But I thinke not so of Faith, which findeth roome, euen in the selfe-same place, from whence friendship hath bene driuen. As amongst Warres, Battailes, Combats, and contentions. For those that Discord and want of Loue force to arme themselues, one against another, ought not for all that, to faile of their faith: inasmuch as Faith it selfe is requisite, and required in an Enemie, and because without the same, not any iust Warre can be waged. For it is lawfull for vs to hate our foe, and to persecute him with anie naked sword in our hands, but not to deceiue him, with our Faith giuen vnto him: seeing nothing should make one to goe from his solemne promise, except the badde dealings of other men, and the treacherous wrongs, wrought against him, by his enemies: which is of force, to make him detest and loath. With such a Faith the ancient Romans waged battaile against Phineus, whome they aduertised of the poyson, which his Phisition would haue ministred vnto him in a Potion. How true of his word, was Marcus Regulus, who with the price of his blood, pre∣serued his Faith, whole, entire, and vnblemisht? I holde then for a truth, that friend∣ship liueth no more now adayes amongst men, but that in his place, warre and discen∣tion gouerne and raigne: and yet for all this, I will not graunt that Faith is also fled from hence, as the other is, seeing she is not onely necessarie in time of quietnes, but also profitable, during the stormes of brawling discord. But should this mischiefe happen, that Faith were quite banished away by men, yet cannot I thinke that God would suffer such as are the cause thereof, to liue one houre, in as much as hee reserueth the punishment of Periurie, to himselfe alone, and that hee being the Father of Truth, the enemies thereof are as much odious vnto
him, as the pride of those Giants was, which would haue scaled Heauen. Indeed (quoth the Shepheard) I confesse, that heeretofore verie Faith liued amongst Warres, and warriours, and that shee was heartily welcome vnto those pla∣ces, from whence amitie was quite exiled: but the times wax euery day worse and worse, men growing more and more in badnes, that first sacred and iust Nature of man, being daily ccorrupted, by reason of the sharpnes of vice, as wine becommeth tart and sower, with ouer-much heat of Sommer. Lysimachus,An Example. being prisoner vnto a certaine barbarous King, gaue good triall of his Faith, being sent home vnto his Countrey without ransome. Loyall and faithfull was Camillus, in his warres, who sent that traiterous Schoole maister home, well whipt vnto his foes, whom he had besieged, whose Citie he offered to betray vnto him. But the world is now changed: In steed of the Lyon, the Fox wageth battell: whilst men (as the followers of Lysander) make vse of their Faith, studying to cozen and deceiue one ano∣ther. Vice (in this age) borroweth the place of Vertue,A Sentence. receiuing the selfe-same vowes, and Sacrifices, which before times were offered vnto that sacred Goddesse, they being (by antiquitie) onely ordained for her. In steede of Faith, false disloyaltie maketh her selfe to be adored: and he is most commended, feared, and respected, that knoweth best, how with subtiltie to ouercom others, and hath put in practise no small number of base and trecherous effects. In times past, prisoners taken in Battaile, might (vpon their promise giuen) retire,A discourse against vnho∣notable Soldi∣ers. whether they best pleased, and such great curtesie receiued (by their aduersaries) they recompenced againe, with a firme and faithfull assurance of their word, neuer failing to performe, as much as they had before protested. But now vp∣on the warrant of their Faith, they will out the throtes (if they can) of such as haue ta∣ken them: and if the same Faith hath giuen them such free passage, as they may haue leaue to retire themselues for a certaine time, yet will they neuer returne backe againe, but had rather, that their promise so pawned, should remaine as prisoner, then their mi∣serable Carkasses should come to be in durance, neuer to be redeemed. Besides, men haue found now adayes many kindes of shiftes, to violate and breake their Faiths, as some,Note. by betraying of their maisters: others, by selling such places of importance, as are committed vnto them in trust: others, by being (neuer) maisters of their owne word: and others, faining themselues, of deadly enemies, to become sound and deare friends; to the ende, that vnder the colour of this faith, they may the sooner beguile such as re∣pute most confidence in them. We must therefore talke no more of Faith. But God who is the reuenger of all out∣rages, and enormities committed against him, punisheth those persons with such ex∣treame rigor, that there is not so much as one of them exempted from publike mis∣fortunes, whereas peace-full quietnes, being the companions of Loue and of Faith, hath followed after them, leauing men in a most miserable plight, and wretched ta∣king: For this is most certaine,A Sentence. that the wicked languish alwayes in miserie, being al∣wayes in continuall feare, horror and frighting, although they be followed by none o∣ther, then their owne faults alone. And thus you see, how Loue and Faith, are quite expulsed from out the world. Al∣though (quoth the olde man) these two goodly vertues be driuen from hence, yet see I (as yet) no sufficient subiect, by reason of which the Muses should be exiled, as thou hast set downe the other be: and therefore in this point thy speech is false. For glo∣rious renowme, is a passion so sweete, and of so pleasing a taste, that it maketh herselfe to be wisht for, not of the good and vertuous onely, but also of such as are Infidels and vn∣godly: For doe the leaude man neuer so badly,A Sentence. yet would he willingly be commended for the same: Praise is a certaine odoriferous sent in the noses of men, and an amo∣rous kinde of thundring in their tickling eares. Haue you euer seene creature, were he neuer so much corrupted with vice, that would refuse such glorie as you seemed willing to attribute vnto him?A right Simily. For as euery parent thinketh his owne childe fairest, and eue∣ry workman, his owne worke finest, euen so euery man, be he neuer so wicked, estee∣meth his deedes most iust, and his actions worthy of most praise. If therefore, both the good and the bad, hunt thus after this glorie, and striue so
much for praise (although the world) at this time be inhabited only with the wicked. And if the sacred Muses be of so great perfection of themselues, as they giue sufficient testimony euerie where of the same, who then can be able to chase them away from men? For much good, can they doe, for the good, in commending their proceedings,Prayse of Learning and in animating their courages to follow the same still: And much hurt can they doe to the bad, in dispraising their actions, and in disswading others to leaue and giue ouer such vndecent, and most vnseemlie fashions. In good therefore, and in bad, the Muses ought and may alwaies haue an interest, and a perfect continuance, as best them plea∣seth. Denis the Tyrant, loued Plato, & diuers learned men, haue tendered, succoured, che∣rished and fauored the Muses and Learning, and therefore doe they still liue amongst them. And I am flat of another minde (replied the Shepheard) being of opinion that the Muses haue neuer had to doe with the wicked, that their fortunes haue not bene like the others, neither their cariage at any time alike. Therefore the Muses (as things contrarie vnto them) hate them, finging of none, but of the vertuous: whereas the o∣thers shunne and detest the Muses, doubting least they should reueale their vices, and reprehend their faults ouermuch. The vpright Iudge hateth the high-way Robber, because he troubleth the quietnes of the Countrie, of which his charge maketh him the preseruer: and the fellon, hateth the good Iudge, because he both knoweth he can and ought to punish him for his demir∣rits. And so is it, betweene the Muses, and such as are wicked. Neuer hath it bene knowne, that betweene them, there hath bene found any perfect frendship (of force sufficient to haue tyed their hearts stronglie together: for if the bad haue at any time made any show of Loue vnto the Muses, yet no sooner came they to haue knowledge of their true & iust, and of their pure and liberall nature, but that sodenly, they conceiued against them a greater hatred, then if they had neuer bene acquainted with thē. For as two agreeable natures hapning to encounter and vnite themselues so strictlie together, as it is not possible for death it selfe to separate them asunder; So likewise two contrarie hu∣mors, cōfronting one against another, after they perceiue now much they disagree, de∣test and loathe one another more, then if there had not bene any habit of acquaintance betweene them before. For although Denis loued Plato, yet when he vnderstood of his plainnes, and bold franknes in his speech, and how he abhorred all flattery, he then pur∣sued him vnto death, sending him home againe most shamefullie into Greece. So was that worthie Philosopher Anaxagoras, hated so much of that Tyrant, as nothing could appease and expat his cankred rage and furie, but only the hart blood of this graue and prudent wise man. It is now an ordinarie custome amongst men, who because they are vicious, therefore they become aduersaries vnto the Muses, whose diuine and immortall pen they greatly feare. So as I may well say, that neither Faith, neither Amitie, nor the Muses, are now liuing amongst men. To this, the olde man began to replie (when on the sodaine they might heare a voice, which sweetly sighed forth these words following. O Loue, and the Sea, alike, and agreeable in power, which force men against their wills to take what course they best please! Loue compelleth to like in despight of our owne hart, and the Sea, driueth mise∣rable wretches out of their way, halfe dead, and halfe aliue, which flote on her waues. Twise hath Loue made me loue, contrarie vnto my minde, and twise hath the sea, driuen me far frō my iourny against my desire. But alas, which of these twaine, can any mortall creature resist? of both, I gesse the sea is best able to be encountred withal. For if the Gods tremble at the commandements of Loue, who then, can set men free & at libertie from his yoke? whereas the labor and industrie of the Marriners, the Mast, the Rudder, the Cable, and the Ancor, may sometimes bridle the boldnes of the sea, and withstand his raging violence. The first place into which the sea maugre my will, threw me, was, whē I arriued (being driuen by the swelling surges) vpō the bankes of the desarts of Arabia, where I sawe that thrise renoumed Iulietta, of whom, Loue on the soden, forced me to become exceeding amorous: since which time, long haue bene my paines, cruell my trauels, & scalding hote
my cares in this my liking, these being the goodliest Weapons that Loue hath, & with∣out which, he is neuer rightly found. All these sorrowes as yet remaine in me, I bring∣ing them with me into my Ship, insteed of such pretious Marchandise, as the Marchant ladeth his vessel withall, in a far and forrein Countrie. But, O how sweete vnto Illustrious spirits, are such trauels as they endure, to purchase glorie? For that labor, doe we not call any toyling at all, which we suffer for a most beau∣tious thing, when with the same, we may recompence our selues for the paines which we haue taken. Sweet and kinde, haue I found the sorrowes, which the loue I bare re∣nowmed Iulietta, hath made me feele? Inasmuch as the remembrance of her rare per∣fections, shadowed the thought of my griefs, as a bright burning torch, doth a little small candle.A Sentence. For how many are there, that iudge the paine more sweete and pleasing which they endure, for the respect of some worthy subiect, then the quiet repose, and gentle rest of their owne soules? How many are there to be founde, which giue them∣selues vnto great paines taking, of which (if they pleased) they might be soone rid, by louing better that kinde of life,A Similie. then any rest at all? The Husbandman calleth not that trauell any labour, which he taketh to sowe his grounde, because he hopeth there∣by to reape a good Haruest. So likewise, cannot any one that loueth, terme his traucls any troubles at all, if he endure the same for a worthie respect, especially hoping to finde some grace or fauour in the ende. The Fruites of Loue are so delightfull, as the onlie sent of them alone,A Sentence. without any further taste, extinguisheth, and cureth the toylings, & turmoyles of Louers. That labor being most blessed, whereof the recompence is ready and at hād, and not long, neither slow in cōming. With Loue may the Louer be requi∣ted of his kinde Lady & mistris, if she so pleaseth, and therefore most happie the paines of Loue. But woe is me, I talke of fortunate Louers, and not of my selfe, for without any shewe or signe, that my loue is cured or healed, am I returned home againe, bring∣ing nothing with me, but the Image of my fair Saint imprinted in my soule, with thou∣sand sorrowes to accompany the same: yet, wheresoeuer the cunning Painter passeth, he leaueth some showe of his skill,A Similie. and euerie famous Poet some signe of his Muses ex∣cellencie. So I, before my departure, from forth this solitarie abode, whilst the angrie sea waxeth calme, and the blustring windes growe to be milde, wandring vp & downe and singing, we wil afterward engraue, in some Oke or other, some of my verses, as true Testimonies of my zealous labors. To the end, that my diuine Goddesse may florish, e∣uen in the most vncoth and vtmost partes of all the world. Wherevpon he sung these Verses following. Mongst the cries of the dead, amidst sighes heauily groning Of such Ghosts as are damn'd, frighted with Fiends and with hags, Long haue I forced forth, the accents of my too hoarse voice, Yet, nor the dead, nor the damn'd, answered haue any word, My cruell Mistris, nor the Heauens will vnderstand me, Ah solitarie wood, answere me then, I thee pray. Ah doe receiue, & marke the wofull tune of my sad Song, And make all for to know, my clamor ore pittious. Draw with at tractiue voyce the stony Rocks for to heare me, O grone, speake thou for me else, all, doe scorne at my cries; Thus for to sigh, and to complaine (alwaie') is a hard case: But worse it is for to see, who sighes, and cries, to be scorn'd. VVhat should I then, O yee woods, for Sacrifice to you offer, But my laments, to you, agreeable, and very fit? Since that you kindly daine, to answer vnto my waylings, Nought haue I now left else, only my sad toung I haue. But tis enough, too much, for such, as Cupid abuseth; For true Louers good hap, lies in the Tombes of the dead. Oh that (of woes wearie) some great God would but exchange me, Into some auncient Beech, or to some wilde sauadge Elme; Should not my linelesse Trunke, be welcome thē to your Forrests!
Teares should so fast from me fall, like to a crist all eye-spring, As they your faithfull plants still should make more abounding, And of power be to force, halfe dying trees to reuine; Ah most sacred Groues, (the time hath bin,) in your coole shade As one rauisht for ioy, I saw the heauenly face Of my cruell Faire; the deadliest foe to my good daies, Of which, since that the stars, as iealous haue me depriu'd, O giue me leaue (so much) as I may but write with my starpe knife Deepe all about your Rocks, the stories of my deare Loue. Then will I write, how heauens haue made daintily perfect, Mongst thousand beauties, Iuliet, more then the rest. I will write of her chast worth, more then rightly renowmed, What doe I say? Will I write? O, no, not I, as I should. Yet dare I write of my dire paines, the Destinie cruell, Write will I of my hopes, lookt for of me, but in vaine. I will tell how mine eyes are blind, with weeping I vse still And to death, will I leaue (deafe to my plaints, that hath bin A defying challenge, for to prooue that he could not Kill me, without that he kill my miseries therewithall. I will write, how my teares could moue no more with their weeping Those faire eies I adore, Eies, which I loue as my soule, Then the waues of sea doe moue the Rocks that doe scorne them: Rather, I write will, how into my teares there are falne Her leaden shafts, tipt hard with disdaine, for to coole them, And by the same, hath she power, me for to wound, when she please. Write will I, thi'll hap of my youth, the spring of my chiefe tide, Of such veniall faults, as by ill lucke we commit: Which when they seaze on vs, they ende our liues most intire: But more loud will I crie, that mine owne hurts and my harmes After so many crosses, nere could make me become wise, Curst is the wight that is plagu'd, yet by his plagues nothing wise. But yet (as, who power hath ore a power of the rest, He complaines without sense, that by a God's ore come. More for to striue, or doe then we can, the lawes doe forbid vs. LOVE ore Gods and Kings, Ile say I take but the vse, If the cause why I haue offended any doe aske me, Of great Gods and Kings, Ile say, I take but the vse. If to haue thus gron'd forth my painfull griefe I be blamed, If condemned I am, thus to bewray my true Loue; If I be taxt for my crying, for my plaints and my wailing, Then for my selfe, thus I say; Loue that doth wound euery man One himselfe being wounded, strait complains to his Mother, And Mars, oft did grieue, when that he first was in loue. Wretched (so that they iustly plaine) no man may for bid them Reason, t' haue to crie, till that each one doth them heare, Vnto the ende they may entreate all men for to helpe them; He that is sicke, yet scornes him that his paine can asswage, Nere can he cured be, lest that he seeke some meanes for his sicknes. Better tis to complaine, then like a foole for to die. Therefore my griefe, to you O Desarts haue I recounted, Which since you listned too, well will I wish vnto you. That gentle Zephirus, may calmely blow on your heads still, So will I pray for you, then for my sake doe the like. Pray that the cruell one, may take on me little pittie, So may you happie be: So may my Loue be as sweete.
As he that is confined within some fodorne Ile, quite out of hope, euer to returne vnto his sweete countrie againe, is not a little moued, seeing a ship to arriue at his shore, which by the language of the passengers, he perceiueth to be of his owne countrie. So was Arcas. much amazed, hearing one to speake of her, who gaue life vnto his infant writings, whom he honoured as a most excellent and exquisite creature, and who for her vertue, was renowmed throughout all the world. And as forsaken Ariadnes being left alone, vpon the durtie shore of the Sea, ran vp and downe, beholding a far off in the Ocean, any ship that seemed to bend his course towards her, to vnderstand some good newes from her disloyall husband: euen so did Arcas runne here and there to find out him, who so often pronounced the name of his deare Iulietta. Away went he then to seeke this straunger, whom ere long he found, and who, being tired with his ouermuch trauaile, and chillie colde, with lying so long vpon the waters, had betaken himselfe vnto his rest, being falne into a little slumber, loth was he, neither durst he to awake him, when marking of him better, he might perceiue two tables to lie by him, which straight he called to mind, remembring them to be the faire and true counterfaits of Phillis and Iulietta: whereupon he thus spake softly vnto himselfe. O happie Painter, that tookest in hand so laudable a peece of worke as this is. In former ages our prede∣cessors did consecrate Statues to such as were valiant, by reason their countries were beholding vnto them, but vnto none, more rare personages then these, could any man giue any, whom these pictures doe represent. For if vertue hath power to make the vertuous liue in the hearts of men, then with greater reason ought such as those, he drawne by the cunning Painter. Ah beautifull counterfaites, how much doe you delight me, and how much is the memorie of those which you present, sweet and pleasing vnto me? And now I approue and allow, that action of his, who made so great a iourney to trauaile to Rome, onely to see that famous Historiographer Liuie: For much pleasing vnto the minde is the sight of excellent creatures. Blessed and religious Ministers of Iehouah, who to refresh the memorie of man, (prone by nature to forget,) haue iudged that the pictures of Saints (after they had merited a crowne of eternall glorie, for their spotlesse liuing) were verie necessarie, and thought commodious vnto men, to the ende they might be, not worshipped, yet be admired of euery one: For if with our seeing ver∣tue corporally, we suffer our selues sweetly to be drawne away by her meanes, then how much more should we like of her, seeing the very faces, of such as lodge and dwell in her alwaies. O prudent Alexander, who didst take so great delight, to see the most famous Pain∣ters of thy time, to be busied about limming thee, with all the skill they had, and so, hap∣pie art thou whosoeuer thou wert, that hast set thy last draught of thy pensill, vnto so faire a piece of worke as this is. Ah, would to God, I saw as liuely shadowed, the faire face of my diuine Diana, for then, should I receiue some ease in these my griefes, hauing by me the likenesse of her, whose absence, absenteth and keepeth away the cleere light from my dim eies. But where froward destinie shooteth her arrowes; there neuer mingleth she so much as one sweete one, amongst so many sower & venomous shafts. Seldome or neuer amongst a∣ny ill fortune, doth there happen any good chance: for man being driuen away by the worst, and wholy possessed of the same, as then is wide and vncapable, of feeling or fin∣ding any pleasure at all, be it neuer so little. Needs then must all sorts of miseries abound in me, to the end I may haue the more praise by reason of enduring the same; or else, far more witnesses, of the anger of the heauens against me, for the more the trauaile is great, the fairer is the glorie, and he that doth participate with dangers, hath likewise a part and share in renowne. As he that without intermission feeleth himselfe to be struck with the piercing darts of heauen, beareth in this world, the punishment of his sinnes. But, O how perfectly doe I see painted forth the valour, the braue grace, and the sweet Maiestie of Phillis. That statue of Scanderbeg, placed vpon his Tombe, as yet is a terror vnto the Turks, whō he so often ouercame; And so goodly doth this portrature seeme vnto me, as me thinkes (yet) I see him aliue, whom it resemb leth: Being comely, wise, & valiant, as another Romane Caesar. In the other, so liuely shadowed, by those daintie flax∣en haires, by that beautious and large forhead, by those diamond eyes, resembling two
bright rolling spheres of heauen, by those roseall cheekes, and those lippes of Gilliflow∣ers, by that prettie dimpled chin, by that brest, a banke of whitest Lillies, by those small and long hands, with that daintie slender and cleane foote, with other parts matchlesse by Nature, and therefore not to be mended with Art, doe I behold the diuinitie of that admirable beautie of peerlesse Iulietta. And therefore must I needes say, the Painter hath shewed his skill to be excellent, in drawing these our bodies. But to set downe with life, the rare qualities of these two worthy personages, nor Painter, nor Poet, nor any in the world, is able to doe. Vnder these two faire counterfaites, were written two Quartraines, and that of Phillis was thus. Braue Phillis, tis not for to saue thy fame, About these woods thy portrature we cast: Who in the sisters of the woods liues, doth disdaine All pictures, for in them his name, shall last. Only the harmelesse good, most need and craue, The shadowes of the valiant sort to haue. Vnder that of Iulietta, was this written. Not for to shew thy beautie excellent, Thou art most (fairest Dame, drawne liuely here) But that all might behold thee still I ment, Since thou for rarest Thewes hast not thy peere. Glorie alone, must Iuliets rightest Painter bee, Honour her patterne, Vertue, her attire to see. These were the verses which were written vnder the two pictures, and he that was Maister of them, was the hard destined Philistel, the most affectionate seruant of the faire Iulietta, who being pressed vpon, to returne into his owne natiue soyle, was forced much against his will, to leaue her, bringing away with her license, these two Tables, to the ende he might still contemplate and behold her, as well with the eyes of his bodie, as those of his soule. And now I maruaile no more of that selfe-conceited Painter,A Historie. who fell in loue with his owne picture, or of fond Narcissus, who grew extreamely enamoured of his owne shadow, seeing the Shepheard Arcas, found the thoughts of his misfortunes to be sweetely asswaged, with the continuall regard of these counterfaites gazing vpon them, without mouing a long time: In the meane space, Philistel, awaked the other Swaine, not perceiuing it at all, hauing now called to mind poore Arcas, and how he had bin hereto∣fore corriuall in his Loue; and imagining that he was as yet touched with his first pas∣sion, by reason his senses were rauished, in staring so much vpon the picture of Iulietta; to awake him out of his dreame, he began thus to accost him. Arcas, the excellencie of beautie, consisteth chiefly in this one poynt, which is not to beare enuie vnto those that exercise the same, but rather to imitate them in what we may, for happie is that countrie which as a thicke and shadowing Forrest, is sowed, and filled, with a great number of worthie and vertuous men. Thy selfe, and I, strooken with one and the selfe-same dart, haue loued her, whose shadow thou here seest, and because this Loue of ours was laudable, yea and worthie of reward, therefore hath it neuer altered our mindes, nor separated our good liking, one from another. The Spartaines heretofore loued (but yet chastly) the faire and prettie children of their citie, this liking of theirs, neuer breeding any falling out, or iealous conceit,An example. one against another, although three or fower of them loued but one of these yongest boies alone: But contrariwise, they rather forced themselues, and striued one with another, who should best teach these youthes, some rare qualitie or perfection, whereby they might come to more estimation and credit. And such was our loue towards the diuine Iulietta, we both hauing loued her, and yet not hated one the other, forcing our selues to trie, who could doe best, in chaunting abroad her faire vertues, seeking still, to render
that worthie honour, vnto her perfections, as they of right deserued. And seeing this Loue, did part vs at that time (for a while) asunder, we ought as now of our owne ac∣cord, to reunite our selues againe together. For the Maister of a ship, who hath had but hard fortune, hauing made a bad voyage at sea, hath neede after his losses, to get to∣ther, the relicks, and remainders of his Shipwracke, and to make account of that which (before this mischaunce) he would haue disdained to haue done. And so we, if any small conceit ouerpartiall, hath passed twixt vs about our Loues, now, at this houre when all is lost, and that scarce we our selues, are escaped from the crueltie of the waters, let vs forget, and sorgiue what is past, and let the (ioy in that we haue once more met againe before we die) maister for a while, this our ouermuch sadnes. Friendship neuer bestow∣eth her diuine brightnes,A Sentence. where aboundance of pleasures flow; for they hinder vs fro dis∣cerning the same; being the occasions, that it is not adored according vnto her deserts. But when affliction and sorrow approacheth, then doth she best appeare, her wholsome effects, as then being most prised and commended. For at such a time, necessitie forceth men to haue more neede one of another, then when they are in prosperitie, it being the onely cause, that loue sheweth it selfe more liuely, hot, & comfortable. My minde prog∣nosticated vnto me, the comming into this place, whilst I not knowing the good and happie meeting, that I should haue here, did murmur against the Seas, for casting me vpon this shore: but now I haue found by triall, that humane matters being ordered by diuine prouidence, happen oftentimes contrarie vnto the opinion of men; to the ende, they may know, that in respect of God, they are but vessels of earth, by him ordained for shame, and that vnto him onely, appertaineth the disposing of all things. O Philistell (answered the Shepheard) of great follie should he be condemned, who finding himselfe all alone, would imagine to be able to carrie away some great victorie amongst the midst of a huge number of enemies: For it is not courage, but rather mad furie, for one to vndertake more then he is able to bring to passe, inasmuch, as it is no lesse vertue to know himselfe, then to vanquish and ouercome his aduersaries. These considerations, are sufficient to moue me, to extinquish all bad conceits, which I might haue conceiued against you, about the loue of sweete Iulietta: For could I hope, to haue any recompence of her, whome hard misfortune, wretched pouertie, the malice of na∣ture, and a thousand other hinderances, haue set me vp, as it were for a marke, to dis∣charge their deadly arrowes at me? Whereas you, (who to serue her, haue left your countrie, and your realme, and who carrie besides, the auncientnes of your birth, and the greatnes of your race, a braue and generous spirit endued with as vnseemely quali∣ties) may well hope for that, which I not so much as dare to name, or thinke of in my heart. Behold then the cause, why I cannot beare any malice vnto thee, as touching that thing, which I iudge my selfe vnworthie to possesse: & which for the same cause, I reue∣rence & adore. For my Loues haue bin but shrill Trompets, to sound the glory, of this faire & superexcellent virgin: my labours, but her Herrolds, to blazen forth in right co∣lours, her rich perfections: and mine amorous trauailes, but loud Chaunters of her rare and diuine vertues. But you my deare Philistell, easilie and sweetly may you obtaine her good will, by the sacred bond of Nuptiall hallowed right; Nature hauing made you her equall in blood,How men ought truely to loue. power, authoritie, credit & command. Diuers waies may a man loue, for in louing, are many effects. Some lay the foundation of their Loue, vpon the weake and feeble ground of pleasures: Others, vpon that of marriage; but the wisest, place it vpon the inexpugnable Rocke of vertue. Voluptuous loue, passeth slightly, and lightly away, with the pleasures themselues: for we loue no more, that thing, which we haue no more occasion to vse, by reason we haue drawne from thence all the contentment we desired. The affection which marriage engendreth, endureth longer, and yet is there oftentimes in the same, many contrarieties and disagreements, betweene the Husband and the Wife: but that liking which is setled vpon the firme Rocke of vertue, neuer dieth, be∣cause the cause thereof remaineth euerlasting: The foundation whereof, can neuer be o∣uerthrown. With such religious amitie haue I sought diuine Iulietta, yea with such amity, as shall neuer die in me, no more then vertue, which is to me, in steed of a strong Pillar, and therefore can neuer be remoued. Now if that Bandite, may count himselfe happie; who seeth to arriue before him, such as are come to restore him vnto his former ho∣nours,
and to bring him home againe into his wished for natiue soyle. Then may I, seeing thee (most generous Knight) halfe perswade my selfe, that mine exile beginneth to ende, graunting mee for thine onely sake, a certaine Truce vnto my ouer-tedious griefes. But tell me I beseech thee, (if too too importunate I be not with thee) what now doth that faire Creature, whose likenes thou hast heere, doth her Vertues still continue, pur∣suing to glaunce forth her diuine beames? doeth her Altars as yet smoke, with so manie Sacrifices which those braue Spirits offered vnto her? and doth her learned vaine, sigh forth such sweete verses, as were wont to Enchaunt and Charme, so many thousands of louely soules? Ah Shepheard (answered Philistel) the alteration, and the changing of the Planets,A Similie. change and turne, by the selfe-same manner, the nature of all creatures, and the course of euery mortall thing. The Prince that meaneth to remooue his Court, where hee stayes, causeth all his houshold likewise to doe the same, because they depend whollie vpon his commaund: and so are men, seruants vnto the will, and powerfull command of the Starres. All things are altered, and quite turned topsie-turuie, in our Desarts of Arabia. The Heauens who before regarded them with a gratious eye, perceiuing how all Faith, all Pietie, all Iustce, & all Learning, was banished from thence, haue therefore banisht from thence, all their gratious fauors, rayning vpon other Countreys, that sweet pearly deaw of Mercie. They haue turned their sight from those parts, which (being vnworthy of their so great bountie) they haue bestowed vpon more thankfull Lands. Well doest thou know, that since that time, wherein men haue left the nature of men, to take vpon them, that of the Wolfe, inuesting themselues, with both skinne, and conditions of that beast, there hath beene no other conceit, nor studie amongst them, but villanie and mischiefe: As those that are vertuous, hunt after Glorie, hauing no other thought, but of Honor, which they set before thē, as a reward for their labors. The wicked sort to doe wickedly, put in practise and vse, diuers meanes & deuices. That which they are not able to execute, by plaine force, that doe they performe, through diuellish Treason. For they hold this generall Maxime, as an Oracle, that the skin of the Foxe,Note. must couer all that part which the Lyon leaueth bare, and vnhidden: and that subtiltie, should sup∣plie and helpe Force, Rage assist Valour, and Treason support Vertue, at a dead lift. We are now no more of that Humor, which this braue Prince was of, who refused to Combat with his enemie, by aduantage or subtiltie, for feare least he, seeing himselfe so ouercome by chaunce; should once more venture, to trie his Fortune againe, to finde if he could as well be ouercome by Vertue, as by false and slie Trecherie. Deceit at this day, is the chiefe ground of euery mans actions,A Sentence. which sheweth suffi∣ciently, that they haue no more accesse vnto Vertue, that they make no more account of Glorie, and that nothing which is good, shou'd henceforth be looked for, to proceed from them. Thou knowest, how Phillis hauing courteously receiued certaine miscre∣ant Infidels, to be as his companions with him, and how they, (as iealous of his re∣nowme, and enuious of his vertue, being greedie to enioy his goods, and more desirous then any way deseruing, his happie Fortunes) most cruellie and damnably slue him on the sodaine, this being the ordinarie death of the valiant, valor it selfe, not being able to resist the same, they themselues still venturing where danger alway bideth. So Iuliius Caesar, the wonder of the world, was traitetously slaine,An Example. whome the bloody hand of Mars could neuer subdue. So dyed Sertorius, slaine by his owne followers, after he had spoyled, and brought to nought the great strength and forces of Pompey, of Metellus, and of all the Roman peo∣ple. So dyed Eumenes, solde most basely, by his owne men, he hauing so often before conquered the kings of Asia, his deadly foes. And in such sort dyed Dyon, (hauing ouer∣throwne Denis, the Tyrant of Siracusa) finde himselfe to be massacred, by his owne household seruants. Thus then wee see, that it is the common course of the greatest Conquerours, to die after a straunge manner. And although to make away anie man, in this base fa∣shion, it is counted dishonest, cruell, and detestable, yet is the same accounted of now adayes, in the World, it beeing as an ordinary practise, daylie put in vse, more
then any other policie. Custome is another nature, and preuenteth ouermuch manie times: for hardly or neuer, can we reclaime a thiefe from stealing, although we threaten him neuer so much: So men vsing themselues (as now) to commit Treasons, will not sticke to glorie in the same (that so much) and as it seemeth, Deceit was the principall matter, of which they were compact and made. Phillis being dead, his diuine sister would needes follow him, shee giuing quite away so many daintie and worthy giftes, wherewith she was most sweetly adorned and embeli∣shed. Shee now desireth to liue no where so much, as in the darke and solitary woods, the companie of mortall creatures, are troublesome vnto her, all pleasures disagreeable, all ioy refused, and vnwelcome, all hope displeasant, and all cheerfull myrth, most hate∣full vnto her. Salt teares are onely sweete vnto her, sorrowe and heauinesse, her best comforts, and pittious laments, are most deare and welcome vnto her. Women haue no other weapons (being crossed by hard destinies) then bitter teares, not that they are able* through weeping to remedie their griefes, but because through them, they shewe signes of their affected mindes and good will towards them, who be∣ing persecuted by vnkind Fortune, are the occasion they lamēt so much for their sakes. For true teares are so dearely bought,A Sentence. & cost so much to draw them from the moyst∣ned springs of the eyes, as none can with reason, thinke they distill from thence, but for the losse of some one thing or other, which wee tender, as much as the better part of our owne selues. So her drerie Muse, (after his death) addicted her selfe vnto nothing else, then to bewaile the losse of her Brother, sighing forth thousands of lamentable verses, and singing mournfull Anthems ouer his graue, whilst shee powred forth whole Oceans of more then affectionate teares. Of these mournfull Ditties, had I great store, but the Tempest vpon the Sea, tooke them from me, yet hope I one day, to recall them againe vnto my former memorie, at what time, I meane to make thee partaker of them. Not long after my parents deceasing, and I being called vpon continually, to returne home vnto my people, was forced much against my will, to take my leaue of her, for a certaine time, leauing her my heart: in easing of which, I brought away this her table. My hope is, shortly to returne backe againe, after I haue set in good order certaine of mine affaires, of great importance: at what time, if thou shalt remaine here, as then I will take thee with me, as I passe, to the ende I may restore thee vnto thy sweete Countrey, vnto thy deare acquaintance, and vnto thy louing friends, who remaine not a little hea∣uie for thine absence. Ah Knight,An excellent discourse, in praise of a Contemplatiue kinde of life. (answered the Shepheard) what need hath he that is resolued to die, re∣tiring himselfe from the companie of men, to returne into their societie againe? What need of a Chyrurgian had Cato, when after he had wounded himselfe, hee was determined with himselfe to die. Next after the dead, are men onely happie, who as these that are dead vnto the world, neuer vse to frequent the world more. And seeing thou thy selfe confessest, that Vice doeth raigne and rage amongst men, why shouldest thou enuie at this small parcell of contentment, which mine Exile yeel∣deth me, tumbling me downe (as it were) from the very height and toppe of the same? The right happinesse of man, doth not consist in greatnes of Honor, nor in the vaine pleasures of this world: for how can you terme such accidents to be happie, when they haue no assurance of continuing, wherein the chase of Vertue is to be followed, without tracing the paths of Vice at all? For what trouble can there arise vnto a vertuous man? can the losse of goods humble him? no, for he hath none. Can the death of children? no, nor that: for hee finding by Vertue, that they were borne to die, vexeth not himselfe at all, in that they haue payd the debt which they did owe vnto Nature. Can the want of friends? no: for, if he iudge the time to be miserable, in which we liue, (and as it were, the father of all misfortunes,) he will then think his friends most fortunate, to be departed out of this vale of misery. Can the afflictions of his bodie? neither, for hee knowing the goodlines of vertue, will soone find that glory is gotten with patience, and that it is far better to suffer for a little while, then to see himselfe mingled with the troupes of vnworthie persons, whose me∣morie & good name dieth, euen with their bodies. What then may grieue the vertuous?
Can the losse of his vertue? No, nor that likewise. For it being a Treasure, farre be∣yond the power of Fortune, and as it were wholly diuine, is not subiect vnto anie mortall decaying. Byas was of the same minde, who carrying his learning with him, wisely affirmed,An Example. that he bare away all his chiefe wealth with him. If then, neither all the spitefull deuises of enuious Fortune, neither all the bloodie cruelties of stepdame Nature, can euer force, or offer violence, vnto a vertuous man, what need hath hee at all, to craue ayde of men, or to enter into their societie? when by their vices, they shall corrupt his vertue. Diogines was of mine opinion, who being content with his owne vertue, very boldly refused those Magnificall proffers of Alexander the great. And so did Phocion, the Gre∣cian, Fabritius the Roman, and Pyrrhus, that famous king of the Epyrotes. Besides, what feare of punishment for his fault, doeth trouble the wise man? what sodaine apprehen∣sion of losses? what frightfulnes of paine? what doubt of death? or what thoughtfull care, for worldly matters to come hereafter? Anacharsis, being pounded to death in a morter, iested at death. Socrates, bought the same, and Plato, forced his owne selfe to take the like. That Rocke that is founded most strongly, within the midst of the Sea, cannot, nor ought once to feare, least the weather-beaten Barks, or Ships, should breake it in peeces; when contrariwise, it is the same that splitteth them in sunder. Euen so, the wise man hath no neede to doubt, least the force of any worldly accidents, should carry him away, seeing in all his Actions, hee goeth beyond them, and vanquisheth the puissance, both of the Heauens and of Fortune. But this power hath he not, whilst he shalbe ranging, and running vp and downe amongst men, spoyling himselfe through their vices, but rather, when he is retired alone by himselfe, to entertaine vertue, which as now, keepeth and abideth in the woods, since shee hath bene banished from Townes and Cities. Our Sauiour CHRIST, being to encounter with Satan, chose not a battalion-field, in the magnificall temple of Salomon, nor in the publike Market-places, of most popu∣lous Cities, but in a solitary and frequentles Desart, within which, whilest S. Iohn Baptist kept, he neuer saw the incestuous adulterie of proud Herod, nor felt his own head cut off from his shoulders, for speaking nothing but the truth. He then, that will be counted wise, let him forbeare and flie from Citties, where growe nothing but contentions, and troubles: for so did Ciccro & Seneca, very often lament, because they were drawne from their solitary abidings, to be imploied by the Roman Emperors, about matters of Estate. But now, what vice can the wise man encounter withall, here in these Desarts, which may be offensiue vnto his Vertues? Doeth he finde here any Iniustice? No: for such as haue nothing to loose, and offend not the Lawes, haue nothing to doe with a Iudge. Doth he find ambition? no: for pouertie is neuer hated, but rather pittied, then spighted. Doth he find murther? no: for vncouth wildernesses neuer breed quarrels. Doth he finde falsifying of faith, and lying? no: for here, being nothing to be gained, we need not to make our selues rich with lying. Doeth he finde disloyaltie, or subtil trecherie? no, nor that neither. For the deceitfull deuises of the wicked, and their aspiring hopes, to become great, doth not combat with the truth and honestie of our contented soules. Seeing then, all accidentall causes of sinne, are here preuented, driuen backe, and quite taken away, that may trouble the vertuous, in his quiet rest, deface his vertue, offer violence vnto his constancie, and bring hurt vnto the calme contentment of his owne minde. Did euer any such man repent him of what he had done? not any, for of well doing,A Sentence. repentance neuer commeth: Repentance beeing one of the most sensible, sharpe, and cruellest whippes, wherwith men are much scourged, because it neuer marcheth alone. without shame and great hurt. He onely is right blessed, who at the very period of his life, and at his last gaspe, sor∣roweth not for any thing that hee hath done, finding himselfe to haue no more to re∣pent him of his former actions passed. A blessed and holy abode then for the wise, are these harmelesse desarts, which ban∣nish all vice, and giue entertainment onely vnto vertue.
Vnto such a place did that godly Saint, Duke William of Aquitaine, withdraw himselfe, when he was determined to leaue the world, to followe God: to renounce all vice, to loue vertue, to abiure all sinne, and to honor pure Innocencie. If onely naturall pas∣sions bring men to be miserable, because the successe of naturall things, hapneth much against our will: what then contrariwise, can make them more happie, then to be de∣liuered from the same? Of innumerable troubles doeth he discharge himselfe, who re∣tireth himselfe from the world, and betaketh him to liue in vncoth wildernesses: where the mortall cares of worldly matters doeth not trauerse him, nor the continuall busi∣nesses of Common-wealths trouble him, nor the feare of any losse disquiet him at all. That man who of long time before, is prepared for some certaine kinde of Exploite, or who long since is resolute, to encounter against the shocke of Fortune, is farre lesse miserable,A Similie. then hee, who without euer dreaming of any such thing, findeth himselfe (on the sodaine) entangled within her knottie Nets. Euen so, hee that many yeares before, hath wisely prepared himselfe, to entertaine Death, calling for it, and as it were, still marching to meete it, findeth the same, when it commeth, nothing cruell at all: where on the other side, hee that is filled vp to the very throate, and as I may say, choaked with delicious pleasures, suffereth most vnspeakeable torments, tormenting and vexing of himselfe with hellish griefes, when he (neuer so much as thinking there∣of before) heareth Death knocking hard, at the gate of his heart, to seaze vpon him, and to kill him on the suddaine. And yet, it is not enough for a man to be wise, and vertuous, vnlesse he learne the skill, how to continue and keepe his prudencie and ver∣tue; for to no ende is it to get,A Sentence. vnlesse we can keepe, what wee haue gotten: the conser∣nation of which, is as laudable, as the labor to gaine it, is commendable. The onely best meanes for a wise man, neuer to loose his vertue and wisedome, is to shunne as neere as he can, the subiect of vice, euery occasion of blame, and all causes of sinne, which may very easily be done by him, if he shall giue ouer, and winde himselfe out of the subtill snares of the world: As S. Ierom did, conuersing & keeping company with wilde beastes, who are farre lesse viciously giuen then men. For the perfection of Glory, consisteth in the ende of the worke, it beeing no reason at all, that that wise∣man should be commended, who hath but begunne (as it were) to doe well, no more then that Crafts-man ought to be payed for his labor, who doth finish and make perfect, but the halfe of the taske he tooke in hand to doe. It is a small matter for a man to be counted for to haue bene wise, and not to continue the same still; for so, better were it, (like Socrates,) to haue bene a foole, and viciously giuen at first, and afterwards, to prooue most graue and vertuous. Let man then seeke the meanes to continue his prudencie, to nourish his Wisedome, and to retaine still his vertue, and then shall he be called wise indeed, and a most happie man, in that hee hath the ende of his life, according vnto the beginning. Not anie one is (in right) to be praised, but after his death, because we knowe not, whether it shall please the Almightie, to continue his good grace towards him, of which hee maketh (a shewe) vntill his dying day. So that if a rich Prince hath neede to demand ayde of a poorer then himselfe, to as∣sist him, then lesse occasion hath the wise man (who is rightly rich indeed) to request the succors of poore vicious creatures, to doe him any pleasure. He that needeth not any thing to finish the contentment of his life, hath as little cause to craue, begge, or intreat the helpe of anie other person. The wise man then, who is rich in vertues, contented in minde, and rightly happie, hath no neede to seeke the companie of men, through which, he can receiue no other good, then displeasure and vnluckinesse, when he hath enioyed the same. All that time which a man liueth, busied in worldlie af∣faires, of which, the society and company of men is the occasion, he cannot truly vaunt to haue had one small whole day of his life particular, and priuate vnto himselfe, his whole time and yeares being imployed to the publike benefite, whilst in himselfe, hee is full of sorrowe and griefe, despite, and waywardnes, but no sooner is he let loose from the world, and that he is alone, without being hindered by any person, liuing in some odde recluse Desart or other, but that then his Life, and Time, beginne to be his owne indeed; for then may he boldly dispose of the same, according vnto his owne minde,
hauing no bodie to controll him, but his owne selfe. What is so pretious in this world, as is our sweet libertie? The little Bird desireth rather to die for hunger abroad, as free, and without the cage, rather then to enioy euery daintie thing,An Example. whilst she is enclosed within her hatefull prison. Whilst we liue amongst men, we shal not only feele our selues to be forced to doe against our owne minds, but which is worse, constrained to submit our selues, vnto the vniust commandements of mightie men, being compelled to offer our selues as executioners of their most wicked desires. For if bondage, may in any thing, be termed sweet and tollerable, then must it be such, as dependeth vpon a iust and lawfull Maister, vnto whom reason is in steed of selfe-will and desire: whereas to serue & follow, the vniust will of a wicked Lord & Soueraigne, is to make himselfe more wretched, then condemned guiltie creatures are, whom dying, are suspenced from all their paine. But this solitarie receptacle in these woods, taketh away all these ills, remoueth from vs these miseries, hindereth vs of these misfortunes, and doth countercheck, all these sower disasters. In this wildernesse then (to enioy all these benefites) doe I desire to spend the short remainder of this my life, that when I am dead, a small peece of ground may serue to shroud my harmlesse Carkas: which is the onely cause sweete knight, of the refusall of thy gentle offer, which thou makest vnto me, to returne againe into the world. In requitall of which, I beseech the immortall Gods, to send thee all good fortune, & to make thee as happie and fortunate, towards thy chast, diuine, and faire Iulietta, as thou thy selfe wouldest wish: whose rare vertues haue serued for worthie subiects, vnto euery braue spirit of this our age. Liue thē happie with her, & may the Heauens be propitious vnto thee in thy voyage, to the end thou maist returne fortunate, like Caster and Pollux, to behold once more those lights of thine owne eyes, and leaue the miserable Arcas, to die here most discontentedly, seeing he is depriued of that sacred Sun, whose beames onely, conserued his languishing life. This said; the Shepheard kept silence, when Philistell thus replied vnto him. In truth (kinde Shepheard) I cānot chuse but approue what thou hast spoken, yet are there very few now adaies to be found, that will follow thy counsell. Although I must needs tell thee, that he that deuoteth his yeares, and life, vnto the seruice of this common wealth, is more to be commended, then that vertuous man, who withdraweth himselfe to liue priuately and alone, without the companie of men: For herein, he taketh paines but for himselfe: his firends, nor countrie reaping no commoditie by the same. We are not borne, only for our selues, but as well for our Coūtrie, friends, and parents, who for this cause may chalenge a certaine interest in vs. Cincinalus, and Fabritius, two worthie Ro∣manes, had more respect vnto the good of their Citie, then thou, who being chosen & commanded to shew their best seruice for the same, most ioyfully and willinglie gaue ouer their house of pleasure in the countrie, with all their quiet, ease and delights, to follow the dangerous march of tumultuous warres, taking infinite paines therein, with∣out ceasing. If euerie one were of thy humor, what comoditie, profit, or aduantage, should our na∣tiue soyle get, by bringing vs forth? good turnes don kindlie, must be recompenced with curtesie: which if we cānot doe by the helpe of Fortune, because we want the meanes, yet ought we, by our seruice, to shew our affectionate good wills. For the Murtherers, yea the very Homicide, is not so much to be detested & abhorred, as is the vngratefull wretch. How rightly and iustlie may that father complaine of his children, who in steed of do∣ing their duties vnto him, and succoring him in his old age, leaue him, being not able to helpe himselfe, vnto the rage of fortune, & to the vncharitable times of this hard world? A Similie. Such children, are by the Law depriued of their inheritance. How much more then are we obliged vnto the deuoire and seruice of our countrie? For it is our first Parent, with∣out whom, neither our predecessors, nor we our selues, could euer haue enioyed this life. May that childe, which may stand in steed to helpe his distressed Syre, retire him∣selfe apart vnto his priuate pleasures, forsaking, and absenting himselfe from him, with∣out his permission and leaue? I thinke none will say he can. Indeed, I will not denie, but that the liuing in solitarie places, and in the sweete Ayre of the wholesome countrie, is far more pleasing, more blessed, and more godlie, then that of the cities. But yet in all our actions, we must haue this consideration, that a publike good, is to be preferred
before a piruate.A Sentence. For the good we doe for the cōmon-wealth, extendeth vnto the bene∣fit of many persons, it being both godly and immortall: whereas that which we doe for our selues, dieth with vs, because nothing is found to succeed vs, but what ought or should be bound to leaue some good memoriall of the same, after we are dead and gone. Vertue it selfe, consisteth not alone in leauing the field vnto vice, and in withdraw∣ing her selfe from thence, because she dareth not combat with her. But it is her part, rather patiently and openly to encounter with the same: For those are properly said to be without courage in vertue, who dare not offer themselues before vice, and who flie, in what they may, to auoyd the fight with her. But as the Sunne is discerned euen in the thickest of the clouds, so is vertue perceiued and knowne, although in the mid∣dest of vice. Neither can he be holden for vertuous, that hauing no bad subiect to trie himselfe, withdraweth himselfe all alone out of the listes, because vertue, doth spring from danger, and those that wage battaile, carrie away the prize. And seeing he cannot be accounted vertuous indeed, but rather faint-hearted, and white-liuered, who for feare to encounter with vice, doth relinquish, both the defence of his owne coun∣trie, and of truth it selfe. For it is not enough to say, that a man is fortunate and conten∣ted, because he is so, vnto his owne selfe onely, seeing he cannot rightly attaine vnto that title, vntill such time as vertue hath first brought him home vnto his countrie, by such happie meanes. Nor is he worthy the name of vertuous, who seeth vice to call and challenge him vnto the Combat, and yet dareth not for his life, to trie his valour with her. It is not vertue, but rather selfe-loue and liking, for one to procure his owne proper ease, but when he forsaketh all his pleasures, to come to resue and succour his com∣mon-wealth, troubled with viciousnes and disorders, then is it vertue indeed. Had not Hercules,An Example. left his owne home; and as a Knight Errant, ventured abroad in the world, he had not left such remembrance of his wonderfull valour as he did, making euery Land and Region acquainted with his honourable exploytes. And therefore he tooke the best course, searching and seeking out in euery place, for the enemies of his vertues, to the end he might trie his force with them, making himselfe glorious by their ouerthrow, rich by their defeit, and as it were immortall, by their fall and deaths. The torch which the traueller carrieth in the night, if he lighteth not the same to guide him in his way, doth rather hinder him, then helpe him. Euen so, vertue is found more hurtfull in a man, then reuerend, and worthie of praise, if he doe not employ the same for the publicke commoditie of all, and for the foundation and strengthning of his owne glory and renowme. A braue man at armes,A Similie. taketh no little pride to be counted valiant, to shew his strong limmes, and warlike bodie, yet if he fight not with his foe, neither goeth about to shew some proofe of his valour; he shall not be accounted, neither couragious, nor valiant. No more shall he, be esteemed as vertuous, who withdraweth himselfe from the societie and fellowship of men, to liue priuately and alone, without hauing once dared to com∣bat with vice, whereby he might giue a signe and testimonie of his assured vertue. Cato could haue giuen ouer the Romane common-wealth, spoyled and corrupted with vi∣tiousnes, and vilde disorders,An Example. if he had would, and might haue addicted himselfe wholie vnto his ease. But he, the more he saw, that it had neede of stoutnes, and vertue to resist those enormities, the more he exposed & thrust himselfe forward in her quarrell, anima∣ting himselfe the more resolutely to take her defence vpon him, and to lay all the bur∣then vpon his owne shoulders. Whereas on the other side, Lucullus was to be much discommended, who being glutted with voluptuous pleasures, and possessed of infinite riches, left all the care of his countrie, to liue without trouble, not so much as once to thrust forth his hand (as it were) to saue the common-wealths vessell, from daungerous Shipwracke. And if that Souldiour, which the vniust lawe of warre, hath brought to liue as a slaue vnder the yoke of a strange maister, cannot depart from him, without his per∣mission and loue,
Then farre lesse reason haue wee, to giue ouer the seruice, which we owe vnto our Na∣tiue soyle, wee going about to discharge our selues from the same, at what time she hath most neede of our helpe. For force onely bindeth the Slaue, whereas wee are bound, both by Nature & honor, in a more perfect & indissoluble chaine, to stād in her defence. Hath not that Prince iust cause to be angrie with his Vassell, (nay rather,A similie. may he not worthily put him to death) who leaueth him in his most extremitie, when he hath most greatest and most dangerous affaires, such as concerne his whole Estate & Land, about which, when he should be busied, he getteth him away, and giueth him quite ouer, ey∣ther for feare least he should be put to too much labor, and taking of paines, or else be∣cause he is loath to hazard his life, for the safetie of his Soueraine? If so, then is hee worthie of farre more punishment, that doth abandon his Countrey, when it is in most miserie: For offering our bodies vnto her, wee offer but the least dutie that may bee: seeing we doe but discharge vs of that debt, which is due vnto her, and which, but for a time, we borrowed. Of a better minde (O Codrus) wert thou, who to serue thy Countrey,An example. wert content to sacrifice thy selfe to death, being willing for the good of thine owne Land, not onely to loose thy pleasures, & thine Imperiall Crowne, but also thy owne sweet and Royall selfe. So likewise did Themistocles, merit great cōmendations, who thought it better to dis∣patch himselfe, by swallowing downe a draught of deadly poison, then to draw his sword against his natiue soyle. He therefore is not worthie the name of Honor, who in res∣pect of his owne priuate contentment, and safetie, renounceth and abiureth the troubles of his Citie, rendring by such bad meanes, his vertue without fruit or profit, and with∣out any merit at all. For most seriouslie shall he be punished of God, who hath not employed his calling to some good vse, which was lent vnto him, and as a bad seruant, hath hid the same vn∣der ground, without profit at all: Inasmuch as hee sheweth himselfe vnthankfull vnto God, yea and deserueth no goodnes at all, if hee shall not make a commoditie of that vertue & good gift, which he hath bountifully giuen vnto him, more then vnto others. Not vnlike vnto him that maketh the world laugh at his follie, who beeing diseased and sicke, carrieth the remedy of his maladie in his hand, without once tasting or taking the same, vnto the benefit of his health. In olde time, such as liued as vnprofitable members vnto their Common-wealths, were taxed at a very great Fine, to the end, that if their bodies would doe no seruice vnto their Countreyes, yet at the least, their purses should supplie the defects of that fault. For there is no reason that we should liue, without bestowing somwhat of our substance, vnto the reliefe of our Common-wealth. Such then, as for feare of taking too much paines, for the Common-wealth, and as loath to oppose themselues against the abuses of the same, withdraw them∣selues apart, to liue to their owne selues, are much to be blamed, and are farre wide from being to be called or accounted vertuous. For it is not a valuable excuse, to say, I cannot doe any good seruice, because I am of no account, and reckoning. No, no, this is not enough, we must doe as much as we may, to the vttermost of our po∣wer: for many little fagots laide together, make a huge and great Bonfire: At the least, we must seeke as much as in vs lyeth, to quit the debt we owe. But as such slothfull men as these, are to be condemned, so farre more, are some o∣thers, to be hated and detested, who sticke not, as damned Traytors, to conspire against the safetie of their natiue soyle, raising factions in the same, consuming them with ciuill dissentions, and vtterly ouerthrowing them, with mutinous Seditions. Such vipers as these, are borne to the detriment & domage of the Common-wealths, comming of the race of Tymon of Athens. These kinde of men being onely such, as the further they are off from their Countreyes, the more profitable it is for the same. But amongst manie children which a good Father bringeth vp, it cannot be chosen, but that some one or other of them, must be found to be bad:An example. In as much as the earth it selfe, producing many plants, of which, some are good, and some are badde, doeth likewise engender such strange and diuerse Natures. Yet as shee tea∣cheth the Gardner, by skill, to set and graft his best fruites, in such a season as he may
bring them to full maturitie and ripenes, at their fitte time. And they deuise how to cut off, and to pluck vp by the roots, such as be ill, & nothing worth. So hath she also both ordained rewards, and glorie, for the best, and most vertuous Natures, in recompence of their worthie and honorable deedes, and sharpe and seuere punishments, for such as are badly enclined, to punish them, for such leaude faults as they shall commit. Now, as a King, who is to wage battaile with a strong and puissant enemie, hath need of all his Forces to gether, valiantly to giue him the ouerthrowe; So that Realme which perceiueth some of her owne proper children, to rise, and to take Armes against her, seeking (like the sonnes of Absolon, to destroy their Father) hath great neede of all her good and faithfull issue, who at such an extreamity as that is, neither may, nor ought to leaue her naked and alone, because as then, such an one doth as much hurt, that will not seeke to hinder this conspiracie against her (and yet is of power to doe it) as hee, that is the first Author and motiue of the same. This time then, will not suffer thee (my deare Shepheard) to take thine ease (thus) thou must returne againe into thine afflicted Countrey, take thy Fortune as shall hap∣pen, participate with her in her miseries, and saile with her in the selfe-same dangerous voyage. For those are knowne to be true friends, that helpe at a dead lift,A Sentence. and in greatest ex∣tremitie, because they doe good, without euer hoping for, of any reward. Change then thy aduise, and like another Camillus, returne from thine exile, to be∣stow vpon thy Countrey, these thy last deuoires, & depriue not thy Natiue soyle of thy bones, being to be pittied, as much as great Affrican was: to the end, that either thou, be∣ing buried within the bowels of the same, thou mayst leaue a glorious remembrance of thy selfe, when thou shalt die: Or else, that thou offering thy seruice vnto her, thou now bindest her vnto thee, although all the seruices which wee are able to render vnto our Countrey, cannot binde her vnto vs, by reason wee are farc more beholding vnto her. Thinke not as yet, that thou art (as it were, a dead tronk, which is cast into the graue) because it is vnprofitable, and to be put to no good vse: yeelde vnto thy Countrey what good thou canst, and any braue qualitie thou hast, to stand her in steed, bestowe it cheerfully on her. For in giuing her that which is thine owne, thou shalt deserue as well at her hands, as those who are farre mightier then thy selfe; vnto whome the hea∣uens haue giuen better meanes to succour their Countryes, then they haue vnto thee: For euery one is discharged, after he hath payd what he doeth owe, and hauing perfor∣med what he can, to the vtmost of his power. But it is not a sufficient discharge for the bad debtor,An example. to say, he hath nothing, and yet in the meane time, can find wealth e∣nough to supplie his own need. Change then thy mind, & take thy iourney with me, and I will thinke my selfe fortunate, if I may restore thee vnto thy Countrey againe, because of the great want she hath of such of her children, as are good, naturall, faithfull, and valiant: Amongst which number, I account thee as one of the chiefe. To this speech Arcas was about to replie, when the sound of a most pittious voyce, o∣uerdrowned his, so that to vnderstand the same, he was husht and silent. This voyce sighed forth this Sonnet following. Accursed wretch, and shall my blubbered teares Nere mollifie my Mystris flintie heart? O no, for these strange heats my bodie beares My teares to fire doe change, to breede my smart. Shall I no more behold her beautie bright, Which wonted was alone, me so to please? No, no, for now I liue withouten light, Since her I see not, cause of my disease. In double wise (alas) I finde my griefe, Whilst trebble still surmounteth my disgrace: First, cause I am a Thrall, without reliefe, And next, for that I see not her faire face.
Thrise blest the dead, far happier then my selfe, Death makes an ende, of all their martyring paine: But I still toyling, keepe on sorrowes shelfe, Then, is my life, the worser of the twaine. Halfe dead, halfe liue, I languishing doe lie, Vnder the beautious eyes of my proud FAIRF: Whilst I more cruell finde my destinie, Exilde from her, the essence of my care. Oh what colde passions in strange vncoth wise, Thy wofull absence breeds, through woes dispences? Since that thy sight, made smile my weeping eyes, The losse whereof, depriues me of my sences. DEARE, what am I? poore I, withouten thee? But like a coarse, quite void of vitall breath: Accursed Fate, that such a Law should bee, To force men liue, against their wills on earth. Of thousand griefes, the least and smallest crosse A Louer, louing, doth in Loue indure: Is worse by ods, then is of life the losse, Which we by gentle death, (our friend) procure. Compar'd vnto the passions which I feele, O happie Fate, that so would'st ende my life, To rid me of my troubles euery deele, A Cordiall wore, and comfort passing rife. What, shall I not, from these plagues be releasde? Neuer, before expir'd be my lifes date: Of blessings all, tis not, tis not the least, To die, whom Heauens, (whilsts that the liues) doth hate. O heauens, when will you gainst me quiet cease, And for a while take truce to doe me spight? No, no, I see with me you'l haue no peace, Yet vertue after stormes, doth shew most bright. You then doe meane, thus still my heart to racke, On tenters yours, to sound my constancie: But to what ende, doe you the same alacke, When I it know, and beare it patiently? Then cease yee Gods, to grieue me still with plagues, Ah whither carrie you my vexed soule? But tis no matter: shew your vtmost rage, Not you my dame alone, can it controule. As long as she to accept it please, in shewe You cannot hau't, nor for you shall it care: For dutie lesse, to heauens and Gods I owe, Then to my lifes sweet death, my cruell FAIRE He that sung this, was the Shepheard Coridon, whome (as Arcas) wilfull banishment had brought by chance into this Desart, and who calling to mind his Loue, sung this dolefull Dittie: which being ended, and perceiuing Philistell, Arcas, and the old man to∣gether, he runneth strait vnto them, and most ioyfully saluteth them, praying them to heare a certaine wofull historie: of the truth of which, his owne eyes had bin witnesses, in this his traualie. Wherupon they graunted his request, and euery one of them taking their places to sit downe, they began to listen vnto him most attentiuely, when the Shepheard spake as followeth. The Tragicall ende of chast Floretta.
Although the Almightie, through his diuine prouidence, hath most prodigally be∣stowed vpon the soule of man, many faire and goodly perfections, making him capa∣ble, to know and vnderstand euery thing; Neuerthelesse, if there be not some striking motion to awake him, or some strange accident to pricke him forward, he remaineth of∣tentimes, as senselesse, without shewing any effects, of his power and might at all. For a horse, although he be by nature, quicke, light, and full of life, yet if he be not spurred forward well, he will neither runne orderly, nor yet keepe any pace rightly at all. Now the sharpest spurres of the soule, are Glory, and Loue, being the first deuisers of his actions, and the chiefest causes of all his enterprises. A braue Generall or Commaunder of a field, egged forward with desire of glory, will with the price of his blood, amidst thousand of dangers, in despite of all hazards, venture to shew a proofe and signe of the brauenes of his minde: A witnes wherof, is Themisticles, who was enuious of the glory of Milliades. So likewise, a Louer will make shew of a thousand proofes of a gallāt spirit, deui∣sing all the best meanes he can to bring himselfe in credit with his Mistresse, to the ende he may thereby obtaine the sooner his desire. And of such inuentious, Iupiter is found to be the first inuenter. Warre then and Loue, are the two most necessarie spurres for the minde, although they are sharpe and violent, as a comfortable potion though bitter, to heale the sickelie body. And when by chaunce, the spirit of man is toucht vnto the quicke with these two hot spurres to∣gether, thē is the time whē we shal see the same to discouer all her perfectiōs, & worthy qualities at the full. For when the valiant champions, begin once to loue, then doe they become most rare and admirable in their actions, as well, by their valiantnes to get the good will of their Ladies, as also because they lesse esteeme of their liues, then they haue done heretofore. Of which number were Hercules, Troylus, Achilles, & infinities of other more. And if the Romane writers speake truely, we find not any braue caualier with∣out a Ladie or Mistris. This being the occasion, that I haue vsed this little preamble, be∣fore I come vnto my historie, which is a mixt discourse both of Mars and Venus. For you shall vnderstand, that a certaine Duke of Banier, had (not long since) a most faire and vertuous daughter, but yet most vnfortunate, as most commonly the vertuous are, because they being enuied for the same, alwaies find a number of enemies, to conspire and worke their ouerthrow. This Princes being of an excellent beautie, her bringing vp, being according vnto her birth, and instructed in all conuenient qualities, fit for so no∣ble a Virgin, grew to be famous and admirable in euery strange countrie. Such one diuine Cassandra was, The Pearle of Phrigian land: Her learning such as it did passe, Whose Sire, it could not vnderstand. Diuers forraigne Princes amazed at the renowmed report of this faire Ladie, found themselues taken with a certaine great desire to see her: amongst others, was the King of Danes sonne, one, who was young, gallant, and couragious, whose chiefe delight was in the sweet exercises of loue. He being driuen by the same of this peerelesse Paragon to passe the Seas, and to come vnto the Court of her Father, to see her, was receiued and en∣tertained according vnto the greatnes of his calling, with large testimonies of content∣ment euery way, on the old Kings side, for that he tooke it most kindly, that the young Prince vouchsafed in his owne person to come and honour him with the noblenes of his presence. Hauing seene this Princesse, he iudged Fame to be enuious, in that she had not brui∣ted abroad, the halfe part of her perfections, being of conceit, that all such rare qualities as euer haue bin, were all assembled and met together in this one bodie: and that Nature hath made this as a superexcellent peece of worke, to bring her selfe to be admired and wondered at in the eyes of all men. For the effecting of the same, Thus whilst the Louer burneth in this flame, No beautie's like to that of his faire dame.
This caused him to think, that she was to be courted with some extraordinary meanes, and not with any triuiall or vsuall discretion, required in such affaires; Because such May∣dens as are beautious, both in bodie, and in minde, are not so easily courted and obtai∣ned, with such facilitie as others are: by reason, a man findeth nothing to proceed from them, but what is found to be graue, prudent, and of great vnderstanding and iudge∣ment. In the meane time, loue daily grew more and more in the young Prince, which was the occasion he imagined the perfections of his Mistris, to encrease likewise in her.A Sentence. Such is the strange force of Loue, as it changeth the nature of mens eyes, making them behold blacke for white, forcing them oftentimes, to adore such a one for celestiall and diuine, which amongst others (generally) is of no account. But what maruaile is it to see him maister the eyes of our bodie, if he be able to con∣troll our very soules, as he himselfe best pleaseth? And herein may Louers be compa∣red vnto such as walke in the night, who can discerne nothing, but what pleaseth their torche to make them see. Euen so, they esteeme nothing to be faire, but what their Loue alloweth them to thinke of. So the flame of a fire, the more it spreadeth á∣broad, the more it maketh the fuell to burne. And so the Prince, the more he found his soule to be powred out vpon the beautie of his Lady, the more hee still viewed and be∣held her, alwayes courting and deuising with her, thinking still that hee should finde one new perfection or another in her. Resembling herein right students, who the more they reade, the more they are desirous: because their reading bringeth them some new contentment or pleasure, causing them more and more to be rauished with the admira∣tion of wondring at the bottomles depth of diuine Learning. But the young Damsel, who through some secret and inward motion of her minde, prophesied the end of this Loue to be miserable, although the beginning seemed to be sweete and goodly, carryed herselfe herein, as the wise husbandman, who commendeth not the day ouermuch,A Similie. vn∣till he see the euening to be come, especially, when he seeth the Sun rise too timely, and to burne too hote, at the beginning, which made her hardly to be brought vnto any thing, being the cause that mooued him to vse these speeches vnto her, hauing found her one day at conuenienient leisure. Most excellēt Princesse, the greatest contentmēt that a man can wish for in this world, is, to see his opinion and conceit, confirmed with experience: and he that beleeueth, and seeth, the effect of his beliefe to take place, esteemeth himselfe thrice Fortunate, as well of the good conceit he hath of his owne sense, as for the pleasure and contentment he findeth therein, when hee beholdeth his soule to be fullie assured of that, which hee so much, and so long desired. Amongst the number of which, I may well place my selfe, esteeming my fortune most happy, in that I (hauing seene you), haue seene the effect of my beliefe, & the full assurance of mine owne infallible iudgemēt: The renowme of your rare vertues, hath driuen me hither, desirous to vnderstand, if it were true or no: But I finde it not so, because it hath forgotten to speake of you, as you haue deserued, which parts in you, are farre more commendable, then all the reports that haue as yet bene made of you. And this is the cause you ought not to wonder, if I (seeing you farre more accomplished euery way, then was bruited vnto mee) doe loue, honour, and affect you, as I doe; Seeing that before euer I beheld you, I honoured you deepely in my heart. And if the Gods recompence the pains which mortal men take to visit them, to receiue their Oracles, and doe answere them according vnto their desires; Then, (deare Soue∣raigne of my thoughts) I shall desire you, I may not be frustrate of the hope which brought me hither, which was to be gratiously accounted of, by a faire Princesse, like your selfe, (who being perfect in all good gifts, cannot I trust) want neither mercie nor mildnes. And if the iust prayers of men, are heard vp to the heauens, though they themselues are in condition, base, and vnworthy to offer the same, yet mine, being of an other nature, (in that I craue nothing but what is lawfull and honest, should me thinks, be accepted of you. Such demands as proceede from a foolish and vndecent Amitie,A Sentence. are to bee re∣iected, as dishonest and beastly: but such as belong vnto a sacred and vnspotted Friendship, ought to be accounted of, because without CHASTE LOVE, both Gods and men quickly perish. The praier which I most humblie desire to offer
vnto you, is to beseech you to entertaine me as your faithfull seruant, to the end, that if my loyall, constant, and long seruices, may deserue any merrit, it might please your gra∣tious and most sacred Loue, to finde some place for me in the same; who hath vowed to make you, and onely you, the Queene of mine owne person, Royall Crowne & Realme. For this I will be bold to say, that if you shall grace me so much as to bestowe the Title of seruant on me, I will not doubt but to shew my selfe worthie of some reward: in that I thinke,An Example. hauing once obtained this fauour at your hands, nothing can come impossible vnto me. Suffer me (diuine Princes, to enioy so rare a name, which shall be more plea∣sing vnto me, then to be Prince of Dace: For no Realme, doe I value at so high a rate, as I doe your admired beautie. The Gods (they say) esteeme most, of the pure good wills, of men their creatures, and loue them for the same, perceluing themselues to be loyallie serued, and faithful∣lie honored by them. Imitate them, I besech you, for you can neuer affect or like anie man that loueth you, in that deepe measure that I doe, which I alwaies will maintaine with the losse of my dearest blood, against all such, as shall make shew to loue you: And I will dare to auouch, that their deuotion towards you, being farre inferiour vnto mine, doth not merit such, or the like guerdon, as mine of right deserueth. To be briefe, I beseech you (good Madam) vouchsafe to accept (as a deed of gift) the whole person, and the entire possessions and Realmes of the Prince of Dace, who doth not account nor imagine, his famous glorie, nor his good fortunes, to depend vp∣on his owne valour, or braue exploits, but only on the faithfull seruice which he hath vowed vnto you. For far greater honor shall it be vnto him to serue so rare and exqui∣site a creature as you are, then to command, and beare sway, ouer ten thousand nations, were they neuer so generous. The young Princes little or nothing moued with these sweete speeches, & yet some∣what loth and vnwilling to anger so great a Prince, whose affection she found to be wonderfull towards her, whose procedings she could not much mislike of, seeing they did spring from a vertuous and loyall hart: and withall, perceiuing how greatly he was honored by the Duke her father, resolued with her selfe (seeing she could not much af∣fect him) to carrie her selfe so wisely, and to giue him so polliticke an answere, as he should scarse tell what to iudge of the same: & that in such sort, as it should neither make him dispaire, nor force him to conceiue any great good hope at all: which she deliuered after this maner of speech. My Lord, if my weake and shallow iudgement were worthie to take place amongst such as are learned, & could make difference and distinction in matters of importance, I should then thinke, that this word of Perfection, is no way proper nor conuenient vnto mortall things: for that which cannot be changed from his first Essence & Being, his omnipotent power, and almightie authoritie (as God himselfe) is onely perfect in∣deed. But cōtrariwise, that which is not certaine to rest, or to keepe as much as the space of one short houre, in one and the-selfe same forme, because it is subiect vnto alteratiō and change,A Sentence. it taking after the vncertaine course of the Stars, and the chaunces of this world, cannot any way be called perfect. Which seeing it is so (I beseech you Sir, vse not this word, proper vnto God onely) towards her, whose fairest perfections that she hath, is the assured knowledge of her owne imperfections. I am noble Prince too base a creature, and of too small account to be beloued of you: the Gods loue not any thing but what is rare, and worthie of their frendship. Princes are Gods here vpon the earth, and ought to imitate them, not searching for any thing, but such (as differing from the vulgar conceit of the cōmon people) carrieth in it selfe some excellent particuler grace, and extraordinarie excellencie with it. But these worthie qualities wanting in me, what should moue you to cast so great affection and liking vpon me, as you would seeme to parswade me you doe? Let me alone I pray you, I pray you let poore Iustinai alone. Let not her defects be, as a laughing stock vnto your youthfull yeares: Nature hath made her wretched enough alreadie, without farther encreasing of her miseries, to make her the table talke, & com∣on laughter. Besides, say that your tongue did agree with your hart, and that they two did not dif∣fer
in affections, you being as willing euery way (as you make shew of) to abase your greatnes so lowe, as to loue me vnfamedly indeed. Yet what assurance can you haue of her, who hath no absolute power ouer her selfe, who is vnder the subiection and rule of a Father, whose commaundement is her will alone? A man can neuer get any benefit of a Seruant that hath nothing at all of his owne,A Similie. and whose onely good dependeth vpon the pleasure of his Maister. Euen such is my case, and so fareth it with me, and therefore if you meane to obtaine, what you seeme so earnestly to desire, you were best to make sute vnto him, who hath interest ouer me, without whose permission and leaue, I neither can, nor ought, to promise any thing vn∣to you at all. If this be all (answered the Prince) and that there is no other let, I doubt not but to haue a good issue in the pursute of this my busines I haue taken in hand, (for I assure my selfe for certaine) that my Lord, the Duke your Father, will neuer refuse the alliance of my house, nor that we shall not be married together. But neitheir his consent, neither our alliance, no, nor the mariage it selfe, will I account of, vnlesse I haue your owne good will. For what good would it be vnto me, to enioy you as my spouse, when you as my mortall enemie shall mislike the same? The consent of parents, maketh not the marriage, but the amitie and liking of both the parties, who are willing that their two bodies shall be bound in so inseparable a bond together, as death it selfe, can scarce sun∣der them. Onely assure me of your liking: for as concerning the obtaining of your fa∣thers good will, which I alreadie perswade my selfe of, I will follow it, as effec∣tually, as speedily. And then will I thinke my selfe the most happiest Prince in the world. I am not so simple, (answered the Ladie) neither so voyd of discretion, but that I know that a wise and dutifull daughter, ought to loue what her Father is willing she should like, not being ignorant how faithfully, loyallie, and dearely, a lawfull and honest husband is to be accounted of. This is all, I can as now answere you: If you would craue more of me, you must pardon me. To talke with my father, you may doe as you please: In your busines, I will neither further nor hinder you, you know best what you haue to doe. And so with your licence, for this time, I will take my leaue. The Princes, being departed from him, he strait went vnto her father, with whome he was so earnest and vehement, in setting forth his amorous passions, as he promised him his daughter, assuring her vnto him before witnes. Whereupon the Danish Prince made all the hast he could to be gone, to the ende he might carrie these happie tidings vnto the King his father, and that he might with the more conuenient speed prepare euery thing readie and fit, for so worthie and so Royall a Marriage. But cruell fortune (in the end) did lie in waite, Too soone so faire beginning for to ruinate. But before he tooke Shipping, he would needs bestow this Sonnet vpon his Lady, who receiued the same, more for feare of offending her Father, then for any pleasure she tooke in these his new proceedings. And this it was. Ladie (I parting) leaue with thee my soule, Carrying with me, nought but my captiue corse: My captiue corse proud that you him controule, Through those faire darts, your eyes, Loues strongest, force Whilst I shall drawe, this aierie vitall breath, I still will keepe within me, this strange fire: Which in the fornace of my heart on earth My heart doth trie, my hopes to make more higher. My soule from death sweete Madame you doe keepe, That you may it restore to me againe
When at that heauenly harbor we shall meete, Where our chast Loues shall querdoned remaine: There shall I need it, for to make him tast, After so many troubles freede from griefe, That happie ioy, which Louers hearts makes wast Vntill thereof they find the right reliefe. Then (Soueraigne) pray we that some heauenly power, May hasten for our good, this blessed hower. The Prince taking his leaue of his faire Mistris, deliuered these verses fairely written vnto her, who was neither glad nor sad at his departure, as well for that she was not as yet wounded with the golden darts of that little blind God, as also, because she feared (I know not what lucklesse ende would chaunce in this constrained loue vnto her; yet neuerthelesse, she resolued to follow the aduise of her father, making account, and that very wisely, whatsoeuer should happen, yet should not she be blamed, nor found to be faultie at all; since she did but that she was commaunded by him. Now the Danish Prince, hauing onely the bare promise of the Duke, without being able to get any small graunt at all of his daughter, leaueth the Court of Bauier, and scow∣ring thorough the Seas with a merrie gale of winde, returneth home to Denmarke, where the King his Father, with all the Nobles of his Realme, receiued him with great ioy, they all being maruellous desirous to see their young Prince married, for the hope they had to see some braue and worthie issue to proceed from so forward and Princely a Gentleman as he was. But as great and Noble personages, are the occasions, either of much good, or of much euill, according vnto such proceedings as they take in hand, euen so, marriages oftentimes bring with them, either much happie fortune, or else exceeding great mi∣serie. There is no so happie an encounter,A Sentence. as is the chast, loyall, and sacred marriage of two bodies vnited together, with one and the selfe-same good will. Neither is there any thing so miserable and vnluckie, as that marriage, where nothing but debate, dis∣cord, discention, and all other mischiefes meete together. For the hatred of a stranger is in some sort tollerable, because it commeth but now and then; but that of the husband and the wife, is insupportable, because it is contrarie vnto the nature of marriage, and is continuall and ordinarie. This being the reason, that in many countries, the people reiected and despised marriage: yea euen amongst Christians, and such as were here∣tikes, was it had in no account, they maintaining the communitie of wiues, and brin∣ging vp the children so begotten, of the common and publicke charge. But yet as we must not giue ouer a sicke creature, because we perceiue in him an ex∣traordinarie feeblenes and weakenes throughout his bodie; euen so, although we finde certaine defects in marriage, yet ought we not to conclude against it, or to condemne it for the same. For though we see one corrupt member in a sound body, yet must we not commaund to kill the body for the same, but rather seeke how to cure it: And so should we vse marriage, being both sacred and iust, which if by chaunce it hath some∣times imperfections, we must studie how to helpe them, such faults being naturally incident vnto all sorts of creatures. But leauing this, let vs come vnto this wished for marriage, which chanced to be the ouerthrow, both of the Prince of Denmarke, of the Princes of Bauiers, and many o∣thers, they being in no sort blame-worthie at all. And now the Danish young Lord, hauing the consent of his Father, and all the Nobilitie of his Realme, to goe through with this match, and all things being in a readines for the entertainement and receiuing of his new Bride, he sendeth certaine of his chiefe Barrons to bring her home into his countrie, they being furnisht at all points with sixe tall shippes, richly set out on euery side, not wanting any thing for so honourable a Conuoy.
No sooner were these Lords are  Duke of Bauiers Court, but they were most ioyfully receiued, and most Princery , of the Duke, and of his daugh∣ter (though somewhat against her will) whose beautie was such, and so rare, as it see∣med most admirable in the eyes of these strangers, they not a little commending their Prince, for that he hath so well and wisely made his choise. After they had bene feasted, highly to their contentments, the Duke according to his promise, appoynting his daughter a Royall ship, and endowing her with many pre∣tious Iewells, with rich treasure, and exceeding sumptuous sutes of Princely apparell, deliuered her, with her whole Traine, vnto the Nobles of Denmarke, who (embarking her in her owne ship) attending on her, with all the courtly solemnities that might be: whilst she standing vpon the hatches, and taking her last farewell of her Father, coun∣trie, and friends, she seemed rather a Goddesse, then an earthly creature. But O how short of mor all worldlings is the glorie: Her fortune is vnconstant, and their liues but sorie. The ships being launced from the shore, the Musicke sweetly beganne to sound, the skie was cleare, the weather faire, and the Sea most calme, as they began to saile, seeming as it were to be rauished with his enchaunting harmonie. But what more wauering did you euer find, Then Seaish waues, what more fierce or vnkind? This braue companie found this to be too true, not a little vnto their cost, for about some two daies after their embarking, Eolus opening his hollow caues, suffered the blustring windes to come abroad, and the Sunne hiding his glorious face, gaue place vnto tempestious stormes, to couer the whole giring vault of heauen. The angrie Seas began to boyle, to rise, and like a Sauadge wild Bore, to set vp his bristles, hissing and roaring most terribly, as one disposed to plague all such, as at that time had too too credulouslie committed themselues vnto his mercie. The whistling windes be∣gan afresh to bluster, to rage and take on, and as it were to be mad for very anger. The azured skie, (cleare and bright a little before) now receiued downe, haile, thunder, and lightning, being all ouer eclipsed with a darke and gloomie cloud: no more was now seene the comfortable day, whilst the vnwelcome night brought with him his ob∣scure frightfulnesse, desperate danger, his dispairing feare, and iueuitable death, his cruell amazement, presenting these Tragicall shewes before the eyes of the poore dist∣ressed passengers. No sweet Musicke was now heard, nor no signe of ioy or pleasure was amongst them. Only the Seas and the windes spake, made a noyse, and roared most horribly, which was the cause that cold feare began as then to take possession of their soules, and death to seaze vpon them, whilst salt teares fell downe like swinging showers vpon their shaking hands, held vp to heauen for mercie. Most wofull were their cries, most heauie their sobbing and groaning, and most mournfull and pittifull the complaints which they made in this their extremities. Their leaking ships were tossed and tumbled here and there, some in one place, and some in another, as pleased the vncertaine windes, not vnlike the conquerour, who deuiseth and separateth his prisoners as he thinkes best, according vnto his owne minde, some of them were carried vnto one strange cost, and some vnto another, euery one of them hauing a contrarie fortune, most of them in the ende being drowned, and fewe or none of them saued, and safely come to land. That vessell, in which the poore Princes remained, was by chance cast vpon the cost of Spaine. Alas, how were her eyes swolne with teares, her heart broken with griefe, and her very soule galled with sorrow, to see what hard fortune was hapned vnto her,
and vnto all her companie and traine,  es were all falne into the bottome of the Sea, whither she looked  follow after, complaining most heauilie of her partiall destinies, that had brought her to be a prey vnto the watrie Mon∣sters. The wearied Marriners, and tired Sailers, had wrought all the meanes they could, both by cunning and force, to withstand the rage of this storme, but all in vaine, for the pumpe was not able to deliuer forth one quarter of the water which the billowes of the Sea continually beate in: in the ende, the windes drew this ship vpon the coasts of Spaine (as I said before) and in such a case as was most daungerous, by reason of the Rockes, that were there all about, which was the cause (in despite of all the Sai∣lers) it ranne vpon a hard shelfe, being with the blowe broken, and splitted all in sun∣der. A wofull spectacle was this to behold, and as drerie a Tragedie for to report. What eyes could see this, and not weepe? what eares can heare this, and not tingle? And what tonge can reade this dolefull storie, and not faulter in his speech? Then, then, euery one cried out for mercie from aboue, one catching a boord, an other a chest, this one thing, and that, another, and all to saue their liues, their sweete liues, which all doe hold so deare: but yet for all that, all of them in a manner notwith∣standing were cast away and perished: onely Iustina, by the grace of God, and assistance of Fortune, hapned vpon a casket, in which were her Iewels, which she grasping fast within her armes, the vnmercifull windes, wearie of their cruelties, through the helpe of a great waue of the Sea, threw her vpon the sandie shore; but yet in so miserable estate, as most pitifuall it ws to behold her: she being pale, heauie, and more then halfe dead, through feare and sorrow, insomuch as she moues no more then a senselesse stone, representing the forme of a dead coarse, rather then of a liuing creature, in which dreadfulnes, was found as yet some small sparke of life. Thus long time did she liue, as one breathlesse and liuelesse, not being able to call, or to recouer her vitall spirits againe. In the ende, (though it were first long) she came vnto her selfe, beholding with a pittious eye, so many drowned coarses to flote vpon the water, and so much costly stuffe, and rich treasure, to be cast here and there vpon the shore, and how hauing somewhat recouered her former senses, lifting vp her moistned eyes, and trembling hands vnto heauen, she began thus. O Sage Romane, that rightly diddest blame such, who when they might take their iournie by land, will foolishlie commit themselues vnto the mercie of the waters. And thou prudent Philosopher, who wert of opinion, that a man sailing in a boate, had but two fingers (as it were) of life. Alacke alacke, too true were your words, I hauing prooued the same, not a little vn∣to my cost, and misfortune. O God, what vice, what fault, or what sinne hath brought me vnto this remedilesse mischiefe, into which I now see my selfe plunged ouer head and eares? was this my doing? or did I euer goe about to labour, or seeke for this vnfortu∣nate alliance, which hath cost me and my companie so deare? No, no, I rather sought how to resist the same to the vttermost of my poore power, and to shun and auoyd (as much as lay in me) this fatall and ominous marriage. Ah vnfortunte children, from whom the respect, and duetie they owe vnto their parents, taketh away all the power and authoritie they haue, to dispose of their owne persons, as themselues doe chiefely couet and desire: my minde did prognosticate this misfortune vnto me, yet could not I auoyd it, and as another vnluckie Cassandra, I ad∣uertised my selfe before hand of a mischiefe to come vnto me, yet would I not giue credite vnto the same. Woe is me, woe is me, because I see my selfe deliuered now from one daunger, and for that I am exempt and freed from the malice of the spightfull Seas; Am I there∣fore more happie, then these breathlesse trunkes, which lying before me, are depriued of life by these vnmercifull Surges? No, no, for they by this meanes are cleared from all debts: and whereas I am (yet) to pay mine, and that perhaps with greater miseries, and mischiefes, and after a worse manner farre (by oddes) then they haue any waies done.
For what can I hope for in this strange Countrey, where I finde my selfe comfort∣les and alone, but either to starue and die for hunger, either to be dishonored by the rude inhabitants and people, heere remaining, or else to be deuoured with the iawes of some one wilde beast or another? Yet Heauens (I pray) to graunt me rather that I may satisfie the famlne of these sa∣uadge monsters, then to be rauished, and to loose mine Honour, it being the chiefe and onely Iewell which I desire to conserue in this world. O haplesse Ariadne, and yet farre more fortunate then I,An example. for thou being left in an vncouth Iland all alone, diddest doubt nothing but death, being throughly assured, as concerning the preseruation of thy virginitie, and good fame; whereas I, alack, feare greatly both the one and the other. To whom may I vtter my complaints? of whom may I intreat for comfort? whom may I craue to assist me? and from whom may I purchase to obtaine remedie, for my so great griefe, and anguish? No, I would thinke my Fortune to be maruellous good, if liuing hardly vpon the rootes and fruite within these woods, I might be sure to keepe my Chastitie vntainted, and vnpolluted: but who can or will assure me of such exceeding fauour? Cruell, & ouer∣cruell Sea, of thee doe I complaine most of all, in that thou hast cast mee vpon thy shore, and not drowned me: for this doe I complaine of thee more, then for the losse of all my friends, cast away most cruelly by thine onely meanes alone. Why diddest not thou send me to death, as thou diddest them? and why did I not take the same course, following them as they did: seeing wee were all embarqued in shippes alike, and were to passe all vnto one place and Countrey? Well, well, yet in despite of thee, will I seeke to die, comforting my selfe with this good, in my last miserie, that so doing, my body shall not be a prey, neither to vicious men, nor to any deformed monster. Nothing doubting at all, but that some one piti∣full man or other, will vouchsafe to burie me after I am dead, and that the same earth, from which it came, will not sticke to accept and receiue it againe into her owne bowels. Thus complained the dolefull Iustina, dispairing as it were, of all succour,A Sentence. hardly perswading her selfe, and scarcely beleeuing that God would euer deliuer her from this wofull estate, in which she found her selfe, as then to be in. But as his power is farre aboue the capacitie of man, so doth his succors come quite contrarie vnto the hope and conceit of them, and as it were, by an extraordinarie kinde of meanes. For euen then, when the vnfortunate Princesse, resolued within her selfe, to make her selfe away, behold, shee might perceiue a young Gentleman to come towards her, attended on with two seruants, whose custome was, to walke oftentimes vnto the Sea side, for his disportand pleasure, his Castle being seituate, and lying hard by the same, vpon the toppe of an high hill. No sooner had hee cast his eyes vpon the sorrowfull virgin, but that he thought presently, she was the haplesse remainder of some shipwrack of the Sea, and the rather, because he saw her enuironed and compassed round about with dead coarses; which he perceiuing, sodainly began to lament the hard hap of this dispairing Damsell. And as the brauest and most generous mindes are soonest subiect to pittie and compassion, he resolued to helpe and succour her in what he could. Comming neere vnto her, he might perceiue her most pittifully to sigh for her dis∣asters, holding her head betweene her hands, which leaned vpon her lappe, and her dropping eyes, looking downe very wistly vpon the ground, which was the cause shee saw not the Knight, vntill he was come right before her. But now his presence, comming as he did, bred a new combat within her thoughts, freezing her heart with a nouell feare againe. For whereas before she onely doubted the crueltie of some rauenous beast: Now seeing so faire and goodly a young Gen∣tleman by her, she began to apprehend in her minde, the losse of her Honour, which neuerthelesse, she resolued to maintaine the same, vnto the vttermost of her power,
and to pleade what she could in her owne defence, before hee should seaze vpon her as his prey. Wherevpon with a good courage, shee flingeth her selfe downe at the No∣ble mans feete, and with an assured confidence (which through his milde countenance, she perswaded her selfe of him, began thus to speake. If GOD (moued at last, by mine incessant prayers, to be gratious vnto me) hath caused thee to come hither, to the intent to succour and helpe me, I know then, thou wilt forbeare to dishonor me. But if not, and that thou art here arriued to worke my vtter ruine and ouerthrowe; Ah then, I beseech thee, without more adoe, cut off, and shorten this my loathed life. Whatsoeuer thou art,An Example. I beseech thee remember, that the glorie of Alexander the great, was greater, in that he vanquished his owne will, preseruing vntainted and vn∣toucht, the honours of Darius daughters, then in conquering Darius himselfe. And thinke that the chaste continencie of Scipio, brought more renowme and fame vnto him, then the defeit and ouerthrowe of Hanniball: and that his modest behauiour, pur∣chased him more faithfull friendes, and seruitours, then the triumphing Conquest of that huge Affrica. Thus (noble Knight) to vanquish our enemie, is the gift of Fortune, and not our own proper force,A Sentence. but to surmount and ouercome our owne selues, is a glorie due vnto our selues alone, and to none other. Because neither Fortune, neither the assistance of our friends, haue any interest or part herein: for onely from our selues it doth proceed, and from none else. Whereas contrariwise, if thou please but to call vnto thy minde, thou shalt soone find, what blame, dishonor, and disgrace, the beastly and vicious life of Tar∣quine of Pacis, of Theseus, and diuers others, brought them vnto: who because they durst presume most cruellie, to rauish and deflowre illustrious and vertuous Ladies, felt the heauy hand of the heauens, to inflict most grieuous plagues vpon them. So perished Aiax Oillius, plagued most iustly, for forcing the sacred Prophetesse Cassandra. For more fowle was his fault accounted, and more was he condemned, for abusing this Virgin, then proud Pyrrhus was thought cruell, in sacrificing the milde Po∣lixena, vpon the tombe of his father Achilles. I am now thy slaue, as Cassandra was his, yet I hope I shall not be so hardly vsed, as she was by him, lest the Gods punish thee, as seuerely as they did Aiax. I rather perswade my selfe, that I haue met with another Alexander for chast continēcie, & that my hap shal be as fortunate, as was that of Slutinas, the wife of Darius. But if not, & that I am deceiued in mine expectation, yet at the least, shew me the fauour, that I may succeede Lucretia in her fortune, and lend me some weapon or other, with which I may open my brest, and leaue this my life,A Sentence. which I haue so much and so long disliked. For it is not life, but rather death, for a modest woman to liue without good name and fame, seeing we pro∣perly call that life indeed, which neuer dyeth at all, and that is Honor. Then worthy Lord, I commit and commend mine into thy hands, it is for this onely, that I so much intreat and begge, and not for life. For so little doe I account thereof, as I would thinke it time ill spent, and worse imployed, to demaund or desire the same at all. The Knight hearing this note, wondred at her beautie, and not a little, at her braue minde, & rare constancie. And so much was he amazed at her excellent oration, but far more at her vertuous and stout resolution, that in steed of hauing her to be his slaue and Captiue, he found himselfe to be ouercome as her prisoner, and to be wounded with her sweete countenance, and pleasing behauiour, which was the occasion hee replyed thus vnto her. Faire Gentlewoman, I knowe no beast, were it neuer so sauadge, but would willing∣lie helpe and assist you in your miserie. And feare you then, that any man hath the power, as much as once to offend you? especially, such as haue taken their oaths, and whose ordinarie exercise extendeth chiefly to conserue and maintaine the Honour, and welfare of all Ladies and Gentlewomen whatsoeuer? My condition bringeth me within the number of such: Heauens onely graunt, that my proceedings, and mine endeuours, may by the fruites thereof, testifie the same.
And as for your selfe, you neede not doubt of any thing: for I assure you, you haue more power to command mee, then Fortune hath giuen me authoritie ouer you.A Sentence. In what base or abiect state soeuer, vertue encounters and enters, she alwaies shineth bright, the crueltie of Fortune not being able to darken her beames, nor to oppose her selfe a∣gainst her diuine cleernesse. Perswade your selfe then, not onely of your life, but also of your Honour, which this my hand shall preserue, against all the men in the world, euen vntill the last drop of blood in my bodie. That prisoner that by myracle hath escaped out of prison,A Similie. is not more glad at the meeting of his deerest friendes, who are come to conuey him away safe and sure, then this poore Princesse was ioyfull, seeing her selfe throughly assured of the safetie of her Honor: Insomuch as shee resolueth to take her Fortune, and to repose her selfe vpon the promise of the Knight: who sweetly kissing her hand, and helping her vp from the ground gentlie, with all curteous ceremonies, and dutious respectes that might be, conducteth her, (his attendants following him) vnto his Castle, where being arriued, hee deliuered, and recommended her, vnto his owne mother, an aged Ladie, who re∣ceiued and entertained her, with the greatest curtesie and kindnesse that might be, as if she had bene her daughter. So, as she found her selfe to be honored and respected, as greatly, as if she had bene in the Court of her Father, without being as much as once vrged, or demaunded, any thing that should be occasion of mislike vnto her. Thus when from Heauens of succour we dispaire, We finde that then they take for vs most care. So myraculously was Ioseph the chaste deliuered, so holie Susanna,An Example. so vertous Iu∣dith, and many other such. Neither is it without great reason, that high Iehoua should come for to assist vs, but euen then, when we haue most need, when we are in greatest extremitie, and when we haue wholly retired our selues, from all expectation of world∣lie hopes. For if we should be deliuered after a humane manner, and by the hands of men, (when we are in exceeding great danger) we then should neuer acknowledge the puis∣sance and power of GOD, to be so mightie and immortall as it is. Neither should we be bound vnto him as we are, when by his onely speciall grace alone, he doth deliuer vs from such infinite troubles. Iustina then, being so starngely freed from all dangers, began by little and little, to forget her sorrow, being (in time) content to receiue some comfort and consolation, in these her grieuous mischaunces, whilst in the meane while, her faire eyes recouered a∣gaine their former attractiue force; her colour, beautie, and grace, reuiuing againe in her, as fresh as euer they were before, hauing caught as Captiue, the heart of her a∣generous Hoast. Valiant Achilles, so was slaue to Brisseis Beautie, fought for her, and became her ser∣uant, with great dutie. By which we finde, how profitable Loue is vnto Slaues and Seruants, making them,An Example. many times, Lords and Commaunders, ouer their owne Maisters. And such was The∣seus to Phedra, Paris to Helena, Anthony to Cleopatra, with other moe. All which, sheweth a prudent kinde of recompence in Loue, to requite with so great an aduantage, such as Fortune hath turned topsie-turuie, and vtterly in a man∣ner ouerthrowne, in giuing them authoritie, to controll ouer such as are their Soue∣raignes. Yet this good which he doeth, is rather to make himselfe seeme admirable, excel∣lent, and diuine, in his power, then for any good will he beareth vnto any man, being for all this, meerely ignorant, and starke blinde, how to finde the meanes through which he may become rightly iust, and pittifull indeed.
But leauing Iustina for a while, to plucke vp her spirits, to take heart at gras againe, and to begin to be as merrie as euer she was: we will returne to the young Danish Prince, who had now gotten a certaine intelligence, and true knowledge, of his betrothed Spouses shipwrack on the Seas, and as he thought, her vtter ruine and ouerthrow. For one of the companie of their Ships, escaping by the benefite of the windes, was driuen back vpon the coasts of Denmarke, by whome he was throughly ascertained, of the casting away of his faire Mistris, and all her Fleete. If hope of future things being prolonged and deferred, rendreth the soule miserie and trouble, how much more then doeth Dispaire afflict and torment the same? The fu∣rious assaults whereof, this young Prince but too too well felt; hauing lost that which he esteemed most of in this world, and seeing himselfe quite frustrate, and voyde of the onely delightfull hope of his life: Oftentimes went he about to embrue his owne hands with his deerest bloud, if he bad not bene preuented, and perswaded to doe otherwise: he being of the minde, that it was impossible for him to liue, after the losse of that, which was the onely occasion of his life. Nor did hee grieue alone, for all his Coun∣trey did participate with hm in his sorrow: not so much for the death of the Princesse, as for to see the exceeding passions and torments he still endured. For so much did hee take on, and so impatiently did he beare her losse, as not only he forgot the office & the deuoir of a Prince, but also of an ordinary poore creature, offering himselfe through the extremitie of his passions, to become the spoyle of Fortune, as the most miserable wretch in the world. For all ioy became irkesome vnto him, all state and pomp, loath∣some and odious, and all pleasure, displeasant and wearisome; his griefe made him for∣get his condition, his health, and his welfare. So faithfull Piramus with griefe was tost, When he had thought his Thisbe faire was lost. His walkes were solitarie, his purmenados melancholie, and the sauage beasts of the woods, his onely companie. How often would hee sit roaring, within the bowells of some hollow Rocke or other, and complaine him in the shadie desarts of his too hap∣lesse disasters? How often would he runne vnto the shore side, looking here and there (like Ariadnne) to see if the selfe-same Ship in which his Ladie was imbarked, would appeare vnto his sight, or no? yet could he see nothing, but the soming surges of the Sea, and the swel∣ling billowes, beating on the bankes too and fro. All the newes that he could vnder∣stand, was the losse of his Mistris, for that was the generall brute that ranne for currant throughout all the Countrey. One while he condemned his ouerrash fondnes (as wán∣ting aduise and discretion) in that, through the same, he had hazarded vpon the vngen∣tle waues, so faire and sweete a Creature, as she was. Another while, he acknowledged and confessed himselfe to be the author of her death, and the cause of her destruction. Whilest this opinion of his, drewe whole floods of teares from his eyes, thousands of sighes from his heart, and millions of heauie complaints from his soule. Two cruell conceits did alwayes afflict him; the one, was the losse of his Loue; the other, the con∣stant beliefe, that he had bene the occasion of her vtter ouerthrow. Commonly we beare with more patience the misfortune which hapneth vntovs,A Sentence. by the despitefull malice of the angrie Stars, then we doe that, which through our owne default doth fall vpon vs. For the one, we can no way remedie, because we cannot resist against the heauens: but the other, wee imagine, we might by some deuise haue preuented, if in due time, we would with discretion haue looked vnto the same. All the Court, as well the highest as lowest, endeuored what they could to comfort him, but he esteemed that as a double griefe, to be perswaded to be comforted by anie, hauing lost her which was his chiefest comfort. In the ende he deuised these dolefull Ditties, in which kinde of exercise, hee spent most part of his wearisome time. This then, was the wofull Song, which he vsed oftentimes to sigh forth, when hee was in his Chamber all alone, or walking amidst the vncouth Forrests, or when he was retired vnto some priuate place, along the solitary Sea-shore.
Now I haue lost the deare light of mine eyes, What should I doe, but end my wearie dayes? That Louer which with Mistris his doeth die,A Sentence. Dyeth not (Alas) but rather liues alwayes. So Pyramus and Thysbe, did disliue Themselues, and liu'd together like two Doues: That seruant which his Louer doth suruiue, No faithfull Louer by loyaltie prooues, So great a losse teares cannot counteruaile, The rate hereof at so high price is set: Base mindes it fittes (for life) to weepe and waile, That so at length their griefes they may forget. Not death it selfe though stung with his sharp sting, Their loyall hearts can parted make remaine: Th'one dying, doth death to the other bring, Making but one for to become of twaine. As sweet that happie life of Louers was, When th'one the other ioyfullie did prooue: So seemes it sweete to them from life to passe, When they together ende their Life and Loue. Loue doth renew, and so like Phoenix shall In the Elizian fieldes, below the earth: Chaste Amitie, not mortall t'is at all, As is our fatall ende, and flitting breath. Ah how can one liue in this world of woe,A Sentence. When he hath lost the best part of himselfe? Who seekes not after Mistris his to goe, In Friendships Checquer hath but little wealth. Diuorse me then from life yee Destinies, To rid me from this labyrinth of noy: The FAIREST shall not plaine in righfullwise Of mee, since I haue lost her, (my chiefe ioy.) Ay mee, I see, Death no remorse will take On me, whilst slowe hee hearkneth to my crie: The Heauens, our plagues the greater for to make, Will not permit, Death should approach vs nie. Shall I then liue in griefe, my selfe to banne? Euen in despite, and gainst my soules owne will: Alas I must, for I vnworthy am To bee, where bides my Ladie, freed from ill. Am I not wretched then, more then the rest, To cause her death, for whom I ought t'haue dide? Then why should I imagine me so blest, As for to looke for comfort at this tide? No, no, I must (and I deserue to finde) Thousands of crosses, ere I ende this life: Who ill hath done, deserues no vsage kinde,A Sentence. No gentle death, but direfull sorrowes rife. My hope is this, that after thousand plagues, A lingring death shall seaze vpon my Coarse: Whilst thousand griefs throughout my vaines shall rage, The more to punish him without remorse. Then let none comfort, or once counsell mee, Since this my wound is mortall sans recure:
A mad man neuer will perswaded be By reason, what is best for him t'endure. Vnhappy I, and trebble curst my state Wherein I liue, a death ore desperate. Thus wailed this sadde Prince continually, and to say truth, iust were his waylings, and but rightfull his complaints, considering how great his loyaltie was; and yet if he loued Iustina well, our Loue-sick Caualier, honored her as much, if not more: for as he liked her for her beautie, so did he as much admire her for her vertue. To seeke to obtaine her, in hope to carrie away that which many a Louer proposeth as a guerdon for his trauaile and paine which he hath taken: hee knewe full well that it was in vaine, and against his word and promise: and to espouse and marrie her, being altogether ignorant of her byrth and estate, euery one knowing in what wretched ta∣king he found her vpon the Sea-shore, all alone, hee durst not, both for feare lest hee should doe iniurie vnto his house, from whence he descended, and also, lest he should prouoke the iust displeasure of his best friendes and nighest kindred, in attempting so rash an enterprise without their consent. Thus was he troubled with many doubtes, still running in his head, not knowing what way to take, or which course to resolue vpon: No more then the Pilgrime, who being vnskilfull in his iourney,A comparison. and comming to a foure crosse-path-way, knoweth not which of them all rightly to chuse. Meane space, Loue got the aduantage of him daily, yea, and in that sort, as in the end, he became absolute maister of the Fort, and chiefe Lord and Conqueror, ouer the soule of the poore Gentleman. In so much as hee could no longer now conceale this hidden fire any more. The burning coale, couered with hot cinders, is more fresh, ardent, and full of heate, then the fiery flame it selfe. Very willing and faine was he, to haue bewrayed his sick∣nesse, but he knewe not to whom, he being not ignorant, that none could ease him of his paine, but onely shee, who was the cause thereof, of whom he looked to reape but small, or no comfort at all. The day and night was all one with him, for hee slept no more when the Moone gaue light, then when the Sunne shined: his greatest contentment being, to be al∣wayes in the companie of his deere Mistris, not remembring how the more he resor∣ted vnto her, the more his heart was inthralled, and caught in the nettes of Loues plea∣sing seruitude and bondage. The often and dutifull deuoires hee alwayes vsed to doe her seruice, his stealing glaunces, and pittifull lookes he cast vpon her beautious countenance, and his continu∣all burning sighes, comming like smoakie exhalations from his brest, were the onely secret messengers of his minde vnto her. All which, the Ladie well perceiued, (although shee wisely dissembled the same) beginning as it were, now to participate with him, in the selfe-same paine, and du∣ring in a manner, the selfe-same that he did. But the feare shee had, lest this good will should force him to forget his promise, and his honorable arriage vnto her, was the cause shee very hardly entertained this kinde affection which she bare him. Yet is it lawfull for an honest woman to loue, for nothing is more sacred in the whole world,A Sentence. then Loue: but yet so must they like, as they must seeeke to conserue their Ho∣nours chaste and vntainted: such was the loue that faire Iustina cast vpon this Noble Spanyard. But as a subtill Tyrant, hauing set foote into some place, although at the first entrance (because hee hath not as yet planted strongly enough sufficient forces, to serue his purpose) carryeth a shewe of mercie and mildnesse to euery one where hee commeth, by which meanes (at the length) hee getteth to be absolute Lorde and maister ouer the same: which authoritie afterwardes, hee exerciseth with all kinde of cruelties, iniustice, and all other horrible faults that may be.
Euen so Loue, hauing gained one of the gates of the heart of the Princesse, in the ende, made himselfe chiefe ruler ouer all the Fortresse of her faire bodie. She now began to take liking vnto the sweet lookes of the Gentlemen, to praise and make account of his seruices, and to lend a listning eare vnto his pleasing speeches: and as a sicke person, leauing his bedde and chamber, doth giue testimonie vnto euery one, of his welfare and recouerie, by reason he findeth his stomack againe, and can disgest his meare well: euen so, the delight and contentment, which she tooke in the compa∣nie, and in the behauiour of the Knight, was a sufficient and assured signe of the great good will, and singular affection which she bare him: yet was her fancie nothing like vnto that which (Alfonso) for so was the Spaniards name, bare vnto her: it being of such strange force, as it not onely gouerned ouer his health and welfare, but also it helde in subiection his very soule, which most miserablie languished: Not vnlike vnto such, who hauing taken a determinatiue kinde of poyson, consume away by little and little. Hee now thought, that there could be no such rare contentment in this world, as to enioy the companie of his Goddesse, which could not be too deerely bought, although it should cost him his deerest heart blood. Neither was he of the rainde he had bene before, to make a doubt what she was, or that she was of a more base or inferiour house then himselfe was of. Loue now had drowned all such doubtes in him, hee onely studyed how he might worke the meanes to be gracious in her sight, and to enioy her as his lawfull Bed-fellow and wife; knowing too too well, that her vertues would oppose themselues against all o∣ther sinister and dishonest meanes, that should be attempted against her: but this could he not doe, except he tooke a newe course, neither euer come to be maister of his de∣sire, without opening his minde vnto her, in such sort, as he resolued to giue his Mistris to vnderstand of the whole matter at large. Wherevpon, as he was one day walking alone with her, after thousands of sighes sent forth from his heart, with thousands of pitious loue-lookes, most sweetely glaunced on her, and with millions of sweet alterations in his minde, his tongue trembling, and his voice fainting, his countenance and his colour altering and changing, and a cold Feuer running through all his bones, doubting least he should be repulsed with a sharp deny∣all, with a lowe and faint voyce, he began thus to accost her. Sweet Charge, for (so she requested him to call her) the assured report of certaine things, amazeth oftentimes the spirit of man very much, but the experience of the same, giueth sufficient testimonie, that it is most true. I speake this vnto this end, for that I haue heard manieto discourse often of Loue, who haue reported infinite strange effects, which hee hath with great wonder brought to passe: so that I, for mine owne part, haue not a little admired him, in mine inward soule, yet could I neuer iudge rightly thereof, vntill experience had acquainted me with an infallible proofe, as concerning the same. Since which time, I (haue found afterward) that he is more wonderfull, then I haue bene giuen to vnderstand, there being such a certaine thing in Loue that none are able to expresse, hauing more diuinitie in him, then one can imagine, with which, only such as are strooken with his dart are acquainted withall, and none else. And certainly, hee may be well called DORDE, and liberall disposer of mortall mens fortunes, seeing he is able to make such as are Conquerours to yeelde, and force maisters to become slaues vnto their owne seruants and vassailes. Besides, he ought by great reason to be termed a God, especially amongst such as are most wretched and miserable, who being ready, (as it were) to fall into the pitte, are by him holpen out, and lifted vp, giuing them commaund and power ouer their Su∣periours. This which I speake is not by roate, nor by heare-say, but onely by good proofe, as I my selfe can best iustifie. For I finde my selfe vanquisht by you, (faire Gentle∣woman) whome enuious Fortune had sometime (though most vniustly) brought into a most pittifull estate. Then am I your slaue, and yet none of these which seeke the dishonour of their La∣dies,
to satisfie their sensuall desires. But such a one I am, as beareth more affection vn∣to your Honor, then loue vnto your beautie. Needes must I confesse, I loue both the one and the other, endeuouring in what I may, for to conserue them both, wishing to die a thousand times, rather then suffer the least wrong or iniurie to be offered vnto them. For your vertue doe I loue you; and for your beautie doe I honor you: for your modestie do I seeke you: and reuerence you, for your chastitie. If I were found to affect you, but for one of these good qua∣lities onely in you, may be, it were subiect, and likely to fall to ruine and decay: but ha∣uing so many goodly and sacred foundations, and all vnited one vnto another, making it to be of an inuincible strength; Me-thinks it is impossible, that euer this my loue should be shaken or remoued from his first place. The hope of your goods, of your Noblenesse of byrth, or your riches, are not oc∣casions of the good liking I haue of you, in that I am not acquainted with any such matters, but onely with your Noblenesse: I rather hating such friendships, because they are lost and ended, as soone as possession is taken of such things, vpon which they were founded. I then loue you, with a sacred and chaste kind of loue, beseeching you, that I may be recompenced with the like affection againe. For no woman can any way offer iniurie vnto her reputation and credit, to loue those, that seeke to conserue the same: neither shall that loue which is loyall, be euer defrauded of his due, because it hath alwayes a greater respect vnto the conseruation of that thing which the woman loueth chiefly, then to the pleasure hee taketh in the fruition and enioying of her beautie. But if my spotlesse amitie be of any merit or worth with you, I then most humblie intreate you, so much to fauor me, as to make me acquainted with your estate, the cause of this your misfortune, your parentage, and house you come of, and what your in∣ward conceit is of me, to the end I may either liue in assurance of some sweete hope, or euer after passe my time in most wretched and remedilesse dispaire? The Princesse who (already in her conscience) acknowledged her selfe much behol∣ding vnto the Knight, and who thought him to deserue the better, in that he loued her with so great consideration and respect, she being sicke of the same maladie that he was diseased, and finding the desires of her mind, (to cope and iump with those of the Gen∣tlemans) they agreeing both in one alike, with a lowe, yet a sweet speech, returned him this gratious answere. Noble Gouernor, if I had no other assurance of your excellent vertues, then your faith, which you haue most strictly kept, and the respectiue care you haue alwayes had most reuerently of mine Honor, I cannot thinke, your intention and meaning, to be otherwise, then most chaste, honest, and laudable euery way: For should you haue any other worse pretence towards mee, I cannot see what profite might redound vnto you thereby. I confesse you may (if you please) I being now in your power, force my chast will, but yet, this pleasure should be both dishonorable, in that you haue falsified your faith, and offered violence vnto a sillie mayden, who hath nought but teares to defend her, and also short & bootlesse, because this hand should purge and wash cleane my bo∣die of this fault, with the losse of his best blood, which I would offer vnto mine Honor, to appease his wrath and anger. As for this sacred amitie which you assure me of, I hold it most deere and agreeable, because it being such as you tell me, I know it will alwayes loue that which I tccount of most chiefly, which is my reputation and credit, studying, by all possible means to conserue the same, to the end it may still preserue me aliue. And this is is a true signe, and an infallible testimony of faithful and loyall Louers in∣deed: For if they loue their Ladies entirely, then will they neuer offer violence, nor seeke to wrong that thing which they account of most, which they esteeme of, as preci∣ous as their liues, & of which they make reckoning of, as of their only glory & renowm For as we cannot rightly call that friendship true loue, which a thiefe maketh a shew of, to heare vnto an honest man, because it is a colour only to robbe him of his goods and wealth:A Similie. euen so, that loue is no loue, but rather a most disloyall furie, which a man pro∣fesseth vnto a woman, when through the onely shadow of the same, he seeketh to take from her, her sole and onely treasure, which is, her high priced Honor.
For what law can bind a man to thinke well of such a Fellon as hath stolen from him all the riches he hath, vnder a counterfaite shew that he loued him? And what Subiect can a woman haue, to make account of the loue of such a man, who vnder this counter∣faite maske, hath reft her of her credit, glorie and reputation. I can neuer thinke, that euer there can be any orderly forme of proceedings of loue amongst such persons, and that woman, that doth not repute him for her mortall ene∣mie, that would with violence, seaze vpon her chastitie, is the onely murtherer of her owne selfe, yea farre worse then he, that killeth his owne parents. For what lawe can binde a man to credit, to affect, and to entertaine friendly, him, that openly seeketh to take away his life forcibly from him? So likewise, who can compell a woman, to loue and hold him in esteeme, that seeketh by all meanes he can, the ouerthrow of her honour? More reason is it, that the robber by the high way side should die, then the true man, that standeth vpon his owne defence: And so is it more necessarie, that the woman should rather suffer the enemie of her chastitie to perish, then to conserue him aliue, to the vtter ruine and destruction of the same: in as much as the death of one man, is but a losse vnto one alone, where the shipwracke of a woman, is not onely hurtfull vnto her selfe, but also vnto her whole kindred. As for mine owne part, I will neuer thinke, that that man loueth me, (what shew soe∣uer he carrieth,) what cunning deuises soeuer he vseth, and what signes of griefe soeuer appeareth, who hath an intention to dispoyle my chastitie, louing more his sensuall pleasure, then my good name or fame: but rather accounting him for my deadliest ene∣mie, will I enforce my selfe alwaies to reuenge me of his villanous minde towards me, arming in what I can, both heauen and earth, against him. I neither meane, nor seeke this of you, being alreadie throughly perswaded of the innocencie of your soule, and of your chaste, and right honest good will towards me, which maketh me the bolder to bewray my estate and condition vnto you, without con∣cealing any thing that is of importance from you. Know then (most courteous Knight) I am the vnfortunate daughter of Arnolde, Duke of Bauiere, betrothed by him (but yet without my consent euery way) vnto the King of Denmarkes Sonne, who sending a companie of ships for me, as we were sailing vpon the Seas, sodenly a storme hapned, which for a long time raged so cruellie, as in the end, all our fleete was cast away, and I by fortune throwne vpon your shore, in such estate as you found me, whome neuerthelesse I cannot much accuse, in that she hath brought me to be vnder your protection, you being for your fidelitie, honestie, cour∣tesie, and continencie, which I finde in your vertuous and liberall Spirit, not a little to be commended. Thus haue I discouered mine estate vnto you, according vnto your desire, & I coniure you, by all the Gods, that in requitall of the same, you will alwaies remember your pro∣mise, and seeke to preserue that which you cannot bereaue me of, without losse of my dearest life. All those, not a little amazed at the solemne discourse of the Princes, admiring more and more her beautie, her house, and Princely descent, kneeling downe before her, hum∣blie craued pardon for the neglect of honour, which was due vnto her, excusing him∣selfe, in that he was ignorant of her qualitie, and promising (hereafter) to amend the same (and to haue respect vnto her) according vnto her Royall degree. But she, that desired not to be knowne (for feare least being discourered, she should be conueied vnto the Prince of Danes, and so by that meanes forced to leaue the compa∣nie of the Spanish Knight, whome now she dearely loued (although she somewhat dis∣sembled the same) most earnestly desired him, not to bewray what she was vnto a∣ny man, vntill she should finde a fit time to be knowne. Which he most willingly pro∣mised, giuing her more honour from that time forward, and vsing her with greater res∣pect, then he had done before: verie much discondemning his owne iudgement, in that he could not perceiue this Ladie to be noblie discended, seeing so many rich proofes, and apparant signes of the same, as her courtly demeanure, her rare vertue, her stately Maiestie, her learned discourse, and excellent beautie gaue forth sufficient testi∣monie
which euery one did admire at. Meane time, these vertuous Louers twaine, did burne in oneselfe fire, And languishing, did pine away, for want of their desire. But alas, no remedie could be found to ease their passiōs; for the gentleman knowing the Princes descent to be so great and worthie, durst not as much as once presume to thinke, she would vouchsafe to accept him for her husband, chusing rather to die a thousand times, then to be very troublesome vnto her, or to receiue so bitter a pill from her, as a sharpe repulse, which he knew he should neuer be able to disiest, but onely by death. This conceit bred such a melancolie apprehension in him, as by little and little, he began to languish away, his blood was dried vp, his colour gone, and his strength de∣caied, so as he seemed rather a dead coarse, readie to be laid in his graue, then a man like∣lie to liue. This sudden accident troubled euery one, all lamenting the misfortune of this gen∣tle Knight, especiallie wofull Iustina, who knew her selfe to be the onely cause of this sor∣row, and which was worse, knew no meanes how to remedie the same, without dispa∣ragement vnto her credit; yet in the ende, she resolued with her selfe, if otherwise then well should happen vnto Alphonso, to die for his sake, so dearely did she loue him; who now was growne, to be in such a pittifull taking, as he could neither rest, sleepe, eate nor drinke, so as he was forced (although sore against his will) to keepe his loathed bed, where he thought neuer to haue seene his Mistris more. A strange thing, Louers resemble the Basiliske, who desireth to see that within a cristall glasse, which is the cause of his owne death. So these poore wretches, couet no∣thing so much, as the presence of that thing, which doth shorten their liues soonest, thinking themselues most miserable, when they are depriued of the same. They ac∣count no time happie, but when they feele death, and nothing is more agreeable vnto them, then that Subiect, which taketh away their life from them. Verilie, if the law doth most iustly condemne such for wilfull murtherers, as destroy and make away them∣selues, then ought Louers, to be placed amongst the ranke of these her selfe-wild mur∣therers, for their onely follie, hastneth the ende of their liues, making them to die be∣fore their time. This poore knight lieth grieuously sicke, without hope of recouerie, and Iustina re∣solueth (for companie) to take the like course, she thinking it to be no reason that she should liue ioyfully, when her friend should be dead, through her onely occasion. O how bitterly did she curse her cruell fortune, seeing her selfe inuironed with two such violent extremities, either to permit him to die, whom she loued more then her selfe, or else to suffer her honour to be crazed, which she loathed more then death. In the ende she resolued rather to ende her daies, then to scandalise her good fame with soule reproach, and to leaue the bodies both of her selfe, and her friend breath∣lesse, then to deface her chastitie, which she preferred before all things else in the world. Hauing set vp her rest thus, she goeth to visit her sickly friend, who seeing her come, began to open his eyes, to mooue his bodie, and to change his colour and countenance: which soden alteration, she presently perceiued, by reason she knew better then any o∣ther the cause of his sicknes, comming to his bed side, she sits her downe by him, and ta∣king him by the hand, with a soft and pittious voice, she began thus to speake vnto him. What cheare sweet Gouernor, and how fare you? what will you with this your sick∣nes, make so many of your good friends ill, who so much loue you, and desire your welfare? If you will not liue, for your owne sake, at the least yet, (seeke to recouer for theirs: for what pleasure or delight can they take, seeing you brought into this low e∣state, in which now you are fallen? We ought more to respect the good of our friends, then our selues, because we are borne for them: your vertues, your youth, and your valour, are to be profitable vnto your countrie, kindred and friends, neither can they (as yet) well spare them, that death should enioy them. Liue my good Lord, liue, and let not your priuate losse, be a generall hinderance vn∣to
all your countrie: For vnhappie is that man, who standeth in steed of a fire to burn his owne proper realme. You that haue so often discomfited your enemies, wonne so ma∣ny braue victories, and subdued and brought vnder so many valiant aduersaries, will you suffer your selfe to be ouercome with a little sickenes, which you may (if you so please) easilie driue away from you? Courage man, courage, and like a good Physition heale your selfe, & be not the occasion (lest for want of helping your selfe) it be thought that you haue bene a wilful murtherer of your owne bodie.A Sentence. For he may well be tearmed a murtherer of his owne life, who shunneth the meanes for to conserue the same; and who entertaineth for his friends, the executioners thereof. Comfort your selfe thē I be∣seech you, and with your recouerie, make your friends recouer their former ioy againe, banishing away all their sorrow, with your abandoned sicknes. And as for my selfe, I of∣fer vnto you all honest seruices (as farre as honour permits) to helpe you vnto your health againe: which I esteeme as dearely of, as mine owne life, for the many courtesies I haue receiued most gratiously of you, which I know and acknowledge so worthie of recompence, as if I thought my life, might buy, and redeeme yours, I would thinke my selfe most fortunate to haue it bestowed vpon so rare and worthie a Subiect. The poore Gentleman, beholding his cruell mistresse, (the onely pretious Balme for his sicknes) with a heauie eye, who neuerthelesse Thrise happie thought himselfe, to see that beautious face, Although she had brought him into, so pittious a case. Clasping her faire & white hand, hard within his, forcing the very walles themselues to yearne and grieue, at his pittious languishing, with a hollow voice, interrupted with many sobs and sighes, perceiuing death to approach, he faintly replied thus. Ah my sweet Charge, what fault haue I committed, that you should enuie at this small rest, which I finde whilst I am dying? and why doe you malice my fortune, when by death I hope to rid my selfe from these so hellish torments? Let me I pray you, depart hence quietly, who deserue not to liue, since whilst I liued, I could not conquere my selfe. If the braue Caualiere, suffereth himselfe sometimes to die, for very griefe to see himselfe ouercome, and if right generous mindes, thinke scorne to beg life of the victor, chusing rather to die, then to liue and carie the marke of a vanquisht person in their face; how much more iustly then ought he to consent to his owne death, and die willingly, who ouer-charged with ordinarie foolish passions, hath not bene able to conquere him∣selfe? It is not for me (Madame) to liue any longer, seeing I am not of power to hinder and forbid, louing that, which is the occasion of my death because I finde my selfe, vnworthie to enioy the same. Yet if it be a lesse disgrace to be subdued by a vertuous and gallant Captaine of the warres, then by a base coward and a dastard of no valour, then doe I count it a lesse displeasure vnto me, to die for so worthie and rare a Subiect as I doe. Iudge then (most gratious Ladie) and iudge but rightly, how sacred and chast, how faithfull and firme my loue hath alwaies bene, which forceth me rather to die most wretchedly, then to discouer it vnto you, for feare of offending your more then wonder∣full vertue. But alas, I, not onely sacrifice this my life vnto your diuine deitie, but thou∣sands more would I offer, if I had so many, onely to be reconciled vnto you. I haue done all that I could, before I came vnto this my last remedie, to take vpon me this wo∣full resolution. But Souldiers that are beggered, and dispaire of all hopefull succours,A Compari∣son. are in the ende forced (despite of themselues) to yeeld. So I, seeing my selfe voyd of all health and helps, to what ende should I longer prolong my dolorous life, to lengthen my cares the more? And yet, if it were possible you might be moued with a solemne protestation, of a iust, loyall, and liuely affection borne towards you; or if the misfortune of him (who for feare to offend you, most willingly abandoneth his life) might touch you with some small drop of pittie; Ah then (Mistris) suffer I beseech you, this wretched carkasse of mine, to be enterred in your presence, to the ende, that euen vnto his Tombe, he may
vaunt to haue had your blessed companie, who whilst he liued was his onely delight, and clearest light: grace this my vnfortunate carkasse so much, vnfortunate to die so soone, without hauing shewed any sufficient proofe of his seruice, nor restored you vn∣to your former happie fortunes. But alas, what good could it doe at all? Seeing (as vn∣worthie to serue you) you haue (and yet iustly) cashired him, and refused his vnprofi∣table seruice. Therefore was it fittest for him to die, seeing whilst he liued, he was found as (Non proficiens) in the seruice of her, vnto whome he was endebted for his life. The onely thing I wish for in this world, was but once more to see you, to the ende I might certi∣tifie you of my minde, as (now) I haue done: and to satisfie my weeping eyes, who would haue died most vnwillingly, if they had not once beheld your sweet selfe, before the closing vp of their lids: which request, since I haue obtained, to what purpose should I longer breathe? The trauailer reposeth himselfe at the ende of his iorney.A Sentence. The craftes man giueth o∣uer, hauing made an ende of his worke: and euery one seeketh to rest, hauing finished what they first tooke in hand. So I, now the houre-glasse of my life is run out, now I haue seene, spoken, and obtained what I requested so much, why should not I repose my selfe as well as others, and quietly goe downe into my graue in peace? I must sweet Ladie, I needs must die, and bid you hartily farewell. I must die, for griefe to want your presence, and loose your companie. But for a mortall disease, no remedie is to be found. Pardon me, if I speake more boldly then becommeth me, and thinke, that he that lieth on his death bed, hath libertie at that time to deliuer his minde at full. Aboue all, I here protest vnto you, and most humblie, (by the name of God, by your faire vertues, by your Princely descent, by your sacred honour, & by your rare beautie,) I earnestly entreate you to beleeue me, that I neuer desired any thing more, then the conseruation of your chastitie: & that I neuer so much wished mine owne good, as I haue alwaies sought to maintaine your renowme and glorie. Yet before I die, let me intreat you sweet Mistris, to heare a few verses, which the remembrance of you, and death to∣gether, endited in memoriall of your chast amitie: for he dieth not at all, who dying, seeth himselfe Imprinted in the mindes of his best friends, most sorrowfull for his de∣parture. And hauing so said, he called his sad Page vnto him, who, being commanded by him, tooke his Lute in his hand, and with an excellent sweet voyce, vnto a most dole∣full tune, sung these verses following, before his weeping Mistris. O Death, which vnto death my griefes doest consecrate, For thankes, my heart blood I will offer vp to thee: Yet dying, I account my selfe as miserable, That sooner this to thee I had not power to proffer. Alas, what gaine I longer life for to prolong? If I am frighted thus as well by day as night? He shipwracke makes not of his rest, that gently dies, And his daies ending, makes an ende of all his griefes. O God, what doth it boote me to adore my FAIRE, Since I vnworthie am to serue so rare a beautie? And yet an honour great tis for me to be loyall, My hurts their guerdons haue in my fidelitie, Then must I die I see, and tis the common course Of brauest spirits, death (gently) to endure, Better resolue to die, then alwaies liue in woe, The shipman toyles, till he attaines the wished port. A due faire beautie, which my soule hast rauished, A due, mine eyes shall nere more see thy brightnes, pure, I will entombe with this my sad disastred life, My heart, my teares, my coarse, in my most faithfull Loue. Ay me, I waile too much, A minde magnanimous Distils not watrie drops, but floods of goarie blood, And worser is his fault, who doth vnwilling die,
Then he that from this world doth part, with stomack braus, Courage then, thou my soute, leaue this sad sorrowes cell My bodie; and goerise with those that liue below, Thrice blessed hee that dieth, his Mistris will to please, Such ende to make, not death, but Glories vnto him, For Countrey, Parents, Frends, their liues let others spend, I will bestow mine, for my faire and chastest Friend. The Page hauing sung this wofull Dittie, vnto a passing mournfull note, wrought so much by his excellent cunning, as the soule of the Princesse was rauished with the same, so that not being able any longer to withhold her selfe from weeping, shee left her sicke Patient, in whose eares (as she was taking her leaue) she softly whispered these fewe, but yet sweete speeches. Courage true Seruant, and liue in hope, expecting from me all the helps that may be, to recouer your grieuous sicknes, which shall be such, yea, and that in such an ample manner, as I will endaunger mine owne life, to restore you to yours, and will not sticke to loose my selfe, so I may saue you. Saying so, she went her wayes, leauing Alfonso to muse on this matter, canaussing di∣uers conceits in his braine. By reason of these last words which she vttered, he knewe not well how to take them, nor how to vnderstand them, nor scarcely what to make of them. Yet in the meane time, he stayed to see what effects would follow vpon the same, and looked for some good Fortune to happen: Not vnlike vnto the criminall, who ex∣pecteth some fauour or friendship promised him by the Iudge. And now he beginneth some what to comfort himselfe, for that hee perceiued some pittie in the remorsefull eyes of his relenting Ladie, who being tormented with diuers passions, knewe not well what to say, what to doe, or what to resolue vpon. The death of her Friend went neere her, his loyall and sincere affection pleaded for some commisseration vnto her: Inso∣much, as the exceeding great paines & trauell he had taken in her behalfe, & the innu∣merable curtesies, & infinite kindnesses she had receiued at his hands, began to make a breach into her constant brest: so as at the last, doe what she could, she yeelded, and be∣came wholly his. On the other side, the feare and doubt, lest she should doe any thing which might be a scandall vnto her Honor, or a blemish vnto her inuincible chastitie, which she had so long, and with so great admiration kept inuiolable & vntainted, made her giue ouer, and retire from her first determination.A Similin. As wee see a floating vessell in the troubled Sea, tossed and tumbled with two contrarie windes, neither forward, nor backward, nor to passe one way, nor another; Euen so fared the mind of this delicate Virgin, who being ouercharged with many conceits and opinions, knew not on which to resolue. Yet in the ende, Loue got the vpper hand: For as a flame of fire, feazing vpon a drye peece of wood, couered with greene Iuie, glideth ouerth wart the same, and at the last, burueth into ashes, both the wood and the greene leaues together. Euen so Loue, entring at the first, by her eyes, descendeth downe lower, and in the end, runneth ouer all her bodie, which he boldeth and arresteth as his owne goods. Iustina then, hauing once more resolued what to doe, detemined with her selfe to marrie her kinde Hoast, but being risen from her bedde, a kind of bashfull shame began to breake this enterprise, which would neuer permit, that a modest Damosell, her owne selfe, should discouer her owne Loue, neither suffer that the proper tongue of the Prin∣cesse, should be the trompet of her owne shame. But LOVE, who would in no wise take the foyle, and was very readie in aduising her, how shee should dispatch this busi∣nes, which much troubled her, gaue her counsell to deliuer her minde in writing vnto her louing Seruant, when she should next goe to visite him, and so the shame should re∣maine within the paper, which is of too pale a colour to blush. Whervpon, as she was ta∣king pen in hand, she called to minde the place from whence she came, & the doubt lest the Letter comming to light, might be a discredit vnto her, which was the cause shee stood in a mummering (as it were) a long time before she began to write, & still as fast as she endited, she strait-waies crost it out againe with her pen. Loue thinking that bashful∣nes could not endite well, and bashfulnes thinking that Loues penning was as ill. Long stood they disputing about fit termes to serue the purpose, but in the end, the Princesse emboldened through LOVE, set downe her minde in these termes following.
The Princesse Letter to her Seruant. IF this manner of writing be of power to bring thee to life againe, then know, it is sufficient to take away mine from me: For in seeking to reuiue thee, I cause mine owme Honor to die. But alas, can I see thee still languish (thus) through mine occasion, and not participate with thee in thy miseries, in the selfe-same fashion? Ah would to God wee had exchaunged our Estates, for then would I presently desire to die as thou doest, & wish thee to liue as I do, and so should I not be forced to satisfie thy request, neither should mine Ho∣nor then complaine of mee, in that I haue lesse respect of that, then of the safegard of one man. The feare lest I should haue bene counted the murtherer of thy life, caused mee to write this Letter vnto thee. Neither had I done any thing at all in thy behalfe, but that I haue a most assured hope and confidence, that thou recouering (by my onely meanes, thy former life) wilt be a helpe and ayde vnto mee, to teach mee how to make away my selfe by death. What shall I say more vnto thee? thy recouerie is my death, and thy life mine ouerthrow and ruine. Yet had I rather perish, then thou shouldest miscarry any way. Liue then, and be well, except thou wilt kill her whom thou sayest thou louest with such res∣pect. Or if thou wilt needes die, yet (at the least) tearme not mee the destroyer of thy life, see∣ing I haue offered health vnto thee. I knowe not which I should most desire, eyther that thou liue, or that thou die. If thou liuest, I then must needes die. And if thou dyest, I may no longer liue. What good then shall I get, by letting thee haue thy life? (Onely this, onely) the glorie that I haue preserued thee from death, the obligation canceld, wherein I was indebted vnto thee, and the break-necke fall of that strong opinion thou hast, that thou dyest for mee. Liue then, I intreate thee, and when thou shalt be well, GOD I beseech him, if so it please him, open vnto vs some honest and iust meanes to vnite vs together, in that sacred band, which of two soules maketh but one. And this I doe promise thee. Fare you well. This Letter being written, there was a new Councell called, to consult whether it should be deliuered, or whether committed vnto the mercie of the fire. For in acciden∣ces of Loue, there is found strange contrarieties euery minute of an houre: as we see in a little while, diuers sorts of windes to arise in the skye. Yet in the ende, Loue still preuailed, and so much perswaded, that the Damosell her selfe resolued to goe and vi∣site the poore patient, and to deliuer the paper into his owne hands. No sooner was she entred the Chamber, but that she beganne to tremble like a leafe, when comming towards Alfonso, and curteously saluting him; Hee force and courage takes,A similie. fresh blood comes in his face, Nor findes he any paine, whilst shee is in that place. That done, she sits her downe by him, and although she came with set purpose, to let the letter fall downe vpon the bed (for the nonce) that he might take it vp; yet now, shee was so ashamed againe, as she kept it still in her pocket. But in the ende, after much dis∣quietnes in her minde, after many dicourses of this, or that, far off from the purpose, and after thousands of conceits, that ran in her head, the time being come to depart, as shee bad him farewell, she thrust it softly (not being seene of any) into the sicke mans hands. Who then esteemes himselfe most blessed in his glorie, More rich, then he had gainde a huge and great victorie. Neuertheles, as he that desireth to vnderstand some good newes from his familie, see∣ing the messenger before him, looking neither ioyfullie, nor sadly, knoweth not well what to gesse at the matter, nor whether he should thinke all well, or no; So this poore Louer, knewe not, whether hee had in his hand his pasport of life or death. O how the soules of Louers are troubled, when hope and feare, both at one time, combat within them together.
He doubteth that which he dareth not doubt, and feareth greatly to promise vnto himselfe, that which hee most of all desireth. Feare so terriblie assaulteth him, that it hindereth him oftentimes, in assuring himselfe of his feare, by reason of the appre∣hension it hath, to finde things contrarie vnto his desire. For yet it were better al∣wayes to continue in one, and the selfe-same Fortune, then to chaunge from good vn∣to bad. And commonly Louers imagine their businesse goeth worse and worse with them, and that it is not possible for the Heauens, to establish them and their procee∣dings in a better estate. In the meane while, after many fearefull doubts, and doubtfull feares, hee openeth a little peece of the paper, and then shutteth it againe, and then hee openeth the same the second time, that done, hee beginneth, first to read one line, then two, and there standing at a stay, dareth proceed no further.A comparison. Not vnlike vnto him that by little and little wadeth through a bad passage, beginning often to passe along, now retiring back, and then resoluing to goe through the same. But as in drinking, we find the taste of the wine, so he in reading, now a line, and then another, in the ende, was assured of all: reioycing not a little, to finde so manie blisfull hopes, to proceed from the reading of this short Letter. What should I say more? but that hee began to comfort himselfe, resoluing (once more to liue) daring to hope for many happie Fortunes to come, and chasing away all frightfull feares and doubts what∣soeuer. I will wonder no more now, if the faire Stratonice, healed the sonne of Seleucus, he promising to giue her vnto him for his wife. For our Knight,A Similie. only vpon the bare word and promise of his mistris, recouered his health againe, growing to be lustier and stron∣ger then euer he was before. No sooner came he abroad, but that he remembred to render condigne thanks vnto his faire Charge, for abasing her gratious selfe so lowe, as to daine to vouchsafe, so often to take the paines to visit him in his sicknes, through whose gentle pittie alone, he con∣fessed to hold his life. Meane space, Loue, like a cunning Soldier, (that faire and softly stealeth vnto the top of his enemies walls) by little and little had such interest in these two Louers, that within a while after, they were solemnely marryed together, with all the pomp and ceremonies requisite in such a matter, to the great contentment, and no little pleasure of them both. But alack, thus was the marriage of Paris and Helena. Who filde, with goarie blood, and flaming fire faire Troy, Whilst as a wofull prey, the Grecians them did stroy. Thus were they placed vpon the top of the turning wheele of vnconstant Fortune, yea, and so surely seated (as they thought) that it was impossible they could be throwne downe from thence: but they considered not, that euery thing being come vnto his last and vrmost perfection, doeth eyther alter or decay: because of the ruine, ouerthrow, losse, miserie, and corruption of old things, such as are nouell and new,A Sentence. take their Es∣sence and beginning, as of an olde Phoenix, is engendered a newe one: So as nothing can remaine perpetuall in this world, seeing the world it selfe may not alwayes last, but must one day be changed into another manner of forme then now it is. Besides, Fortune doth not alwayes make choyce of meane and base people, for small praise, and lesser glorie, should she haue to deale with such: she rather chusing the most mightiest, most happiest, and most richest persons, to the end her renowme may growe more famous, giuing such the ouerthrow, whose haughtie pride, and high prosperitie, seemed to threaten, euen the Heauens themselues. The terrible falles of diuers Emperours, Kings, and Princes, are sufficient testimo∣monies, that this is but too true; Of which, some haue bene throwne downe so lowe, from the toppe of her Wheele, as they haue neuer bene able to rise againe: which mis∣chaunce hath neuer happened vnto the poorer sort, who can neuer fall from high, be∣cause they are wretched, and are alwayes moulled alow.
But to returne where we left, three yeares (or there-abouts) did our two Louers liue in all happy contentments that might be, without any alteration at all; for euery one imagined Iustina to be perished in the Sea, in so much, as there was no more search, nor enquirie made after her, to know what became of her. But in the end, as (ill Fortune would haue it, there was a certaine Shippe cast by Tempest vpon the same place, where the Princesse before was driuen, in which were two Danes escaped from shipwracke, who seeing her to walke along the shore, (as was her vsuall custome) presently knewe her, and no sooner were they returned home vnto their Countrey, but forthwith they informed their Prince of the whole matter, who (as yet) tooke it very heauily, and sore languished for the losse of the Princesse. No sooner was hee acquainted with this newes, but as one ioyfull aboue measure, he resolued to haue her againe (although with the losse of his dearest blood) imagining in his conceit, that shee was already his. For Hellen, so his force did Menelaus trie, Resolu'de herfor to haue, or else with griefe to die. Meane space, it happened that our Knight Alfonso was forced to make a voyage vnto the Court of his King, called Ramire. I will leaue to your iudgement to gesse, how loth hee was to depart from her, from whom he could hardly be absent, without aban∣doning his owne life. But his Honor forced him, (although sore against his will) to make necessitie a vertue, and to shewe himselfe amongst the assemblie of diuers braue and valorous Knightes, who all followed immortall Honor, in quest. And now ha∣uing prouided euery thing fit for his iourney, kissing his faire wife, he taketh his leaue, whilst with teares in his eyes, he promised to returne as speedily as might be. But alack,A Sentence. it is great folly for a man to giue his word or promise to perform any thing, seeing he is a seruant vnto the will of the Heauens, who may dispose of him as they best please. Forwhat assurance can one build vpon the faith of a vassaile, who wholly depen∣deth vpon the commandement of his Lord, and can doe nothing at all of himselfe? No more can men, (who are the slaues of Fortune, the pastime of the Heauens, and subiects vnto mortall miseries) promise of themselues, they not knowing what the De∣stinies will decree shall fall vpon them. But now Alfonso being come vnto the Court, his friendes entertained him with all Courtly compliments that might be, as his vertues well deserued the same, each No∣ble-man saluteth him most kindely, thinking the Court not to be a little honored with the presence of so braue and valorous a Caualier. Whilst he thus stayed, attending the pleasure of his King, Beholde there arriueth an Embassador from the Prince of Denmarke, certifying the King of Spaine, that his Lords wife was held as prisoner, in a certaine part of his Realme, desiring his Maiestie, to command her to be rendered vnto him: otherwise, not to thinke ill of him, if hee should doe his best endeuour for to recouer her againe, by force of Armes. Alfonso being present at this Embassage, (for it was all the Countrey ouer, how hee came by his wife) and therefore it was verily supposed, that shee was the same woman which the Prince demaunded, (presently replyed, saying) that true it was; that not long since he found a Ladie halfe dead, which the waues of the Seas (after shee had suf∣fered shipwrack) had driuen vpon the shore, where hee inhabited, and that afterward he married her with her owne consent and free will, she hauing before assured him, yea, and which is more, taking her oath vpon the holy Euangelists, that she neuer betrothed, nor promised herselfe vnto any other man liuing but himselfe: Affirming, that as the no∣ble Gentlewoman, was his true and lawfull Spouse, so he was resolued to defend and keepe her, against all such as should goe about to take her from him by force: Vowing to be their death, and vtter ouerthrow, as most wicked enemies vnto the maiestie of sa∣cred wedlocke. The King hearing Alfonsoes answer, and iudging his reasons to be both iust and tol∣lerable, returned back the Embassador, with the foresaid speeches, who deliuered them vnto his Prince, assoone as he came home.
If the baser sort of people, hardly support or beare any ruiurie, and seeke not to ha∣zard their liues to be reuenged for the same: Then I referre it to your owne censures,A Similie. if this Prince being young in yeares, of a hot mettall by nature, valiant & hardie of spirit, and withall, wonderfully amorous of the Ladie; could endure patiently, and pocket vp the Braua do of a simple Gentleman, seeing no man whatsoeuer, can receiue a greater in∣iurie than that which is offered him as touching his wife, as well for the loue he beareth her, which oftētimes engēdreth iealousie: as also for the great desire he hath to encrease his stocke and familie. Which was the cause that this youthfull Lord, went about most rashly and vnaduisedly to set vpon the Spanish King, to begin most foolishly to pro∣claime warre against him, who quickly would haue ouerrunne all his countrie, had not the Nobilitie of Denmarke crossed the same: For they very wisely, iudging that they were not able to incounter well so great an enemie, and that their slender shoulders, were too weake to support so great a burthen, would by no meanes yeeld vnto his collericke and hastie motion, who although he saw himselfe to be forsaken of his owne subiects, yet for all that, would he not giue ouer his first enterprise: determining with himselfe, to re∣couer his Mistris againe, or else to loose his life. Wherupon he sent another Embassador vnto the King, to demaund license of him (according vnto the auncient law of Armes) that he might combat with him, who detained his spouse so wrongfully from him, to the ende the fortune of warre might determine and set downe which of them twaine should enioy her. The King hearing this motiō, entreated Alfonso to condiscend therevnto: who know∣ing that with his credit he could not refuse it, as willingly accepted thereof, as the other earnestly did challenge him: which the rather he did, because he might hereafter qui∣etly enioy his deare wife, without any more quarrells. The Denmarke Prince, hauing in∣telligence that the combat was graunted, determined with himselfe, to trie the vtmost of his fortune, although much against the mindes of all his Barrons, and Noblemen. But who can shut vp and inclose vertue, force the waues of the Sea to stand still,A Sentence. or bri∣dle the stately course of the Sunne? Euen so, what counsaile, perswasion, or wisedome, are able to withhold loue, who being turbulent and full of rage, resembleth the furi∣ous mad man, that dasheth his owne braines against the stonie wall. Thus the Prince possessed with the spirit of loue, taketh in hand the comb at against the aduise of all his Nobles, and hauing prouided euery thing fit for that purpose, arri∣ueth at the Court of the Spanish King, with a gallant troupe attending on him, where he was receiued according vnto his greatnes, and as his worthines well deserued. Great was the desire that euery one had, to see this Princely Dane, who was famous for his chiual∣rie, he being come so farre to trie the combat with his enemie, to reuenge him of the in∣iurie, which (as he supposed) was done vnto him. Hauing a day of hearing appoynted him by the King, he forthwith craued audience, declaring openly vnto him, the cause of his comming, reaccounting the equitie of his cause, pleading hardly for his right, and in conclusion, demaunded to haue Iustice. On the other side, Alphonso discoursing at large in his owne defence, sheweth plainly, what interest he hath in the Ladie, protesting (by the permission of his Soueraigne) to maintaine this quarrell against all men liuing, with the perill of his life. At the last (these two Caualiers) not agreeing) the combat is graunted vnto them, but yet with this cōdition, that the Ladie shall be the prize of the Conquerour: and that the conquered, shall neuer after make claime vnto her. The day is appoynted, the field cho∣sen, their armour prouided, and Iudges substituted onely for this purpose. The King hauing caused many scaffolds to be erected, as well for himselfe, as for his owne Nobles, & diuers other honourable strangers, great was the concourse of people that were gathered together, to see the euent and issue of this daungerous battell. And now the time being come, the two Knights presented themselues before the Iudges, who gaue them their oath, vpon the holy Bible, that they entered into this combat vp∣on a iust cause: that done, they vewed their armour and weapons, and lastly, conducted them vnto the listes; making proclamation, that vpon paine of life, no person whatso∣euer, should as much as once presume, either by shew, or signe, looke or countenance, word or deed, to fauour either the the one, or the other; but to let their valour & fortune
trie who shall be conquerour.A Compari∣son. As two young Bucks, burning in loue of a faire Doe, take delight to trie their strength before her, and being both furious, pierce through their bodies and heads, with their sharpe and rough hornes. Euen so, these two gallant Cham∣pions, longing to encounter, and either of them desirous to enioy that pretious prize, which armeth the one against the other, being in place where they may trie the vtmost of their force, most furiously discharge one against the other, and as two terrible Thun∣der-claps, meeting together in a cloud, breake at the cracke, & fall both downe vpon the earth; So these two Knights, at the first shecke and meeting, tumble both downe vpon the ground, but their launces being broken, they draw forth their swords, beginning to charge themselues a fresh. As did Achilles once, and Hector valiant stout, When fore the walles of stately Troy, they fought it out. The Dane, animated more with furie, then with force, laid on load without ceasing, flinging forth his fire so furiously, as if his strength had not failed more then his cou∣rage,A Similie. Alphonso had bene vanquisht, but a great fire of strawe, is quickly extinguished. In like manner, the blowes that despite and rage giueth, are assoone ended. Meane-while, our Spaniard fought coldly, but yet with great aduisement, neuer striking, but to the purpose, & so still kept himselfe in breath with great aduantage. The Prince redoubling his strokes, supposing his foe was growen feeble, both in force & courage, laid on loade, hurting him vpon the left arme. This wound, from which the blood issued apace, the re∣membrance of her who was the cause of this warre, the presence of the King, and the flower of Chiualrie of all his countrie, did stirre vp the Spaniard so much, as now he would combat no more soberly and with discretion, but as a desperate Souldiour against his deadly enemie, letting driue at him so lustily, with such quicknes, and such dexteri∣tie, as the Dane found he was not a little deceiued in him. But as he was chasing of him thus, by chaunce Alphonsoes sword fell out of his hand, he hauing nothing now but his dagger to defend himselfe withall, which was the reason euery one thought as then, that he was but a dead man, his enemie promising vnto himselfe the victorie, the desire of which made him pursue the Spaniard hotly, who knew not which way to furnish himselfe of a Target, nor how to warrantise his honour, and his life, but onely by running in vpon the Dane, and so by maine force, to get him downe; which deuise of his, the other fearing, looked more warily vnto himselfe, lest he should get within him, whilst in the meane time, he gaue him many a sore wound, which he could not well escape, because he wanted his weapon. In the ende, such was the good fortune of the Spaniard, that the Dane thinking to runne full but at him with all his force, (which the other auoyded by mouing his body from that place lightly) his sword also slipt out of his hand, so as they were now weapond alike: when comming to handie gripes, and to grappell together, Alphonso proued to be the stronger of the twaine, flin∣ging his enemie downe, and giuing him so terrible a knocke withall, as both speech and senses failed him. That done, he vnbuckled his head-peece, and setting his poni∣ard to his bare throat, willeth him henceforward to renounce all such claime as he be∣fore had laid vnto his Ladie and wife, and to acknowledge himselfe to be vanquisht, or else he should die presently. But the Prince, choosing rather death, than shame and vtter destruction, then the depriuation of his Mistris, disdained to answere him, looking still when the other would stabbe him quite through: which neuerthelesse (as a right Noble minde) he would not, but leauing the Dane wallowing in his owne blood, and sore bruised with his fall, he commeth vnto the Iudges, demaunding of them, if he had done sufficient to be coun∣ted the vanguisher, and to haue obtained the glory of the victorie or no. Who much commending him for his clemencie, in that he had so cutreously pardoned his aduersa∣rie, told him, he had performed his duetie euery way: that done, he was conducted vnto the place where the King sat, who highly praised him for his valour, and greatly ho∣nouring him for his vertue, gaue him leaue to depart his Royall presence. From thence he rode vnto the Court, accōpanied with thousands of braue Knights, where with great
ioy, the faire Ladies as the custome was, disarmed him, whilst the Chirurgians prouided for the dressing of his wounds: that done, he was had vnto his lodging, keeping his bed, vntill such time as he recouered: whilst in the meane space, he was euery day visited by all the Barrons and great Lords of the Realme, who did congratulate with him, for so fa∣mous a victorie. Not long after, the Danish Prince was carried out of the field sore wounded, and wel nigh dead for griefe and shame; cursing his bad fortune, that he had not bene kild out right: who although he was highly beholding vnto Alphonso for his life, yet did he most tratierously conspire in his minde to murther him one way or other, suffering himselfe rather to be transported with base reuenge, then with sage reason, or with honestie of the cause. So Paris (dastard-like) surp isde with feruile feare, Sware stout Achilles death, to whom he hate did beare. But the gallant Spaniard, that ment nothing but well, neuer suspected any such trea∣cherie, but rather that he had surely bound the Prince his enemie vnto him in good will, seeing he had shewed him so great a kindnes as to gratifie him with, his life.A Sentence. For so the right valiant man indeed, iudgeth by his selfe, that others are valiant like vnto him: and he that is honest, thinketh other men to beare as honest a minde as himselfe doth. But all creatures, are not framed of one kind of mettall, or condition, their passions and desires in louing, being contrarie and diuers, Nature greatly delighting, and making proofe of her mightines and power, by this diuersitie of humours. Alphonso being recouered of his late wounds, and very much longing to see his faire wife, determined to take his iourney homewards, of which his minde, the malicious Dane hauing an inckling, he taketh his leaue of the King in most dutifull manner, ma∣king a shew as if he would take his iourney towards Denmarke, riding a day or two on∣wards on his way, and then turneth backe, poasting towards Alphonsos Castle, where he and his companie being disguised, lay in waite for the Spaniard, not daring for his life to set vpon him nigh the Kings Court, lest his villanre should be descried, and he well pu∣nished for the same. About some sixe daies after he was gone, Alphonso leaueth the Court, highly com∣mended and much praised of euery one, little suspecting any treason, with a small traine following him, when being now within two leagues of his Castle, behold the vngrate∣full Dane, and his attendants, to come out of a little wood, well armed at all points, and to rush sodēly vpon Alphonso, who being of an excellēt spirit & courage, carried himselfe so brauely, as before he caught his deaths wound, the Prince was turned off from his horse starke dead, vpon the ground, by him, who being the first that set vpon him. But in the ende, What can the valiant Hercules, gainst oremuch force preuaile? Couragious mindes will sooner die, then yeeld themselues, or quaile. So our worthie Spaniard, had rather be killed manfully, then saue his life, by base and ignoble flying away. But after he had fought a long time, hauing giuen vnto many their death wounds, and receiuing many himselfe, his enemies still hemming him in round about, & setting vpō him, with a fresh assault; at the last, he falleth downe dead from his horse: which the villaines perceiuing, and doubting lest they should be followed by the countrie, they tooke vp the dead course of their Prince in hast, lamenting this hard ad∣uenture, and setting spurres to their horse, away they flew as fast as the winde, being ne∣uer heard of after. Behold here one of Loues fests, of a contrarie fashion vnto other bankets. For his first dishes, presented at the table, are pleasant, sweet, and delightsome; but his last course is bitter, cruell, wofull, bloodie, and full of murther. His chiefest companion is quarrel∣ling Mars, neither doth he euer march, without hauing with him, either Rage, Furie, or Follie. Meane space, some of Alphonsos men, who as crauens, retired apart when the
skirmish was at the hottest, seeing their enemies fled, came backe againe, where all the broile had bin, longing to know how their Maister had sped, whom they found, with a thousand wounds well nigh bleeding through euery part of his bodie, and lying a∣mongst the thickest of his enemies, which were slaine by his owne hand; whereat they making most pittious mone, began to search, if there were yet any one sparke of life in in him or no; At the last, they hauing done their best indeuour to recouer him, he began to come a little vnto himselfe againe, when scarce being able to open his eyes, dimd and damd vp with death, his soule readie to flit from hence vnto a better world, with a hol∣low voice, he thratled forth these few words. My dearest friends, let me intreat you to shew me this fauour, it being the last which I will euer hope or looke for at your hands, to conuey this my martyred body vnto my faithfull spouse, to the ende I may be so happie, as once to see her, and to bid her farewell. More would I say, but I am so faint I cannot. His sorrowfull seruants yerning for very griefe, and dissoluing themselues into salt teares, cursing now (though too late, their cowardly running away) carried his dying carkasse faire and softly towards his house. To Cleopatra so, Marke Anthònies dead coarse Was brought, which she drew vp to her with wofull force. O what a spectacle, what a tragicke present, and what a bitter encounter was this, for miserable Iustina to meete withall, who not long before, had heard how happily, and how valiantly, her kind husband had conquered his enemie in the sight of all Spaine, which good newes had filled all her spirits, with an exceeding kind of pleasing ioy and comfort. But alas, what a change and alteration was this from the first matter? Ah how much more is that misfortune liuely, & toucheth vs to the quicke, which when we least thinke of it, surprizeth vs, altogether vnexpected (we passing our time in iollitie and pleasure) then such as we are prouided for when it commeth, it being (long) since we looked for the same, and therefore the better prepared to beare the burthen thereof. Meane time, the poore Ladie must needs tast this bitter potion, & beare as well as shee can, this terrible clap of dismall thunder. No sooner had she a sight of this dying coarse, which she thought to be starke dead, But that she tooke on as one distraught and quite out of their wits. O faire haire (before daintily curled) how cruelly were you then torne? But farre fairer face, how wert thou bescratched? and thou beautious brest, how wert thou be bloodied? So great was her anquish, as she fell downe in a sowne, vpon that bodie whom she so dearely loued, embracing the same most tenderly, it being that, which she more accounted of then of any thing else in the world. Thrise happie had she bin, and not a little beholding vnto death, if (at that houre) he had bereft her of life: but her fortune was not so good, for she was compelled to liue the longer, because her paine should be the greater. And now she being come vnto her selfe againe, although it was a woful mirrour to behold his pale & bloodlesse face, & his man∣gled flesh all to be sprinkled & washed in his owne gore; yet did she not sticke to kisse his wan and cold lips, a thousand times and more, whilst her teares serued her in steed of water to make cleane his wounds, to wash away the blood, and to solemnize his drerie Funerall with the same. Carelesse of her health, she lay long time vpon the wet ground, whilst she held the coarse as pittifully in her lap, as the kind nurse doth her little Infant in her armes; nei∣ther did she remoue her sweet mouth from his, but kept it still close thereon, desirous to die as he had done. Out alas, alas (cried she) where am I? who am I? & what do I see? is it pos∣sible that I should yet breath, hauing lost the onely life of my soule? And you mine eyes, are you so cruell vnto my health, that you will abide to behold that which will force you to be more miserable? and yet mine eyes, my wofull eyes, it is no shame to behold your best benefactor: looke then, on him your fill, although pittilesse death hath closed vp his sight with an eternall sleepe. But thou art dead for me, (my deare husband) for my cause hast thou lost thy life, and for no other. O wretched iourney, and most vnhappie that euer thou tookest in hand: yet was it not death that slew thee. No, no, death durst
But it was I, and euen I, t'was I, and none but I, and I alone, whome thou diddest thinke to be thy louing wife. Ah sweete, sweet Husband, shall I be guiltie of this fault, by murthering of my selfe, which I haue committed against thee? No, no, for my death cannot counteruaile thine. Shall it be said, that I doe liue af∣ter thee, and suruiue him who was the onely nourisher of my dolorous life? Can I abide to be one minute of an houre from thee, who hast so much alwayes desired the companie of haplesse Iustina? Ah mine eyes, mine eyes, as much as you shewed your selues cheerfull, to delight the heart of my Husband in your Loues: so much, or more, shew your selues full of salt teares, to lament his disaster. But teares are the common offerings of euery woman, at their husbands buryalls,A Sentence. and are too base oblations for so worthie and solemne an exequies. Thy friendship deserueth better then so: And more am I obliged vnto thee, then to offer such base trifles. Not my blubbering teares, but my heart blood is due vnto thee. For why should it not be thine, when my verie soule is at thy seruice? Ah cruell Honor, why hast thou not rendered mee againe mine Alfonso, in the selfe∣same manner, as thou tookest him from mee to doe thee seruice? And how badly hast thou requited the paines hee hath taken, in seeking to preserue thee fafe and sound? Who euer would haue thought I should haue seene so horrible a sight as I see, before I had dyed? and who would haue imagined, but that my praiers which I made continu∣allie vnto God, to take me out of the world before my sweet Husband, should not haue obtained grace from Heauen? But come the worst that can come, there shall not be much difference of time be∣tweene our deaths, for (so) quickly will we follow one another, that if one houre can∣not cut vs off both together, yet (at least) one day shall dispatch and make vs away. But in the meane space, iustly maiest thou complaine of me (my deare Knight) in ano∣ther world: for that I haue bene the murtherer of thy life. But I beseech thee, complaine not of that, neither of her, who thinketh the time but miserable, in which she liueth exiled and banished from thee. Woe is mee, I haue killed, I haue slaine and murthered that which I loued most vpon the earth: And vnto him, which (I know and acknowledge) I was most beholding. But is this possible? Alack, alack, it is but too true. Blacke and vnluckie was our marriage, not vnlike vnto that of Paris and Hellena: the conclusion whereof, was bloo∣die woe, and sorrowfull death. Ah my tongue, canst thou yet talke? and thou my heart, canst thou still breathe? and yee mine eyes, are you not yet blinde? Alas, I liue not, for the least anguish that I endure, is a greater hell then death vnto me. And thou partiall death, who art not ignorant that my Husband and I were but one onely person, why killing him, hast thou not done the like vnto me? Or, if thou then hadst forgotten the same, why doest not thou (now) better remember thy selfe? Come then (most welcome death) come I pray, and permit not her to liue, that so much desi∣reth to attend on thee. And yet before I depart, where shall I find eyes sufficient to weepe, and lamentings, bitter enough, to be conformable vnto the sorrowes of my soule? Oh that this my humor, changing it selfe wholly into teares, and drowning me there∣with in it, might be so forth ate, to drowne therewith all my torments also. And alack, what intollerable pangs doe I suffer? can any sauadge body endure the same, and yet not part hence? And can mine eyes view my Spouse giue vp his ghost, and not seale vp their liddes, with an euerlasting slumber? Louing and louely bedfellow, as heretofore our affections were loyall, true, and chast, so as loyall, sweet, and chast, shall our entombings be together. Sweet Husband, as long as thou liuedst, thou neuer wouldest depriue me of thy kinde and friendly embracings: Ah then, I desire thee, let me not be defrauded of thy death. For I am not worthie to be called thy wife, if I doe not as well participate of thy bad fortunes, as of thy good, and take a say of thy sowre, as well as I haue done of thy sweet: If ioy could neuer diuide our foules, why should they then be vntyed by death? And as I heeretofore haue slept with thee in the selfe-same bed (as our sacred marriage appointed vs) so I beseech thee,
denie mee not to lye with thee, in the selfe-same Tombe that thou doest. Whlist we were liuing, we were perfitly vnited together, being dead, wee will be as kindly ioyned one vnto another. As well shalt thou be my husband now thou art dead, as when thou wert aliue, nei∣ther shall the Destinies themselues hinder me from following thee still, to assist and helpe thee, according vnto my bounden dutie. But now alas, before I come vnto thee, how shall I pay the last remainders of my Loue which I owe thee? By what testimony shall I render sufficient proofe of mine ardent affection towards thee? and what perfect signes shall I shewe of my true dolour, as thou too too well deseruest? In times past,An Example. those women that loued their husbands best, vsed to sacrifice them∣selues vnto the fire, burning their bodies, because they would die with them. And shall I be lesse dutifull then those? And what, cannot I? for my Loue is more perfect then theirs was. But yet before I die, let me kisse those eyes, which (liuing) rauished my libertie: those eyes which were of late the cheerfull Sun of my soule: those eyes which once nourished my sadde and dulled spirits. So let me touch those sugred lips, whose liuely breath was sometimes the chiefe comfort of my minde, and a precious balme to my griefe: And thou faire countenance, wherein sometimes lay all my hopes, whose louely presence entertained my good Fortune; Neuer shall I be satisfied enough in kissing of thee: nei∣ther can my mortall desires be satisfied as they wish. Ay me; was I borne to murther mine owne life? and was I so vnluckie in my birth, that I could not dye, without the losse of that which I helde as deare as mine inward soule? And thou my soule, how hard is thy trouble? how heauie thy languishing? and how wretched thy estate, whilst that of mine Espouse liueth glorious by me heerein? I can no longer talke, and too long haue I prolonged my life, and it may seeme my griefe is the lesse, in that I haue had such libertie of speech. But how? The Swan singeth sweetly at the houre of her death,An example. then let none wonder though I waile and lament so much, mine ende being so nigh. Dispatch then, miserable Iusti∣na, and performe the last vowes, which are due vnto thy Alphonso, to the ende thou maist hasten the more to follow him. And therewithall she so often kissed and rekissed him, as his Ghost for a while once returned againe into his bodie, whilst hauing heard what pitious mone shee made for him, he striueth euen in the middest of his death pangs, to open his closed eyes, and pale mouth, a little to looke (once more) vpon her, and to vtter these fewe words vn∣to her. Ah my deare soule, and deerer then my soule, if it were possible. Why afflicting thy selfe thus, doest thou adde more miserie vnto my paine? If euer I haue merited anie thing at thy handes, then I coniure thee, by that most faithfull amitie I haue borne thee whilest I liued, forbeare to lament or grieue any more. And suffer I pray poore Alphonso to die quietly, who accounteth himselfe most for∣tunate, in that he seeth, he dieth in thy good grace and fauour. Most fortunare doeth he die, hauing bene brought to his ende by base treason, and not through braue valour, hauing before reuenged himselfe of thy mortall enemie, my deere and louely Ladie. Now if I shall finde that thou seemest to enuie at my glorie, shall I not then haue reason to complaine of thee? to accuse thy friendship, to thinke hardlie of thy pro∣mise, and lastly, to condemne thy most loyall Loue? Alas Iustina, wilt thou make mee so miserable, as I shall heare my selfe to be the cause of thy death, now I am dying? Ah doe not that iniurie or wrong vnto him, who hath loued thee dearer then the apples of his owne eyes. How deerely, and at what a high price doest thou sell to mee this last pleasure which I finde in dying before thy presence? Diddest thou thinke Iustina, when thou marriedst mee, that thou hadst wedded some God or other, that was immortall?
(Deare heart) Death is common and naturall to all men, without sparing of any:A Sentence. we must all die, at one time or another: and if my dayes were shortned sooner then thou wishest, what remedie canst thou finde against the will of the Heauens? Then content thy selfe with my death, without making me die againe, through the vnpleasant report of thy ouerthrow. Liue then, liue long and happily, to the end I may die the more pleasingly. And here I most earnestly pray, desire, and adiure thee, by our former mutuall loue, by all our chast pleasures, by our sacred band of wedlock, and by the selfe-same affection which maketh thee so heauie and ioylesse for mine occasion, seeke not to offer any violence vnto thy faire selfe, after I am dead. Speake (my sweet Charge) wilt thou giue me thy word, as thou hast held me deare, to hold this promise with me? Ay mee, I see thou disdainest to answere me, as vnwilling to yeelde vnto this my last request. Oh most disconsolate, and comfortles my death. And wilt thou then (mine onely ioy) refuse to graunt me this my last boone, which I so earnestly begge of you? Thou that for my sake art willing to leaue this world, and who of late didst please to offer it vnto me to saue my life; Be not so vnkinde now, nor offer me this iniurie, to re∣fuse me in this point, otherwise, I protest, I will curse my byrth, my cruell Fortune, and the froward Heauens themselues. Speake then (sweet Spouse) for till then I forbid thee, to touch my dying face and lippes. Ah speake yet at length, and I beseech thee, be content with the hellish paines which I endure to leese thy companie, without aggreuating any more, my more then endlesse torments. Ah cruell Husband, replyed the pensiue Princesse, what offence haue I done thee? what iniurie haue I committed against thee? and how haue I wronged the bands of our sacred marriage, that thou shouldest forbid me thy presence? Where is now the time, in which thou hast so much desired to haue me about thee? Where are those wonder∣full caresses, those sweet embraces, and those affectionate kindnesses vsed vnto mee of late, that thou shouldest now, thus reiect, condemne, and disdaine me? If I am vnwor∣thy of thee, then why diddest thou accept of me as thy companion and friend? And if I haue not merited to follow thee, then why hast thou ioyned my soule so strictly vnto thine? Thinkest thou I would be thine liuing, and would not be the same vnto thee after thou wert dead? My deare Lord, remember, that since I first was wedded vnto thee, I haue alwayes ful∣filled thy commandement, and that I serued and obeyed thee, and thy will in all things. In leiu of which perfect obedience, graunt mee (once) what I shall desire of thee. But if thou wilt not, not onely be content to leaue mee a most wretched Creature after thy departure, but also to make me more miserable, wilt not permit me to follow thee, then to render a new proofe of my great affection towards thee, for the great good will I haue alwayes had to be dutifull vnto thee, and to satisfie thy dying Spirit at this houre; Behold I here vow, not to lay any violent hands vpon my person, but to attend with pa∣tience, vntill it shall please the Destinies to call mee vnto thee from hence. Then my kinde Loue, answered the Knight, let me embrace thee once againe cheerfully: and let me kisse thee once more, since thou art so pleasing vnto me. O how much doe I acknowledge my selfe beholding vnto thee? how blessed doest thou make my death, and how willingly doe I depart from out this world? And see∣ing thou hast made me this faithfull promise, I most humblie beseech thee, to haue al∣wayes in remembrance poore Alfonso, thy loyall Husband. Heauens graunt, that if thou hast a minde to take a second choyce, that thou mayest happen vpon such a one, as may loue thee, no worse then I haue done. I feele my speech beginneth to faile me, and death knocketh at my hearts doore, to enter in. Fare∣well, my faire, sweete, louing, kinde, chaste, and loyall wife. Adieu my heart and life, close vp these mine eyes, and this my mouth, which once was thine: and cause my bodie to be carryed vnto his last home, whilest I re∣ceiue for vowes, thy plaintes: thy teares, for oblations, and thy Faith, for friend∣lie assurance.
That little land and wealth I haue, I wholly bequeath vnto thee: I will that all my goods whatsoeuer, be thine, although I doubt not, but that thy vertues are able to pur∣chase thee more great and precious riches. Onely bestow a little peece of ground vp∣on his bodie, who whilest he liued, was vnworthy to enioy so gratious a Princesse as thy worthie selfe. Farewell my good Friends, and faithfull Seruants, whom I desire and commaund, to honour and make account of my deere Ladie and wife, as you would of mine owne selfe, if I were liuing: whom I know will not be vnmindfull of you, for your good seruices done vnto mee. And cease you your womanish teares, for not with effeminate teares, but with shrill Trumpets, and warlike Drummes, the coarses of braue Souldiers are vsed to be conducted vnto their graues. Once more farewell my sweete Princesse. Remember what thou hast promised vnto mee, and LORD receiue my soule into thy heauenlie King. Alas, this word Kingdome, hee could not throughly pronounce. Death with one stroke, cutting off his voyce and his life, both together at once. But why hold I you so long with this Tragicall discourse? or what should I report vnto you the vnspeake∣able sorrowes of dispairing Iustina, when shee saw her noble husband giue vp the last gaspe in her armes? I will now be briefe. After the Princesse found Alfonso dead, she remembred her pligh∣ted vowe vnto him, and therefore sought neither venim, sword, nor ame other extremi∣tie to ende her dayes; but hauing sweetely embalmed his carkasse, and placing it in a monument of Christall, because she might the better behold it; she neuer departed from the same, vntill that after a certaine time, what with hunger, sorrow & griefe, she finished her wearie and loathed life. Her fasting and weeping, had so chaunged her, as her nee∣rest seruants and acquaintance scarce knew her. Now had shee (no more) that sweete face, for the beautie of which, so many Prin∣ces had so often combatted and fought, nor were her eyes such, as had rauished so ma∣nie soules, neither was her haire, that passing golden haire, whose tresses had serued for nets, to catch and intrap the Courtliest and greatest hearts that liued: And to be briefe, she was no more that faire and louely Iustina: who indeed had no need of such comely fauour, when her onely desire was to die. Her face and cheekes were now become pale and yeallow, her eyes darke, and sunke deepe into her head, her haire fowle, vnkempt, and almost all torne off, her breasts drie, and leane, her armes shrunke and brawnfallen, her handes without flesh, or whitenesse, and finally, shee resembled the very portraiture of a Ghost, or rather of Death it selfe. In this miserie did shee liue some fewe moneths, when at the last, perceiuing the date of her life to be expired, she came vnto the Tombe, where taking the embalmed carkasse vp, and embracing it in her armes, she vsed these pittifull speeches vnto it, as followeth. O sole remainder of all my good Fortunes, O onely chiefe treasure of all my goods, O sole pawne, furuiuing of my true Loue, the onely comfort I haue in these my langui∣shing griefes, and the goodly bodie, which sometimes reuiued the faire soule inhabi∣ting therein, which now liueth in eternall glorie for euer. To thee I appeale, as the onely thing which I most loue, honor, and praise, pray∣ing thee to assist me at mine ende, and to beare witnesse with me, that I haue kept pro∣mise most faithfullie. As thou (when thou diddest die) wert willing that I should not malice or annoy thee at thy death; So let not mine, (I pray thee) be any way displea∣sing vnto thee. All whatsoeuer thou diddest craue, did I yeeld and accord vnto: then blame me not, if hauing performed what I protested, I come vnto the Heauens to finde thee. In thy life time I haue liued, for feare to displease, but now thou liuest no longer (faire and beautifull Coarse) and that I haue taken order for thy buryall, what thinkest thou should keepe me heere any longer? It is reasonable I should die, seeing I can now no longer liue, and that I goe to make a search for thee (most chast soule) in what place soeuer thou art.
Die then (sorrowfull Iustina) and (leauing of to lament,) change these thy reares, thy miseries, and cares, into this eternall repose, where resteth thy husband quietly. I haue liued but too too long, and my miserable life, hath bin too irkesome vnto me. It is (now) more then high time, to make an ende thereof (and making an ende of my selfe) to re∣moue my selfe vnto him, who whilst he liued, had commaund ouer my soule. Thrise blessed Instina, to be quit and rid of these vnspeakable torments, to liue in euerlasting quietnes, which is the onely hope of the miserable. Let vs goe then, let vs goe, & I hum∣bly beseech that great God (who as a iust Iudge of the innocencie of our hearts, know∣eth the secrets of our thoughts) to open that sacred gate vnto me, which he hath pro∣mised vnto his faithfull children. This said, she kissed the dead coarse of her husband againe, giuing charge vnto her Gentlewoman, to enterre and burie her body hard by his side: that done, she layeth her selfe along by the same, which she still embraceth: and hauing dressed her head, and apparelled her selfe for the same purpose, she rendied vp her spirit: A spirit, right meritorious, and worthie of eternall glorie. Her body according vnto her last will, was buried in the selfe same sepulcre which she had caused to be made for her husband before. Herewith Coribant held his peace, being hindred to speake any more, by reason of his teares, teares which berest the others of their voyces, who without being able to dis∣course any more one with another, for that time departed, euery one to their senerall homes, so to passe away the darke and gloomie night. As they were walking faire and softly onwardsvpon their way, Arcas heard one sing this song following. Loue fare thouwell, liue will I now, Quiet amongst, the green-wood bow. Ill betide him that loue seekes, He shall liue, but with leane cheekes: He that fondly falles in Ioue, A slaue (still) to griefe shall prooue. Loue fare thou well, liue will I now, Quiet amongst the greene-wood bow. What an Asse, and foole is hee, That may serue, and will goe free: In worlds not a wench so faire, But I for my life more care. Loue fare thou well, liue will I now, Quiet amongst the &c. I like not these Dames so smooth, As would haue men court and lous, For as constant I them finde, As the Sea is, or the winde. Loue fare thou well, liue &c. Once I lou'd one that was kinde, But she did what pleasde her minde: Better tis nere to be borne, Then liue, as anothers scorne. Loue fare thou well, liue well, &c. Then Loue, thee I doe defie, I hate thy bad dealing I, He is a foole that liues in paine, A toy so small for to gaine. Loue fare thou well, liue will I now, Quiet amongst the greene-woodbow. After the Shepheard had made an ende of this merrie Sonnet, another came vnto them, demaunding if some of the companie could expound his Riddle, which he propo∣sed in this manner.
Nor life, nor vertue haue I, lest I die, I borrow of my buried trunke chiefe strength, Though I am dead, ore time yet triumph I, Ore time, that cuerie thing consumes at length, Whats dead, disdained is, yet all affoord Me honour, and their chiefe preseruers name, All men may rightly call me their best Lord, Since they (Sans me) the world cannot maintaine, Yet though so much good doth from me proceed, These thanklesse worldlings doe not sticke at all To cut me off in Summer with great speed, And beate me into little powder small, Yet had I rather cruelly thus perish, Then liue a longer space, for many time The season doth but badly oft me chearish, Offering great hurt and wrong to vertue mine. This Riddle was interpreted to be corne, which being sowne in the earth, and see∣ming dead, casteth forth a greene blade, and in time groweth to be ripe, in despite of all stormes and foule weather whatsoeuer; It nourisheth mankind, and therefore is honou∣red of them as a father, not forbearing for all that, to reape him in Haruest, to thresh and grinde him, and so to make flower thereof, which he had rather should be done, then to be ouer long kept, for many times it groweth mustie lying in garners. This Riddle being thus expounded, the harmlesse Shepheards retired themselues for that night, as also did melancholie Arcas. Where we will leaue them vntill the next mor∣ning. The end of the first daies meeting of Iuliettaes Shepheards.
THE SECOND DAIES MEETING, OF THE FIFT BOOKE OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHEARDS. WHAT Frostie Night (neuer so bitter) were of power sufficient to coole the outragious and burning heate of the Shepheard Arcas? What obscure horror, could bring a sleepe, the watchfull thoughts of his waking euills? And what deepe slumber, take from him the continuall re∣membrance of his diuine Diana? his spirit being alwaies troubled, as well in the night, as in the day, and therefore far more miserable then the bruite beastes. For whereas they repose themselues (sometimes) from their trauell, he (alwaies) laboured, and was (still) in paine, he plainely perceiued the day beginning to lighten the hollow giering vault of heauen, he viewed the glorious Sunne, to gild and adorne the Roseall skie: and he beheld beautious Anrora, to weepe drerie teares, for the death of her deare swarthie child; yet all these brought no comfort vnto his griefes. For such mindes as are ouer-cruellie afflicted with cares,A Sentence. are neither su iect to the coolie rest of the night, nor take pleasure at the glistering lampe, of All-seeing Phoebus. because they receiue no contentment, neither in the one, nor in the other. Scarse did the breake of day appeare, when this Swaine ariseth from his bed, running vp and downe the Desart, and searching for some fit place, where he might bewaile his sorrowes at the full. At length he entreth into a huge deepe Caue, enuironed round a∣bout with sharpe brambles, and pricking bryars, able to terrifie and affright any, ex∣cepting onely such as seeke for death, whom wretched and wofull Caitiues feare not at all, because euery houre they feele farre worse plagues then death it selfe: and for that it is rather a pleasure then a torment vnto them, to exchange their euill for good, and to leaue a sowre and seuere Maister, to follow and serue one that is milde, and debonaire. Arcas then being gotten into the bottome of this darkesome Dungion, after he had for a certaine time bene mute, and as one falne into a sound, in the end, breaking as it were out of a dead sleepe, he began thus to complaine. Ay me, Alas! What might I thinke to be the reason, or cause of the miserie and vnhappines of man? Is it the heauens, that iealous of their good fortune, scourgeth them with so great cruelties? Or is it their sinnes, which prouoketh the anger of God, forcing him to stretch out his threatning hand against them? No doubt it is this last, for sinne onely and wickednes, first opened the gate to death, that he might come in amongst vs, and so ouerthrow vs. It is for the punishment of such offences as we commit against the holy One, that we are persecuted with pestilence, famine, and with warre. So was Dauid plagued for his fault; and Sodome and Gomorrh with fire ouerthrowen. So were the Niniuites threatned: & so was Ezechias admonished to repent. O thrise happie the Godly, who prosper like the fruitfull Lawrell, and possesse in peace, that land, which is taken away from the wicked with tempestious lightning and thunder. For so was the good Abraham blessed, and so (after his imprison∣ment) was the righteous Ioseph, with many moe besides. But cōtrariwise, most vnfortunate are the wretched wicked ones, because they grudge and repine, in that they suffer for the faults they haue committed, whilst they are stung with Serpents from the heauens: as were the Hebrewes heretofore, when they began to
murmure in the wildernes. Beware how thou repinest against the Almightie Ichoua. And saith the (wise man) for no good nor profit, can come thereof. We cannot then tearme the heauens, to be the authours of our euils; but it is the onely transgressing of the diuine commandemēts; which we cannot truely say, be hath giuen vnto vs, to breake them, or that he hath giuen vs so hard a law, as that it is vnpossible for vs to sulfill the same. For it should be a most rediculous and vaine part of a Prince, to establish and appoynt such ordinances vnto his Subiects, as they cannot any way performe, as to defelid, or foid them to grow, to wax taller, or bigger, or other such fond and vnreasonable impossibili∣ties as these be. And therefore, O how gentle and easie, are the commaundement, of God, be him∣selfe affirming the same, when he tearmeth his yoke easie and ight, & his burthen little and gentle to beare. For, Is it not as easie a thing for a man to doe good as euill? when as in doing good, he enioyeth the happie and blessed content of the quietnes of his minde, without being troubled, either with the feare of the lawes, or the doubt of re∣proach or slaunder. Besides, he doth not dread death, for he withdraweth himselfe from other hazards, whilst he meditateth vpon the same; whereas Theeues and Murtherers, in robbing and killing, euery houre incounter therewith, before they are aware. But say it hapneth vnto them, yet doe they receiue it most meekely: for sweet and blessed is the death of the iust, that die in the Lord; where, that of the wicked is hatefull and abhommable. Curti∣ous then and gentle, are the commaundements of the highest, which his Apostle Saint Iohn approueth in these words; Keepe his commaundements, and you shall find them, to be neither troublesome, hard, nor difficult to obserue. They chase away, hot boyling Auarice, which burneth men with her vncharitable coldnes; they banish all mortall am∣bition, which weareth away the yeares of man before his time is come; they take from them, all murther and robbing, which stifleth the necke of the wicked with an infamous corde; they smother and kill adulterie, which laieth hold as well vpon the health of man, as on his honour: and to conclude, they extirpe and roote out, all those vices which are deadly enemies, as well to the bodie as to the soule. By which we see, his lawes are ea∣sie and sweet, yea, and most profitable and necessarie for the health and contentment of mankind; which was the cause, the other Apostle Saint Paul, calleth the commaunde∣ment of the Eternall Iehona, a godly, iust, and sacred commaundement; it being the pre∣seruer of Iustice, the puritie of our liues, and the very essence (as it were) of all equitie, peace, and goodnes; For what crosses ouerthwart the soules of the godly, who delight in no other thing, then in the law of the Lord? And what great and grieuous courses doe trouble and disturbe the consciences of the wicked, who take a pride (as it were) as did Remus sometime in leaping ouer the walles of Rome) to exceed & goe beyond the bounds of the diuine ordinances of God? which, because they are not hard to be accomplished, are not the cause of our sinnes, and so by consequence, are not the occasions of our miseries: For we may liue well, if we will, and liuing well, (and walking rightly in the commaundements of God) we may taste of all happines, without once, as much as feeling the stroke of his heaue hand to fall vpon vs. Then let vs chuse the best, and leaue the worst, and so shall we be free from wretched∣nes: where, if we make election of vice, and refuse vertue, we must not thinke it strange, if God doth iustly punish vs for the same: for euen humane Iustice, which is but a sha∣dow, and a figure of the diuine, correcteth, and awardeth death vnto such as be malefac∣tors and wicked, violating their lawes most iniuriously. After the same sort did God speake vnto Caine, saying; If thou doest well, thou shalt be recompenced for thy well doing: and if thou doest ill, thy sinne shall be presently knocking at thy gate: that is to say, the punishment thereof shall not stay long, but it shall seaze vpon thee, for doing so badly. But vnder thee, shall the desire of sinne be subiect, and ouer it, shalt thou commaund; So that, if ve be scourged & plagued, we must impute it vn∣to our owne faults; or we may auovd and leaue to sinne so wittingly (as we doe) if we will, and so our plagues will cease; but by reason we giue ouer our selues too too licenci∣ously vnto the same, and like beastly Swine wallow still in this filthie puddle, we are af∣flicted by the heauen from aboue.
Thrice blessed (then) is hee, that hath not transgressed the sacred lawes of GOD:A Sentence. which neuertheles, he hath not done (thinking thereby to reape reward, for his so well doing) for had hee done otherwise, he had bene tortured and afflicted with many pu∣nishments. That famous Iosuah, one of the nine Worthies, followed this aduise, when he spake thus vnto the children of Israell: Worship such Gods, as you list your selues, it lieth in you, & is in your owne power and autoritie, to sacrifice vnto such as you please: As for my selfe, and all my familie, wee will acknowledge none for true God, but the HOLIE GOD, of our fore-fathers, Abraham, Isaack, and Iacob. Thus you see, it is in vs to doe good or euill: as it is in the power of the Traueller∣to follow what company hee pleaseth, of all the rest he meeteth, whilest he goeth on∣wards on his Iourney. If we shall worship the true God, as Iosuah did, we shall liue hap¦pily, as did our predecessours before vs: but if we shall come to be seruants vnto Idols, then shall our offences open the doore, and make way for our afflictions and miseries, bringing vs (at last) vnto vtter destruction for euer. For our God, hath presented vnto vs, both good and euill. Yet doeth he say, Chuse the good, (onely) that thou and thine may liue in rest and quietnesse. Which was the reason that our blessed Sautour forgaue the sinnes of Mary Magdalaine the repentant, for that (said he) she chose the better part, which could neuer be taken from her. That seruant that doeth ill against the consent of his maister, can he iustly complaine,An example. when hee is punished for his faults? If so, why then, (seeing we make choyce of sin and iniquitie, and God scourgeth vs worthilie for the same) doe wee murmure and repine a∣gainst him? when we our selues, and not he, are the authors of our owne misfortunes, in that we commit those sins, which are the first motiues & occasions therof? God, who in his owne nature, is vncapable of sin, & who can no way receiue the accident of vice, can∣not be the author of our offences: otherwise, he himselfe should sinne, (which to thinke, were meere blasphemie) and sinning so, he should become the sinner, and not wee, who should be, but onely the simple executioners of his faults: Being a sinner, he could not be God, no more then pure white, can become coale black, because God and sinne are so much contrary and different, as they can neuer be in one selfe subiect, nor one agree, or like of the other. Againe, if God should force me to commit sin,A Similie. how then could he iust∣ly punish me? For can that Lord rightly punish his slaue, who by his cōmandement hath don that fault, for which he is corrected? In like manner, what iust colour can God haue, to inflict punishment vpon vs, if he himselfe hath not only perswaded vs vnto the same, but also hath constrained & vrged vs (as it were) perforce to cōmit this sin, for which he doeth plague vs. Besides, God hath not created man to be damned, or lost, hell (being ordained only for diuels) neither will he the death of a sinner, but rather that he liue & repent. For if you your selues will (saith the Prophet Esay) harken vnto my voyce you shall eate the fruits of the earth in peace, without being touched with any kinde of miserie. It (then) lieth in vs, to be fortunate and happy, in abstaining and forbearing from sinne: for our fore-fathers were blessed, and liued in all tranquillitie, & peacefull rest of the spirit, as long as thy abstained from doing what was ill: but when they tooke once a contrary course, then were they o∣uerthrowne and plunged in an infinitie of miseries: As the Iewes were slaine, ransomed, and carried away (as captiues) by the Heathen and Pagan Kings, when they had prouoked God against them, by reason of the hainousnes of their faults, and had purchased his iust indignation and displeasure against them. It is our bad and leaud life, and not God, that bringeth vs into so manie miseries. Who (as the Psalmist saith) is a God that hateth ini∣quitie, a God that hath not appointed death for man, and so mercifull, as hee taketh no delight in his vtter ruine and euerlasting damnation. For with his owne proper mouth, thus did he speake vnto the Iewes. O Hierusalem, Hierusalem, how often would I haue gathered thee together, as the henne doth her chickens vnder hernings, but thou wouldest not? And as by our wicked behauiour, we ha∣sten the wrath of God against vs, so by doing well, we many times hinder & asswage his anger and his plagues, which he menaceth and threatneth to send vpon vs. So did the Niniuites, by their hearty praiers & vnfained repentance, change and alter the diuine will and purpose of God, breaking off that which hee had meant to haue done, which as it is comminatorie, so it is not (alwayes) necessarie, it should be put in practise.
So the good King Ezechias, by his contrite penitence, & by his earnest supplications, hindered the Almighties determination, which threatned him, that he shuld die within 15. dayes after, prolonging & lengthening his life, whole 15. yeares more. And so Moses (oftētimes) through his earnest intreaty, withdrew the predestination of God, which was then resorute, and rosolued to suffer the Iewes to perish, being then in the wildernes, and murmuring against his holy Name. But the Apostle saith, If we be not of the number of the Elect and chosen of God, yet let vs behaue our selues so, as we may be of the same: meaning by these his words, that if we list, we may saue our selues. Then ought I, to fret and fume against the starres, or murmure and repine against the Heauens themselues? No, God forbid, since my faults and not they, haue bene the authors of mine owne misfortunes. Had I not sinned, I had not felt the least touch of these troubles, that thus torment mee: I had not bene so wretched as to haue bene despoiled of that little mercie & grace, which I had of the Almightie: I had not bene driuen from mine owne house, banished from my Countrie, exiled from the presence of my dearest friēds, nor scourged with the sharp whip of extreme want and pouertie: Neither had this my predestinated disaster (which still followeth me, vnto mine vndoing) bene able to haue crost mee in all my designes, as it doeth (euen at this houre) and will doe continually. For alas, how little would I esteeme of my losses, and of mine exile (since he cannot be termed a Bandite) who is welcome amongst the wiser sort, and who (yet) hath some friendes left him) were it not for this my hard Destinie, which as a ghastly Furie, doeth still haunt and follow mee. But I see, I see, (as in a glasse) my miserie to be such, as it will neuer be separated from mee: and I perceiue but too well, that Destinies may be foreseeue, but neuer can be preuented. As the Shepheard was (thus) pittifully lamenting vnto himselfe, behold, hee might perceiue two terrible roaring Lyons, to come directly towards the Caue, wherein he had gotten himselfe, it being the ordinary denne, wherein they vsed to harbour, which when hee saw, he quickly started vp, drawing forth his sword, with intention to defend him∣selfe, & to make them buy his flesh dearely: but they without so much (as once) offering to hurt him, gently passed by him, moued as (I gesse) with his more then wofull misery. They being gone, he came forth from his melancholike Cell, and as he was walking thus alone, the dolefull Nymph Orythia, his old (yet loyall Louer) met him by chance, who was comen (euen into this wildernes) to finde him out. After she had saluted him, shee intreated him to sit downe vpon a greene banke, couered ouer with shadowing Ci∣presse, and to heare a certaine Sonnet, which shee had made in remembrance of him. The Shepheard seeing no other remedie, sitteth him downe, promising the Nymph, at∣tentiucly, to giue eare vnto her Dittie, which shee most pitifully sung after this manner following. Cruell mishap, the Butcher of my life, All (thee except) is mortall heere below: Men are deaths foes, & with him, are at strife, And death is that which I doe couet so. My tongue speaks what with hart agreeth best, Death and laments, is of my speech the sourse: Ah iudge (then if that I haue any rest, Louing (of euils all) the very worse. If damned soules without en ende (alwaies) Sharp plagues endure; Alas, I feele like paine: A monstrous ill it is, all his lifes daies, To beare the brunt of ghosts in Limbo slaine: And yet the damnd, suffer for their offence, Whilst I (for doing good) indure these woes: The guiltie (to complaine of ill) wants sonse, Wrongly to suffer, patience makes to lose: May not my plaints most iustly counted be, In right the Heauens of crueltie t'accuse? What good, ere found I, O yee Gods, (to mee
Vniust) yee slay vs, yet to heare vs yee refuse, Without enfeele, of pleasure or of ioy: With anguish you our vitall spirits fill, Enforcing vs to entertaine annoy. So what's good, leaues vs, whilst we take the ill, Thus gainst your fierce, and more then sharpe Alarms Wee sickly soules, too weake, must harden strong Our selues, and for to helpe vs in our harmes, Wee hope in vaine, (the more) our selues to wrong. "Alack, Cowards that flie, and followed are orefast, "Small leisure haue, or none, their Armour off to cast. The Nymph hauing ended this her mournfull Musicke, with a deepe sigh, fet from the bottome of her heart, began (thus) to wooe the Shepheard. O how (iustly) doe the powers aboue afflict thee, seeing thou so cruellie doest tor∣ment others! Is it not most meete and reasonable, that as we sowe, so we should reape? and as we haue measured vnto others, so wee should looke for the like measure againe? LOVE maketh thee die, without depriuing thee of life, whilst thou forcest the selfe∣same Loue (without killing me) to torment me most cruelly. Ay mee, what strange kinde of Frenzie doeth trouble thy soule? Thou refusest the friendship of one that is immortall, to seek after the loue of a world∣lie beautie, which is subiect vnto death, fortune, and chaunge, wherein thou doest shewe a sufficient signe of the error of men, who follow that that flieth from them, leauing the best, and accepting of the worst. And if they, (committing so grosse an absurditie) feele themselues to be plunged in the gulfe of most bottomles griefes, by the Heauens, A Sentence. should they, (therefore) complaine & lament? He that hath wounded himselfe, can accuse none for his hurts, but his own selfe: and the prodigal child, that hath through his foolishnes, consumed all his wealth, may blame or thank no bodie, but his owne meere follie. Why doest thou not accept of that present, which willingly offereth it selfe vnto thee? & why doest thou endure so many miseries, to obtaine that, which thou wilt neuer be able to purchase? Is not hee vnwise, that whilst the storme lasteth, leaueth the drie house (in which he was in) to runne to seeke another farther off, and in the meane time is subiect vnto the bitternes of the Tempest? And is not he a foole, who leaueth a thing certaine and present, to take what is vncertaine and doubtfull? Well may hee bee counted to murther himselfe, that refuseth what is profitable vnto him, whilest he vainely seeketh, (and yet to no purpose) what he is likely neuer come by. Loue then, (sweet Shepheard) loue her, that dearely liketh thee. No small punishment doe they deserue,A Sentece. who hate such as loue & fancie them, in as much, as friēdship being not forced, but rather com∣ming of his owne accord, deserueth a recompence, no lesse then that gift which depar∣teth from a franke and liberall free minde, doeth merit thankes, because it is not forced any way: Then (I say) doest thou not loue her, who esteemeth of thee, more then of her owne selfe? whilst thou (more sauadge and fierce, then the cruell Tygers (who loue their matches) doest refuse the amitie of thine equall euery way, that sacred amitie, (so much) accounted of, both by Gods, and men. Ah change thy selfe-will and stubborne minde (hard hearted swaine, as thou art) and call to remembrance, what dangers I haue passed, what hazards I haue trauersed, and how many countryes I haue runne through to find thee out, resoluing with my selfe, neuer to leaue him who hath my heart, and carri∣eth the same within his brest alwayes. But why speakest thou not all this while? & why breakest thou not this solemne silence of thine? which cānot be but grieuous vnto such as behold thee: nay more, as painfull as death it selfe, vnto them that think well of thee. Ah faire Nymphe (replyed the Shepheard) what delightfull answer canst thou imagin to draw from him, who is not agreeable or pleasing vnto his own selfe? and what medi∣cine canst thou get from a sicke person, that is not able through the agonie of his griefe to help himselfe any thing at all? Can my discourses be pleasing vnto thee, when they are most odious and hatefull vnto mine owne selfe? he had need to be perfect in health, that will heale such as be sick, to be fully at libertie, that can infranchise slaues; and to be
perfectly content,A Sentence. that taketh vpon him to comfort the unserable. Stay but the time, (beautious Nymph,) I say, stay but the time, vntill the gratious Heauens, taking compas∣sion vpon me, doe cure my recureles infirmitie, & that I be (once) freed from the heauy and burthensom: bonds, wherein I am now chained, and then will I condescend vnto thy demaund. For alas, can one loyall and faithfull seruant, serue at one time two mai∣sters, and they (both) differing in nature? Euen so, can the true & chast Louer, (loue) with equall affection) two contrary subiects?A Sentence. No, no: for that Loue which is sacred, firme, and commendable, can neuer endure to be diuided: Loue it selfe being a simple substance, which participateth with no diuision, and therefore, such as truely fancie anie, doe loue without the separation of good will, in such wise, as it is as vnpossible for the constant Louer to haue two Mistresses, as it is for the Element to containe two Sunnes within it all at one time. If thy fancie were fixed vpon some Demi-god heere below, wouldest thou take it in good part, that a sillie Swaine should presume to make loue vnto thee, seeking to force thee to giue ouer thy first loue and promise, which neuer should be forgotten, what deuise soeuer might be wrought? If not, then I beseech thee (immor∣tall Creature) importune no more the despised Arcas. (too too much alreadie wronged by the Heauens,) but rather suffer him to take some breath in his miseries, which hee must (perforce) endure, as well as he may. Heape not vpon him, stone vpon stone, burthen vpon burthen, nor mischiefe vpon mischiefe, satisfying thy selfe with this his most heauie extremitie, without seeking to make his woes more terrible or cruell then they already be. For (Orythia,) this I will sweare, that the Heauens shall fall vpon this ground, and the cold frozen Seas shall turne into hote fire, before the heart of vnfor∣tunate Arcas shall be heated with anie other loue, then with that of his Diana: Her beautie will he loue alone, (shee onely) shall be serued of him, pale death it selfe, not be∣ing of force to alter this constant resolution. Then speake no more of this matter vnto mee, and let it suffice thee, that I honour thee, for thy Deitie, as Numa Pompilius adored the Nymph Egeria: For onely Diana doe I loue, and none but her alone. Commaund my bodie to serue thee, in what he is able; call my soule to ttend vppon thee, at thy will; dispose of my poore power, as thou shalt best please; and bid mee doe anie thing, whatsoeuer thou likest; Behold me prest to obey thee, (but not to loue) least I should forget my Diana: and say I should goe about to doe so, yet cannot I, although I would neuer so faine. Content thee, that I doe what I may, that I offer thee all that my soule is able, and be not so vnour∣teous vnto me, as to binde me to things vnpossible, which no man is bound to per∣forme. So deare doe I hold thy quietnes, (answered the weeping Nymphe) that for feare I shoulddisplease thee (to the end thou shalt perceiue how vnfainedly I doe fancie thee) I will rather studie to ouerthrow, and vtterlie ruinate mine owne life, then seeke by any meanes, to hinder or force thy desire any way at all. So let it be, yea, let it be so, and so let it still continue, since I was borne to be the most miserable of all others. And seeing I see so many mortall creatures preferred be∣fore my loue (who am immortall) I will vse to make mine eyes (perforce) to weepe con∣tinually, to the ende, that they being depriued of their lightes, may no longer behold the cause of their ineuitable sorrowes. Thou must then, (O poore Nymph) and wretched Orythia, resolue with thy selfe, to endure this mischiefe, and prepare thy selfe to make an ordinary exercise of thy more then heauie mischaunces. So liued Venus in woe, long time after the death of her Dar∣ling Adonis. So did Phoebus lament the losse of his deare Daphne. And so did Ioue, waile for the losse of his Io, and his Europa. Euen so must I grieue at this mine vn∣lukie deniall. Yet neuertheles,A Sentence. thou that art the onely motiue of this my mischiefe, and the onely cause of this my sharpe and bitter Corsie, take heede, take heede, I say, lest for this egre∣gious iniurie, which thou (now) offerest mee, the Gods reuenge not themselues vppon thee, making thine anguish as great, as mine is grieuous euerie way: For neuer let him looke for fauour from aboue, that hath not shewed mercie, vnto such as sue and seeke vnto him heere below.
And yet (accursed that I am) mine owne griefe is not so cruell, but that the care which I take for thine, is farre more troublesome vnto mee. I, seeking (in desire) to be doublie plagued, perplexed, and tormented, so I might see thee quite ridde and released from these thy woefull passions; although notwithstanding all this, thou doest badly requite my great good will towards thee. But the Heauens, who are farre more iust, more excellent, and diuine then thou, will yeelde me some sufficient guerdon: Meane space, dispose of dolefull Orythia, who is more thine, then her owne, and (reseruing her honor) doe with her what thou list, shee beeing readie, with her diuine power, to assist thee in all thy writings, which thy mournfull Muse shall sigh forth, not onely (alone) at this time, but for euer hereafter: not demaunding any other reward of thee, for her paines, but that shee (sometimes) may be had in remembrance in thy works: which al∣readie haue found place amongst the most commendable Inuentions, that haue bene accounted of by the brauest Princes, and highly prised and esteemed of by manie o∣thers: and which also, shall be had in request (heereafter) more then euer they (yet) haue bene, (despite of the enuious whatsoeuer) that goe about to seeke to deface the same. Liue then, (sweet Shepheard) and dreame as long as thou please, with thy selfe, of thy so much desired Loues, as I shall do the like of thine. But the day shall come, in which the Heauens shall depriue thee from the pleasure of the same, to the ende thou mayest know, by the experience of thine owne proper misfortune, how lamentable the state of such Louers is, that are barted and excluded from all good hope, of obtaining their wish and desire. The Nymph hauing so said, sodainly departed, running as swiftly into the woods ad∣ioyning, as the light Hinde, leauing the Shepheard all alone, who was as much amazed at her speech, as is the way-faring man, when in his trauaile, he seeth the Thunder-bolt of heauen, to fall vpon some proud Rocke, breaking the toppes thereof, with his terri∣ble flashie blow. Long was hee not in this browne studie, but that the olde man, (wonderfull ear∣nest) to vnderstand the discourse of his troubles, came to seeke him, whome hee thus beganne to accost. There is nothing that is holden more reuerend, eyther a∣mongst Gods, or amongst men, as is the word of man, which ought to be respected most religious, amongst ones enemies themselues, be the neuer so cruell or barba∣rous, and which wee ought not to falsifie, although it be for the least thinges in the world: because it is the band, which tyeth the societie and fellowship of men together, which being dismembred, would most foulie and confusedly perish, were it not, but in repect of the great regard that is had, and held of the same. I know thou hast not forgotten, how thou hast plighted thy promise, to report vnto me thy misfortunes, and thy Loues. Now doe I summon thee, to performe the same, praying thee, that thou wilt not be the cause, that this Desart (beeing the habitation of the Nymphes) be not defiled with infidelitie of speech. For as the Gods will not (a∣lone) be free and spotlesse from all vices, but also cleane from suspition of the same, so will they haue the like Ceremonies to be most orderly obserued, amongst their sa∣cred abidings, where (as yet) neuer any fault lodged. And if thou imeginest, that this thy discourse will prooue ikesome vnto thee, then know, that the breaking of thy faith, ought to be farre more grieuous: and that of two euils thou oughtest to chuse the least: which is, rather to endure the nouell ap∣prehensions of thine olde sores, then to violate thy pawned promise: I will craue no∣thing at thy hands, but what I will heereafter requite againe, offering in recompence of thy kindnesse (after thou hast done) to discourse vnto thee the whole storie of my life, to the end, that if our Fortunes shall be found to be alike, we may (the better) seeke the like remedie to helpe our selues. Then (courage Sonne) plucke vp thy spirits, so long dulled with sorrow, made o∣uermuch sicke with sadnesse, and almost massacred with extreame melancholie, and be∣ginne to recount thy Tragedie, whilst I will listen vnto thee, reporting of thy harde Fortunes in thy trauell. The Shepheard somewhat rowsed, with this earnest request, replyed thus. I cannot
denie, but what one promiseth he ought to performe, and so meane I. Yet the debtor who hath giuen his faith and promise, to paie his money at a certaine set day, although he is willing to keepe his word, yet will he not sticke to get a longer time for the tende∣ring of the same, if he can possible, (especialie) if he want the meanes to satisfie his cre∣ditor, vnto whom hee is bound.A Piouerbe. For it is an olde saying: What is delaide, is not vn∣paide: and such fruits as are longest attended and looked for, are alwaies the better, be∣cause they are of better rellish, and more ripe then the others. Then suffer my minde (yet a little longer) to be in quiet, and make not my mortall wounds so soone to bleed (freshly) againe: For, as bloody & cruell are the thoughts of a mans vnlucky chances, as the memorie is sweet & pleasing, of his happy good fortunes. To report the same anew, is as much as to strike the wound againe, because wee call them to memorie, when they are (in a manner) halfe forgotten, whilst Time it selfe, that hath somewhat lessened them, seemeth to complaine (as it were) that men are abused by his meanes. Giue me therefore some longer respite, (kinde Father of these Nocturnall Abodes) to bethinke my selfe better of this matter, to the end I may haue space to take breath a little more, being so lately come forth, from so manie outragious Seas of ex∣treame miseries. The Sayler, hauing escaped the danger of waters, leaueth to giue ouer from working, assoone (as euer) his Shippe is come into the hauen,An Example. without looking vnto eyther his Merchandize, or his vessell: for ease and rest is more sweete then any other thing in the world, seeing for this rest, man trauelleth all the dayes of his life, hoping at the ende of his labours to finde the same. Then giue me leaue (I beseech thee) some small while to be quiet, and trouble not my minde, with this vnwelcome busines: otherwise, in steed of consolating my paine, I shall thinke thou doest aggrauate it the more, and makest the same more bitter vnto mee. Ah Shepheard (answered the old man) doest thou make account, that the quietnes of a wofull wretch is troubled, when one desireth to vnderstand his griefe, that so hee may help, and heale him the sooner? Man, as he is curteous and humane, is (afterwards) more readie to doe goood then euill, because he roweth in the selfe-same Boate that he doeth, whom he seeketh to relieue, being so much afflicted, and for that a good turne doth ne∣uer come amisse, but is welcome at all times. Thinkest thou, that thy sorrowes shall waxe worser and worser,A Sentence. by reason of this discourse, which I intreat thee to deliuer? The sicke patient reuealeth his disease vnto the Phisition, but concealeth his griefe, to the end he may find remedie. Why then wilt thou make aduersaries, thy tongue and thy face? For, did thy speech faile thee, as not being able to discouer thy paine, yet should we plainely perceiue it by thy looks. Satisfie thy tongue, and thy countenance, in what they seeme to desire, and beginne not here in this strange Countrey, to shift vs off with disloyaltie, and dissembling. Behold, this houre most fit, the time now scrues, and this place is most apte and com∣modious for the purpose. It is in vncoth Desarts, where Louers vse to come, to report their mishaps at large, thinking themselues not a little fortunate, when they can haue au∣ditors to listen vnto them. I will attend thee, whilst this shade doeth inuite thee, to per∣forme what heretofore thou hast promised. Then I pray thee dispatch, to the end thou maist satisfie my mind, which euē (as it were, languisheth) with meer desire to heare thee. The Shepheard seeing himselfe so sharply vrged to keep his word, not being able any longer to delay him, or to put him off, after hee had sent foorth a number of scalding sighes, thus began his speech. Scarse was I come out of mine infancie, & growen a stripling, my chinne (not yet) bea∣ring the mark of a man, when Loue enrolled me for one of his band, forcing me to loue, before I knewe what liking meant: wherevpon, I beeing young in experience, and lesse practised in knowledge, began to set my selfe to schoole, to learne the hardest science in the world. Neuerthelesse, as of vipers, (by nature venemous) Physitions drawe many wholsome medicins: so Loue, depriuing me of my libertie, recompencing me with somwhat worth the giuing, for hauing within my conceit, a huge heap, & a great cōfused masse of verses, he dispersed, diuided, brake, and spred abroad the same, in such sort, as in a small time, a
thousand young shiuers and pieces, came thereof. Know then, I loued a faire and rich Shepheardesse, called Magaalis, she not much disdaining my modest affection, for her sake, did I compose many thousand Sonnets, but simple ones, and young (God he knoweth) were they, as young and simple as was mine age, but farre younger my knowledge and skill. Yet such as they were, she most curtiously accepted of them, ob∣liging my miserable fortune greatly vnto her, whilst she relieued it, by the meanes she had through the benefit of Nature, so that my verse was recompenced, by reason of the fauours which she held of Fortune. Long time did this faire maide enioy my loue, till (mine eyes being dazeled with the renowme of the most famous Iulietta,) I longed (exceedingly) to see her, to con∣firme for truth, the sacred report, which her rare perfections range of her, through∣out all the countrie: whereupon I resolued to see her, yet (sore) doubting the pre∣sence of so rare a thing, as the tender Eagle doth the face of the Sunne. There is nothing galleth the Foxe so much,A Compari∣son. as to be found to be nigh vnto the Lion, because his beastlines is knowne by the excellencie of the other. And the bad Painter, will (alwaies) shun the companie of such a one as is cunning, for feare least the perfection of his worke, should disgrace the vnskilfulnes of the other. In the end, I was forcedto see this diuine Shepheardesse, who (as she is diuine, and her effects diuine also) vpon the first sight I had of her, stole (at one time from me, both my soule, and the remembrance of the foresaid Magdalis: yet did she not this by force, but rather with such a sweet violence, as (me thought) I lost nothing, reputing my defait, to be a kind of victorie vnto me. If Magdalis was rich, and honourably descended, yet this farre passed her in these accidences, especially, in wisedome, and in learning, with other rich qualities, aswell of the bodie, as of the minde. For I verily beleeue, fewe Poets did excell her in Poetrie: fewe Orators in the Art of Oratorie: fewe Painters, in drawing of countorfaits: fewe Pen-men, in writing of sundrie and faire sort of hands: fewe Musitians in Musicke: fewe sage men in grauitie: and fewe learned men, in iuditiall knowledge, and reading. To discourse in all the seuen liberall Sciences, was an ordinarie course with her, nei∣ther had she euer the ouerthrow of the cunningest and greatest Doctors of her time. This faire creature then, (faire both for vertue and for beautie) long time staied and brideled the follie and licencious libertie, of my forward youth. In all which space, my Muse did nothing else, but chaunt forth her sacred praises, the rare Thewes, and exquisite parts of this louely Shepheardesse being her Subiect, and the onely efficient courses of all her writings; whilst she in the meane time, disdained not (oftentimes) to answere me. For she hath (alwaies) fauoured and respected gentle and towardly spirits, not that I am one of the same number, but because she made account of mine, as if they had bene such indeed, they still producing, and bringing forth such fruits, as were to her glorie, her honour, and contentment. If the name of the BERGERIES of IVLIETTA, haue (by chaunce) come vnto thine eares, then maist thou gather the truth of my speeches, by the report thereof, and easilie perceiue thereby, what dutious respect, and solemne seruice, I most religiously vowed vnto this faire and learned virgin. But as the heauens them∣selues,A Sentence. cannot (alwaies) continue in one, and the selfe-same course, but euer changeth and diuideth themselues to an other forme; Euen so, the misfortune, or rather the punishment of our sinnes, opposed her selfe most cruellie against the chaste continua∣tion, of my most modest and respectiue loues, secluding and separating me, farre from my diuine Iulietta, of whom, (notwithstanding all this) I carried away with me, the Tef∣figies and counterfait, shadowed within my soule, honouring her, as one, who had most power ouer me, and ringing loud peales, of her well deseruing praises, so long, till at the last, Time, not onely changed my nature, but also my fortune and estate. And the sooner to finish my ruine and ouerthrow, he forced me to trie so many wofull miseries, scourging me with his seuere roddes, so sore and cruelly; As (in the end) I forgot euery thing, and gaue ouer all; studying onely what good meanes I might finde, to warrant and shield me, from the furie of my too too spightfull desires, and to saue me from the sharpe arrowes they darted at me, knowing that
one poyson expelleth an other, that one nayle driueth out an other, and that the greater eull, that is more violent, maketh the lesser to yeelde and to giue o∣uer. Thus was I compeld to beate my witts, to find the way as well to preserue and saue my sillie life, laid in waite for, by many enuious persons, as to conserue that little which I held, through the grace of Fortune. But (hardly) could I keepe safe, either the one, or the other, loosing both my goods, and my bodie, which was drawne into an vn∣comfortable prison; where (yet for all this, such was my good lucke) I found so much curtesie, as I might rather haue tearmed it libertie, then imprisonment, in that it was more profitable, then hurtfull vnto me, by reason I purchase many friends there∣by. After this had hapned, I wandred into euery place, as the Hart that searcheth his companion gone astray, without finding any one place, of sufficient securitie for this my wretched life. In the end, (when I had sometime remained within a certaine Castle, with some of my friends) I chaunced to arriue at a goodly, rich, and great Cittie, which serued as a Sanctuarie vnto the miserable, and as a safegard and refuge, for such as were hardly destined, of which number I counted my selfe as chiefe. There did I finde my selfe, secure and safe, and therefore did I cast mine anker on that strand, wishing that I might make an end of my ouer-long paines, and too too wearisome peregrinations. Now whilst I liued in this place, my Muse was not altogether idle, one while in sighing forth my hard fortune, an other while in lamenting my manifold and irrecouerable losses; and sometimes Heroldizing the praises of those, that maintained my poore life; so that I was not tongue-tide or dumbe, neither lay I long in silence, without doing some one thing or an other. Meane space, it was my chaunce (one day) to walke into the Forrests adioyning, as well to asswage my griefes, as also to put out of my minde, the thought of my mis∣chances, where I found about a coolie fountaine, many faire Shepheardesses, who all daunced without feare, but onely for feare to be seene. Faire were they all,An excellent description of a faire virgin. and (yet) not all liking vnto my minde, nor alike agreeable in mine eyes. Amongst the whole troupe, one there was that pleased my fancie, aboue all the other; being taller in stature, straiter of bodie, and fairer and goodlier then all the companie were. Her flaxen haire was daintily bound vp, placed vnder a curious Coife of fine Lawne. Her high forhead, goodly and broad. Her amorous eye-browes, somewhat blacke, seruing as an Vmbrill for her diamond-like-eyes. Her diamond eyes, cleare, quicke, and sparkling; like vnto two Sunnes eles, which without hurting the bodie, pierced into the very soule, wounding most cruellie. Eares, which tooke prisoners, millions of hearts, the vertues thereof, drawing them most sweetly vnto them. Eies, resembling two sacred lampes, being of force, to chase away all darknes, and to bring the bright day with them. Her witching lips, werered, like vnto the Cloue-Gilliflower. Her prittie mouth, faultlesse and little. Her chast mouth, neuer touched of any, being as a religious re∣licke, most sacredly reserued for the seruice and honour of the celestiall Goddesses Diana. Her cheekes, vermillion right, resembling the Sommer Rose, adorned with a white lillie. Her dimpled chin, short, round, and well made. Her throate was cleare Alablaster, and her goodly brest composed of pure Iuprie: in which, were sweetly seated, two rich and pretious monuments of mountaine snow, disdaining to be com∣pared with any whitenes whatsoeuer. Her hands with azured veines, resembled the pretious stones digged out of the quarrie of beautie. And to be briefe, her feete were slender and little withall. But O how perfectly faire wert thou in all poynts, beautious and louely Diana? How rare and gentle, was thy spirit? How stately and full of Maiestie, thy gate? And how sweet and pleasing, thy more then angelicall presence? If so admirable a Subiect as this, was not of sufficient power, to enthrall and captiue me, when farre meaner and baser (by ods) haue made the greatest and brauest personages in the world to stoope, I referre it vnto your owne sensures to imagine.
O most seeret and maruellous, is the puislance of loue; No sooner did I behold her, but I felt my selfe to be wholie changed and transformed into an other shape, as the Serpent changeth his skinne in the Spring-time. The remembrance of all whatsoeuer I had done before, was slipt and vanished away, no otherwise then a waue of water, glideth swiftly in the Sea. I remained as one bound, and inchained: and yet alack, I could not chuse but honour my bonds; neither could I withdraw, or retire my selfe from this deadly enemie of my rest, which had depriued me alreadie as it were of my life, but staied still by her. Not vnlike vnto the foolish flie,A Similie. that buzzeth (so long) about the candle, till at the last he burneth himselfe in the flame thereof. Egerly, did I sucke this sweete poyson downe my throate, enchaunting my spi∣rits with the same. As the thriftie way-fairing man, drinketh with great greedines, what∣soeuer is presented vnto him, to staunch his drines. With great reuerence did I vse, and (not a little) did I respect, those arrowes, shafts, and darts, that were my death: so much fortunate did I imagine my selfe, to be vanquished by so sweet and faire an enemie: nei∣ther could I once remoue mine eyes from her beautious face, no more then the captiue taken in warre, who looketh pittifully on him that hath taken him, vpon whose will de∣pendeth his deare deliuerance. The remembrance of all my fore-passed Disasters, was lost with my libertie: this cruell wound, extinguishing all sense of griefe of my other lesser troubles, as a great euill doth expell and thrust out a lesse. Thus loue couereth all other miseries, his heat, drying all others sorrowes; and his force, asswaging all other losses whatsoeuer. And (as a great broad-leafed oke) hideth all kind of mischiefes whatsoeuer. Like as we see that man, that hath lost sooe great matter of waight, to take on, and to chafe wonderfully, as often as it commeth into his minde, and when he calleth into his memorie, the worth and valew of the same, he held so deare. Euen so, doth it vexe my very soule, when I remember the rare and admirable qualities of my Diana, considering the great losse I haue thereby. And therefore (good Father) let me here leaue (I beseech thee) without vrging me to proceed any farther; but rather permit me to goe my waies, that I may find out some close & frightfull Caue, where I may sufficiētly & enough bewaile this my inestimable losse. For the very thought thereof, doth take my voice away, pierceth quite through my heart, and disturbeth all my wittes and sences. Nay (forward) (good Shepheard) answered the earnest old man. A worke halfe done, ought to be throughly finished; yet in the meane time, thou maiest if thou thinkest good, pause for a while here, and take vnto thee breath againe, letting passe this sad ap∣prehension of thy losses, since others haue had ill fortune as well as thy selfe. But well hast thou begun, and therefore I doubt not but thou wilt make as good an end. Arcas, hauing rested a while, began to proceed in his discourse, when Philistell, and Corribant, comming vnto them (and hauing saluted them) sat downe hard by them; whereupon Philistell, marking the countenance of the old man very wistly, and iudging him to be a Magitian, (as indeed he was) began thus to argue with him. Father, I am not ignorāt, that these Desars, resēble a hot coale of glowing fire, A Similie. which if you fling amongst sweet and odoriferous spices, it shall yeeld a delightfull and pleasing sauour: and if you cast it amongst bad, it shall smell loathsome and stinking. Euen so, these Desarts serue some to end their yeares in holines, such being rauished with the cōtemplation of the wonderfull workes of the Almightie: whilst vnto other some, they are as a Receptacle, to colour their faults, and as a commodious place, wherein they may hide their bad liues, and leaud wickednes: Neuerthelesse, the latter of these twaine, who helpe themselues (by their meanes) to doe ill, doe offer them the more iniurie, because these vncoth woods, haue euer bene fitter, for such as doe pennance, and me∣ditate vpon God, then to scrue for a retrait vnto the wicked: to the end, they may the safer exercise their bad and detested leaudnes therein. And to be plaine with you, I thinke you are come hither, because you may the more fitter put in practise your blacke Art here, and haue conference with the diuels. Now whether this your trade be lawfull or no, I faine would know the truth.
That Maister will neuer account such a one of his seruants,An Example. for faithfull and good, that shall goe about to seeke for aide of his enemie. If so, Thinke you then, that God can al∣low it for good, that men, who are his seruants & creatures, shall enter league, conferre, and be familiar with the diuels, his odious aduersaries? Can the Iudge, take it for well, and not mislike the reof, that any of his followers, should aide and assist, comfort, and keepe companie with the criminall, whom for his faults he hath most iustly condemned to death? So likewise, if the diuels (who for their pride and wickednes haue bene condem∣ned by the Almightie) are driuen and chased away from his diuine presence, what ex∣cuse can such men alledge for themselues? who dare be so bold, as to presume to come amongst them, and to consult with them? It is sharpely forbidden, the good to conuerse with the bad; the faithfull, to be acquainted with the Infidels; and the Christians to haue truce with the Turkes. Then what alliance or league, can there be found betweene men, the children of God, and damned diuells, condemned from the beginning of the world for their most horrible offences? Long since, did God punish the Iewes most extreame∣ly, for offering to marrie with the wiues of the Heathen, deliuering them (for theirpu∣nishment) into the hands of their enemies: because light and darkenes can neuer agree well together. And thinke you not, that he will giue ouer into the hands of the diuells, such men as serue them, and are familiar with them; to the end they may be pumshed, by the selfe-same spirits, whose executioners they haue bene in all hatefull vngodlines? Can any Father support and beare so great an iniurie,A Sentence. that his sonne shall follow and keepe companie, with such a leaude and bad seruant of his, whom he hath driuen out of his house, in that he sought to depriue him of the same, rising vp (most rebelliously) a∣gainst him? Euen so, can God take it well at our hands, that we, who are his children, should compact and agree, seeking for the friendship and acquaintance of these vn∣godly seruants (the diuels) whom he hath throwne headlong, downe from out his hea∣uenly mansion, because they presumed through their arrogancie, to be equall with himselfe? If diuels are (by nature) wicked, and for their iniquitie are iudged vnto hell fire for euer; What then can men learne of them, but malice, enuie, euill, blasphemie, and sinne? Now these qualitiés being extreamely displeasant vnto God (who is the mortall enemie of vice) how then can such men sufficiently excuse themselues, who haue lear∣ned such wickednes of Sathan and his angels? The old man, angred at the heart, as well to heare his Art blamed, as from being hin∣dered from the discourse which Arcas had began, (halfe chollericke) replied thus. My friend (and straunger vnto me,) I see well, thou hast a tast of thine old corrupt nature, seruing God, according vnto the grose custome of thiue Auncestors, & only af∣ter one fashion.An excellent discourse of Inchantuients. Know then, there are diuers kindes of worshipping of God. To take an oath, is forbidden by the diuine law; for feare, least we fall into periurie: and therefore wilt thou say, we ought not to sweare at all? So farre off frō offending, are we by the same, that swearing truely, and before the iust face of vpright Iustice, it is a kind of adoration, and worship, which we render vnto God, because we charge him (as it were) with the iustnes of the truth, or with the falsenes of the oath taken, in his holy name. So like∣wise, wilt thou blame exorcisme of spirits, and the coniuring of them, which men doe to force them to vnderstand, and giue care to that which is demaunded of them? The auncient Hebrewes, had not they Enchauntments, which chased away diuels, commaunding them in the name of God? Which our Sauiour his Sonne, when he li∣ued (here) vpon the earth, approued and allowed, as authenticall and lawfull? I tell thee, for thy learning, that there are two sorts of Art Magicke (as there are two kindes of swearing) the one good, and the other bad. That is good, which is done by the diuine power alone, inasmuch, as (onely) to him is the glory attributed, to com∣maund ouer diuels Is not sinne, a most wicked euill? and yet notwithstanding, doe not the holy Doctors of the Church, will vs to follow and haunt the bad, vntill we haue cha∣sed and driuen quite away, both themselues and their vicious kind of liuing also? If so, thinke you then, that it is forbidden to conuerse with spirits, when thereby they are bound more surely, and brideled more straightly, as being vnable through their malice to hure manking, as they haue done? By whose vertue and authoritie doe diuels come out of hell? and in whose name, doe
they speake, obey, and fulfill the desires of men?Whether in∣uocation and calling vpon spirits, be lavv∣full, or no? Is it through the puissance of other Diuells? No. For, they haue no authoritie one ouer the other: and euery Kingdome diuided within it selfe, shall (quickly) be brought to confusion. Is it through the vertue of men? That is vnlikelyer then the other: for so farre be they off from commaunding ouer them, as they be farre inferiour vnto them in po∣wer and might. In whose name doe they then appeare? Euen in the Name of GOD; by whose diuine power, they come when they are called, which being imployed for the benefite of man, vnto this purpose, the whole glorse thereof redoundeth wholly vnto him, hee being the sole Author of this admirable worke. For it is no common matter, neither is it a trifle, or a thing of small account, to force, constraine, or commaund Diuells: This beeing not able to be brought to passe, but by the Omnipotent might of God, the whole honor thereof, is attributed vnto him alone. So that to call vpon spirits through the power diuine (and not to employ them vnto any ill, but rather repressing, and kee∣ping vnder, (more and more) their wicked intentions, is properly an Act, or a kinde of worshipping of God. The sage Spartans, vsed to make their slaues drunke, and so to shewe them vnto their Children, to the ende they might make them flie that foule vice, detest drunken∣nesse, and loue sobrietie the better. Euen so, when one shall see these Diuells (to the ende, that by contemplating of their most horrible vglines, they may be the more en∣flamed with the sacred Loue of God) Is it ill done of them so to do? But we (commonly) see, that men condemne that for bad, which themselues can∣not haue, find fault with that Science, which they cannot attaine vnto, and dispraise that, which they are no way worthie to enioy. As for the other kinde of Magique, which extendeth to consult with Diuels, about the knowledge and Nature of wicked simples and hearbes,A Sentence. to make most damned poy∣sons, hurtfull vnto so many Creatures, I cannot chuse but confesse the same to bee pas∣sing ill, and that it is prohibited both by the Lawes of God and man. Neither can the one nor the other be good, answered Philistell. For as by the one, the diuine power of God is abused, so by the other, his holie will is (as it were) chec∣ked and controlled. What neede hath any man to conferre with hellish Spirits, about the knowledge of things to come? (seeing vnto God alone, belongeth the certaintie of the same) as long as wee haue a firme confidence, and a strong beliefe, that the Almightie taketh protecti∣on and care ouer vs, (as hee doeth of the least Byrd that flyeth in the ayre) which also his prouidence nourisheth? Then what occasion haue wee, that we should haue any recourse or speech with Di∣uels, who are the mortall enemies of God? In this we shewe our selues, either to mis∣doubt the diuine Bountie and Goodnes: or else, to haue no beliefe or confidence in his eternall and euerlasting power. We are created of God, only to eleuate our minds in contemplation, to consider, and to take knowledge of things present, and not to formalize and frame our selues after that which is to come: the knowledge of which, he his owne selfe refused to participate vnto his Apostles; & therfore (except we would presume to be wiser thē they) we haue nothing to doe to talke with Diuells, much lesse to inuite or constraine them, to shew their puis∣sance or malice, because it is a kinde of vsurping ouer the power of the holie one, vnto whom is reserued this correction or chastisement, ouer these most damned Spirits. And to conclude, the hystorie of Saule may resolue vs in this doubt, who lost his soule, his life, and his Realme, for that hee forced a certaine Sorceresse to raise vp a Diuell, who had the forme and shadow of Samuel. Besides, the Lawes of man condemne such to be burned, as meddle with this Arte, because they are as well enemies to God as men, which neuerthelesse, they had neuer done without iust and good considerations. The other sort of Magique, (farre more wicked then this) is so detestable and bad, as it ought not (in right) to be tearmed by this word (Science) because it is an vsuall ex∣ercise of ill doing, which these Inchanters borrow of the Diuell, with the māner to finde
out these Venims, which is applied vnto the hurt and ouerthrow of all persons what∣soeuer. Againe, it hath bene (alwaies) worse punished than murther: for a man may take heede of the one, but he is most miserably betraied by the other. The sword, being able to destroy, onely such soules as haue life, whereas this Venim, not onely killeth liuing creatures, but all other hearbes, trees, and plants, whatsoeuer. Farre then be it from vs, to exercise so wicked a studie as this is. O stranger (replied the old man) is not he worthie of more praise, that yoketh strong and fierce Lions, then if he had done the same to little dogges, and small whelpes, that are of no courage? Is not that Prince more puissaunt, and more to be redoubted, that commaundeth ouer a nation, warlike and generous, then he that hath vnder him, none but base beggers, and poore white-liuered peasants? Euen so, is not that man to be more commended, who by his cunning and industrie, commaundeth ouer diuels, who for their sinne, haue lost nothing of their former puissaunce, in which they were first created, (but onely their eternall Beatitude) then he, who for want of know∣ledge and skill, gouerneth ouer troupes of fearefull sheepe onely, and ouer a com∣panie of rude and simple peasants. That person, who by his art and cunning, shall haue made, that which Nature hath hidden,A Similie. (in the deepest bowels of the earth) framing through his rare skill this glorious golde, which so much flourisheth, and is in request throughout the whole world. Is not he, to be praised and esteemed aboue all other? Euen so, can that wight merit lesse, than great commendation, who by his wise∣dome, knoweth how to signorize ouerspirits, who terme themselues, the Kings and Lords of the world? For thou must vnderstand (for thy learning) that there be diuers kindes of spirits, whereof, some are extreame wicked, and sworne enemies vnto man, and other some there be, gentle and curteous, seruing to doe good, in steed of hurting any one. But what fault I pray you, can you finde, with conuersing with such? Salomon, on whom so much wisedome was bestowed, had not he conference oftentimes with them? and in the meane space did he ill? No, for he had receiued such great knowledge of God, as the vertue thereof, made him worthie to discourse with spirits, and he himselfe being willing to instruct vs in that notable perfect Art, left certaine writings of his behinde him, which are much sought after by the Magitians now at this day, which are called SALOMONS KEIES. So that, by this we may gather, that if to haue communication or a parlie with di∣uels, had bene thought a thing detestable and vniust, Salomon had neuer talked with them, neither he himselfe, would haue left vnto vs in writings, the meanes how to call vpon their names, or to discourse with them. Father, Father, (replied Philistel) all these reasons thou alledgest, cannot defend this thy bad cause, for neither ought we to follow Salomon in this, because he made an ill end, hauing forgotten himselfe (most miserably) in the latter end of his age, and com∣mitted so horrible a fault, as the onely remembrance thereof, maketh my haire to stand vpright for feare) neither is thy cunning herein to be allowed, inasmuch, as euery Science, that proceedeth not from God himselfe, and is not drawne out of the sacred fountaine of his immortall wisedome, is not onely worthie to be condemned, but also meriteth to be rewarded with fire. That Magicke, should be a Science ordained by God, thou canst not maintaine, seeing that our Sauiour Christ neuer taught it, neither his Apostles, euer learnd it, as they did many other, good, holy, and iust Sciences. It is (ra∣ther) the Art of Eue, who beleeued what the Serpent tolde her, which was the cause, both of her ruine, and of ours. For tell me, I pray you, what grace or goodnes, can a man expect from his mortall enemie, being not giuen vnto any thing, by the corruption of his nature, but vnto blood-shedding, vnto wickednes, and vnto extreame crueltie? And so, what can one looke for, that may be profitable or good, to come from proud Lucifer, and his angels of darkenes, they being the most deadliest enemies that may be vnto man∣kinde?
Besides, with what kind of payment, doe they paie themselues (in the end) for the seruice which they haue done vnto men? Is it not, with the pretious price of their soules, which they ought to esteeme more dearely, then all things (else) whatsoeuer? What doth it profit a man, to gaine all the kingdomes in the world, if he shall lose his owne soale thereby? And who euer knew Magitians to die well, whose bodies often∣times haue bene visible seene to haue bene carried away by these Fiends? Ochozias King of the Iewes, being sicke onely because he sent vnto the Oracle of Belzebub, died most wretchedly, by the iust commaundement of God, how much (more seuerely,) had he bene punished, if he had, had ordinarie conference with the diuels, when he was plagued with death, (onely) for that, he did (but) send, to aske ad∣uise and counsaile of him? But say, that God would forgiue this sinne, yet tell me, I pray you, what truth and certaintie can you find, amongst these illuding spirits? First, they are (for the most part) ignorant of such things, (as shall hereafter happen) as well as men be; And besides, there is no truth in them, they being the first authors of lies, and those that first taught vs to speake vntruely. The poore Pamms themselues (ouer whom they had so great power) for that they were Infidels, and abandoned of God, were continually mocked, deluded, and most grosely deceiued, by these malignant spirits. As witnesse Pirrhus, Alexander, and thousands moe. If then they would cousen their chiefest friends, and dearest seruants, how much more will they goe about to deceiue such as are their enemies, and who, as strangers, giue but little credit vnto them? To conclude, the diuels are abiured enemies, against the righteous God himselfe: and therefore, if we will be counted his true and faithfull soruiters indeed, we must not haunt, nor keepe companie with his aduersaries; otherwise he will suffer them, to make a prey of our soules, as being vnworthie to appeare before his heauenly throne, because we haue left him, and followed his foes. Such is the common end, of such kind of people, who, whilst they are liuing, seruing the diuels, doe the like when they are dead, they being rewarded with hell fire for their paines. As the old man was replying againe, they might perceiue two Nymphs to come towards them, where they sat, each of them, hauing a written paper in their hands, which they deliuered vnto the shepheard Arcas, who vnfolding the same, found these verses following. Loue, is a daintie force aboue all other, Which doth enforce our spirits vnto good things: And without it, our soules were neuer able Any thing to doe rightly, that deserueth Gloriefor euer. Contraries, it doth bring into a concòrd, Bloodie warres, it (soone) swageth: (Being more puissant, then the Gods themselues are) Sweet, and the sower, it ioyneth both together, For to agree well. Vnder him (wholy) gouernd is the huge world, Vnder his lawes, the heauens eke are subiect: Rightly may he be termd a mightie Monarke, Whose power extends so far, as tis withouten Any set limit. He doth his might vse, onely exercising It, in the harts of lile pretie creatures, (greene trees, Flowers, plants, hearbes, and fruitfull springing (Vnder his influence) like true hartie Louers, Loue one another.
Of a brace of soules, he doth make but one soule, Which death it selfe doth hardly make to sunder, But man, doth perish, by his destny fatall: Therefore, is Loue, more kinder to be counted Then is our fortune. Simple mens fortunes, he doth (often) raise high, Making them, like to those, of greatest Princesse, Then doth not he (well) merrit much rewarding That to him submits, marching passing brauely Vnder his banner? Hope, to our fainting thoughts he bring to vs still, And to our hearts he bringeth ioy and gladnes, For vnto Louers nothing is so pleasant, As when they see, that of their louely Ladies Much they are made of. He doth reuiue our glory, that was extinct, Through the displeasure of our peruerse Plannees, Oh how the pleasure is accounted daintie. After laments, and bitter heauie sorrowes Which one endureth. After the brunt, of cruell raging Tempest, We find the skies more fairer then before time, Lone doth reforme vs, making vs become new. And to resist our mischiefes, he doth backe vs Fresh to encounter. Tis th'happie hauen, of our best assurance, The sacred Lodestar, Sailers vse in voyage, Whilst that his sweetnesse, all our fornser tranailes (Which we endured) in our tedious iourney. Makes vs forget them. Neuer hath he had taste aright of pleasure,A Sentence. That in the field hath neuer followed true Loue: As the darke night, is nothing to the faire day, So, to delights of Loue, ther's not vpon earth, Aught to be equalde. Euery ioy, must yeeld vnto daintie Loues ioy, Thoughts of all other, what are they but bitter? All chiefe contentment springeth from this kind Loue, For the conceit (oft) is so sweetly sugred, As all, it passeth. What we imagine of it, in our minds still Cannot be bettred, by our often wishing; For it doth (so much) please vs in our owne thoughts, As it reuiues vs, when our soule is passing Forth of our bodies. Then vnto Cupid, as asacrifice fit, I, on his altar, offer will my poore heart, Nor is it disgrace for to honour rightly, One that is counted as a heauenly victor, Throughout the whole world. These were theverses, which one of the Nymphs had composed, in praise of Loue, but the other had writ in dispraise of the same, as here followeth. Vaine Loue's, a furious burning force, That chastest minds burnes, sanus remorse:
Wretched (that loueth) is that coarse, And want shall his desire: He hearts, and minds makes disagree, Through him great houses filled bee, With slaughters, treasons, treacherie; For he of strife is sire. Millions of men, he doth betray, The Gods he bringeth to his bay, Like subtill tyrant he doth slay, (Through sloth) all vertue rare, The smallest shrubs that grow so trim, Doe vade and wither thorough him, Poore beastes flie his imprisoning, Who liues he doth not spare. Such (as in Marriage) holily Are knit, which none ought to vntie, He seekes to lose most wickedly, Faith (plighted) to despite: Braue Kings and Princes he destroyes, Mightie and feeble, he annoyes, Whilst that, with proudest hearts he ioyes, To feed his appetite. The Louer oft as desperate, He egges to slay himselfe through hate, Better to be without Loues mate, Than die, and damned bee, If any pleasure he doth bring, (For that) he (double) doth vs sting, Loue cannot yeeld forth any thing, But what is sorrowes fee. To comfort vs, when storme is done, Then shines againe the cheerfull Sunne, Where, neuer ioy to Louers come, For they are shipwrackt still. Loue is of man the fatall Rocke,A Sentence. On which his ship of ease doth knocke, Whilst on the sands he doth him shocke, By death him for to spill: He nouer felt hath any paine, That hath not knowne the Louers vaine: Each griefe hath but his course certaine, Where Loue doth bleed for aye; No ill (so nigh) the heart doth sit, As doth this fierce tormenting fit, Death is more pleasing far than it, Which rids our cares away. Our soules with hope, it doth torment, Whilst nought, but Massacres are ment, To die tis better far content, Then (ay) liue languishing. Loue (then) most cruell, without grace, Whom I will curse in euery place; No God, but diuell is in this case, God, tha'utor's not of sinne.
These verses being read, before the companie, the first Nymphe, who wrote in praise of Loue, began thus to frame her speech, vnto amorous Arcas. It is a matter worthy of due consideration, to thinke how the Glorie of vertue, flieth throughout the world eurey where, and how the renowmed fame of learning, filleth the eares of all mortall men. Neuer hath there bene any vertuous wight,A Sentence. that hath wanted his condigne praise, for the more Vertue shunneth Glorie, the more it maketh it selfe famous, Glorie fol∣lowing after the heeles of the same. Many Sages haue there bene, in the old time, who thought (burying their bodies) to haue interred their memorie and renowme therewithall, but though they sought it, yet could not they bring it to passe.A Similie. For as the lightning, passeth into the vessell with∣out breaking of it, and sucketh vp the wine that is therein: Euen so, faire Glorie entereth into the Sepulcre and Tombe of the learned, and desirous to be at libertie, spreddeth it selfe abroad, into euery coast and countrie. The fire couered close vnder the cinders, is more hote, then the outward flame: and that Captiue, more ioyfull, who is (newly) come forth of prison, then he, that hath (neuer) bene in durance. Euen so, more bright, and more liuely, is that famous renowme, which we seeke to smother, and to keepe secret, then that which hath libertie to raunge abroad euery where. Let neuer any wise man, then thinke to be without Glorie, no more then the leaude liuer,A Sentence. can be without shame and reproach. Vertue soweth her seeds, in truaile, and trouble, which in the end, growe to be Glorie and Honour, and which no tempest from heauen can destroy, as it doth other common Plants. Thrise happier that labourer, that reapeth the fruites of his trauaile in peace. And so, right blessedis that prudent man, that enioyeth the fruites of his Vertue with praise. Well haue (yee) verified my saying to be true, O (yee worthie persons) who are (here) assembled in this place together. For your rare qualities haue brought you forth so many famous Glories, with so perfect and excellent a renowme, as it hath come vnto our eares (here) within this vncoth wildernesse: and long time is it (since) my Sister and I, haue expected your comming, to determine vpon this our argument, as concerning the great valure, or the pouertie and basenes of Loue. Therefore since you (all) are now so happily here arriued, and met; Iudge (I be∣seech you) of our writings, which of vs twaine, shall carrie away the praise of victorie, sending vs, both away from you, throughly contented and pleased, with your graue and prudent censure: whilst we in the meane space, will attend (in all dutifull deuotion) and with most willing mindes, to be resolued of our doubts, by your learned and reue∣rent iudgement, in all equitie and right. Whereupon, Philistel, reading ouer againe the foresaid verses, set open (first) the schoole vnto these disputations, in these tearmes following. No trauaile, (that is not without end,) or without hope, can properly be called a paine, for he that laboureth truely, doth endure and suffer (in hope) to reape some sweete fruits of his labour, which doth recompence him for the toyle he hath taken; And (this) he cannot (rightly) call paines, but rather a kinde of busie and stirring exer∣cise. All men (euery one in their vocation) trauaile & take paine, and yet (for all that) they thinke not to suffer paine, in that they make no doubt to receiue the reward of their trauaile. For if the labour of such men as receiue fruite, were paine, then could they not liue, in as much, as verie paine indeed, which is, neither comforted, nor appeased, nor guer∣doned with any reward, doth bring a man (vntimely) vnto his end. We see in the bodies of such as be diseased,An example. that the very anguish of the sicknes, for want of helping the same, bringeth them (at last) vnto their graue. But now, we can∣not giue this name of paine, (rightly) vnto Loue, because Louers doe liue still, neither doe they (sodenly) die, for that they alwaies hope well.
Is it a paine vnto a valiant Capitaine, and an approued Soldier to sleepe in the fields vn∣der a hedge, to suffer hunger and cold, to endure thirst and drinesse, rayne and cold wea∣ther, vsing his bodie to this hardnes, (onely) to purchase honor? I thinke not, but rather (Iudge it) to be a sweete and allowable exercise vnto him. Euen so, Louers cannot terme that trauaile, which they endure (for louing) any paine at all, but because (in the ende) they eyther attaine vnto the scope of what they haue so long pursued and sought for: gathering the fruits, which to enioy, hath cost them so deerly; Or else the conti∣nuance of time, purgeth and washeth away the paines from them quite and cleane. Therefore, Loue being no paine, it cannot be taxed of crueltie: Nay more, I dare auouch, that it is very necessarie, and not a little profitable. Fabius Maximus, was of opinion, that it was conuenient that Carthage should be suffered to continue in her auncient force, and not to be raced vnto the ground, that it might serue as a continuall exercise vnto the young Romanes, who for want of wanes, would spoyle themselues through too much idlenes, which (afterward) fell out to be too true; For the Romanes being Lords ouer the whole world (by reason they had no more enemies to ouerthrow) spoyled and ouercame their owne selues, doing vengeance one vpon another, with their owne proper swords: in requitall of all such wrongs and iniu∣ries, as they had offered vnto strangers, who could neuer haue bene able to haue done halfe so much hurt vnto them. And so I may say of Loue,The commen∣dation of Loue for what exercise were able to keepe downe so great a number of follies attending vpon youth, who for the most part are idle and slothfull, if Loue, did not set him to schoole, and busie his braynes about matters of great moment and weight? He would quarrell, brawle, and fight, delighting in drunkennesse, and in surfeitting: He would be arrogant and proude, a great Gamester, and a leaud Dicer, or else become altogether sottish and foolish. But hauing (once gotten him a Mistris, he must (if hee meane to be entertained into her seruice) clense himselfe of all these badde vices; For seeldome or neuer, doeth Loue meddle with leaude and ill disposed per∣sons. Well may comelines rauish and winne the heart of a gallant Ladie: but beasilines, neuer is able, because it hath no one iote of that diuine perfection, resembling the Al∣mightie, which hee doth bestowe vpon such as pleaseth him, to make to be loued, and to make them to be admyred for the excellencie of his gifts, which are enclosed with∣in them. Therefore must such young men as would be beloued, studie to come to be graue, curtcous, eloquent, stayed, and secret. These commendable qualities, must they hold of Loue in Capite: these being the ordinary lessons hee teacheth vnto his schollers, in his schoole. Contrariwise, if you but marke these vaine young Gulles, that loue not at all, you shall finde them viciouslie giuen, Blasphemers, Drunkardes, Dicers, arrogant Asses, and swaggering Bragadcchios. The young Boy, that is without a Tutor, is hee not worse, (and an hundred times more rude) then he, that hath a carefull and seuere Master, who looketh vnto him nar∣rowlie, and sharpely keepeth him in? For nothing increaseth vice and leaudenesse so much, as doeth wanton libertie. The vnbrideled Colte runneth galloping heere and there, committing manie foule disorders. The priuiledge of Euill, taketh away all Vertue, be cause it stifleth the re∣compence of good deedes, and hindreth the punishment due vnto offences. The auncient Princes, who would haue their Children learne how to obey well, be∣fore they should commaund, sent them to studie amongst the Lacedcmonians, to the in∣tent they might be restrained and depriued of this enchaunting libertie, through which men draw forth vice, as if it were at a full vessell. LOVE therefore, must be gouernour and protector ouer youthfulnesse, which he will purge from badde qualities, (as the Physition doth the sicke man, from corrupt humours) replenishing him againe, with manie excellent and commendable Vertues. Is not then Loue very necessarie? The winde carryeth the chaffe from the Corne, lea∣uing onely that, that is good, and fanned cleerly.
So doth Loue,A Similie. croppe off vice, cutting it away, as the husbandman doeth the superflu∣ous braunches of his vine, leauing the inward minde, neat, and quite clensed from all fil∣thinesse of vice. Loue can doe more then all knowledge, yea, then the Muses them∣selues can doe. For he teacheth learned men (who hauing a confused masse and heape of thousand Sciences in their braines, not knowing in what good manner to deliuer their mindes (ar full) as concerning these matters, how to set downe their meaning or∣derly, and to discourse of euery thing, with good method and iudgement: imitating the cunning Gold-smith, who of a great wedge of Gold, forgeth and frameth a great sort of good peeces of plate, right profitable for men. Or resembling the Sun, which breaketh and diuideth in sunder the gloomy clouds, which darkē the brightnes of heauē. He is the luke-warme blood of the Goate, mollifying and sotfning these rocks of Diamonds, tur∣ning them to the vse of all sorts of people. The greatest Doctors are but Dunces, vntill Loue hath refined them, and that they haue felt what his power is, they after that, be∣comming wittie and Courtly enditers, through the sweete vaine of Loue. For necessi∣tie findeth out the Art, and the perill sought forth by the Soldior, vrgeth him to finde the means to saue himselfe. And so is the Louer compelled to please his Mistris, which he doeth, either discoursing vnto her his true and loyall affection, in smoothe and plea∣sing tearms, or else, couching them sweetly, and daintily in writing curiously, and with a Courtlike phrase. And of this perfection, is Loue also the author, & shall he then be called a Paine, and not rather the father of all science and vertue? It is reported that the Muses lighted one day vpon Cupid, keeping him within a border of flowers, but what could that border bring, but pleasure and contentment vnto them, who had enclosed him within the same? The Muses then honored Loue (as Conquerors are wont to be v∣sed) placing vpon his head, a Crowne of greene flowers, as also the most wisest in the world, haue offered scrifices vnto him, and to his celestiall Godhead, he being the grea∣test power amongst the Gods that are in Heauen. Therefore, as I will not dispute against him, so dare I not maintaine the cause of anie that should not pleade in his behalfe. Herewithall the noble Knight held his peace, daunting very much the other Nymph that had written against LOVE, with these his liuely and excellent reasons, which (she thought) were of such efficacie and force, that they could hardly be refelled by anie o∣ther. But the olde man, who found himselfe to be ouercome in the argument hee had with Philistell, as concerning Inchauntment and Sorcerie, willing to recouer his lost honor, and to winne the spurres againe, in this second disputation, replied against Loue, in this wise. I cannot denie, but must needs confesse, that neither the ordinary trauailes that men vse, nor the day lie labours which they vsually take, ought to be called Paine, for they are not (alwayes) of one force and nature, they passing away, quiet & rest comming in their place, as the Bowe, that cannot alwaies remaine stiffe and bent, wheras Loue onely (and that most iustly) deserueth well this name of Paine.An example. The Laborer being payed for his worke, is contented, and taketh his rest, the Husbandman, reaping his corne, taketh his ease, and liueth merilie after: but in Loue, what quietnes can be found? The poore drudge being wearie, reposeth himselfe in the night, so doth the tyred Traueller, and e∣uery beast whatsoeuer: but the Louer, what rest receiueth he, either in the night or day? As the day is tedious vnto him, so is the night irksome and sadde, are they then freed of paine? The hungrie desire neuer taketh quiet ease, but is in continuall paine: the gree∣die couetous wretch, crauing still golde, can neuer so much as slumber one winke: but the tormented Louers, leadeth a wotse life (farre) then both these twaine, because that good which he so much wisheth for (and yet cannot obtaine it) seemeth more pretious vnto him, then all the Treasures in the world. This doctrine, to KNOW: HIMSELFE, doeth him no good at all, for it cannot bridle his passions, keep in his hed strong will, nor curb or constraine his ardent affections: and hee that cannot so doe, can neuer be quiet in his minde. Now the Louer coueteth alwayes, and couetousnes is the child of paine: Is not then Loue the author of paine? and is it any thing else then meere griefe? Nay, although the Louer obtaineth that which he desireth, yet for all that, his torments cease not, because he wisheth still to cōtinue the same: & (for that the sore doubt he hath to lose that, which he hath obtained
with so much trauell) increaseth the paine (still) in him. The more golde the couetous myzer possesseth, the more continually he wisheth,A Sentence. by reason the contentmēt of man is without any limit: for being glutted with one kind of meat, he is greedy and hungry after an other. Diogines gaue out, that he was contented in his pouertie, but yet he was not, for he did hunt after vaine-glory. What shall wee then say of Louers? who not onely desire to enioy their Loues, but also a continuation still to gather them. And when, that length of much time, hath quenched this fire of loue, yet is there still remaining some hote cinders, which presently is set on fire with the wind of desire, as a flame (when it is out) is reuiued againe, with the breath of the Ayre: the selfe-same Loue, beeing of this propertie, that after it hath a long space troubled and tormented, ouerthrowne, and ruinated a man, with continuall paine and anguish of minde, in the ende it taketh away his life, whether he will or no. Achilles knoweth this to be true, who died for louing Polixena, being slaine most miserablie amongst his enemies. So doth Priam,An Example. the foolish loue of incestuous Paris, being the cause he lost his life. And so doeth sage Agamemnon, whose disloyall wife cut his owne throate, because she might (the more safer) follow her disordinate appetite. O what a pernitious thing is this Loue! & how often hath it broke the plighted oath betweene man & wife, making them amorous of strangers, and causing them to disdaine their nuptiall bed, with base and filthie whoredome? The good Em∣perour Marcus Aurelius, remembred this but too too well, who saw so often his wife, o∣uer familar with so many: and poor Sampson through loue, was depriued of his strength; and made a slaue vnto others: that Sampson I say, who was wont to conquer others, and to make them become tributaries vnto him. Againe, what faith and trust is there to be reposed in Louers, so cunning are they; and so readie to break their promises, and to sweare falsly? that Iupiter iesteth and scof∣feth at their protestations, as one that thinketh, they neither can nor ought to keepe them any longer then they list. For if men (now a daies) be so basely giuē, that they will strait yeelde vnto Loue, and that the desire to enioy a little paltrie beautie, or a little co∣loured complexion, composde of white and red, can make them to forget all dutie, all promise, and their owne good nature it selfe; What then should hinder them, but that they may loue in another place, to endanger their Faith there, & to sweare, and forsweare themselues againe? For hee that once committeth one sinne, will easily fall into diuers other more grieuous: & he that is knowne to be faultie in one thing,A Sentence. is reputed to haue offended in all the rest. Besides, so farre is Loue off, from standing the learned in anie stead, that it hindereth and ouerthroweth their learning: for it is impossible for a lear∣ned man, both to loue, and follow his studie together, because the minde cannot in one and the selfe-same time, intend to hunt after diuers matters: and for that, the care which Loue engendreth, hindereth a wise man, in prositing himselfe at his booke, and doeth withdraw him from the pervsing and reading of the same. Againe, if there be neuer so meane and little ascience in the world, but is sufficient to imploy a mans whole life time, and all his wittes therein, and yet for all that, it hath neuer bene found, that any could euer sound the deapth of the same: How (then) is it possible, that a wise man should be able to follow both Loue and Learning, & (to) prooue excellent in both? Nay then, I will see farther, and dare auouch, that the malice of the Serpent, not onely spoyleth and corrupteth the studie of the wise, but also his condition and religion. And that this is true, great Dauid, and his sonne Salomon, can witnesse, and the Iewes themselues, whom the loue of the Moabite women, which the trayterous King Balaac sent vnto them, moued from the seruice of the true God, making them become most wicked and abhominable Idolaters. What greater mischiefe can happen vnto a man, then to denie his God, his faith, his beliefe, and his religion: yea, and therewithall, to loose all his wisdome, and authoritie? If Loue (then) be the cause of so manie mis∣fortunes vnto men, and bringeth them with him vnto them, is not he then, the damna∣ble author of our ruine, our perpetuall paine, and vtter ouerthrow? heeis farre worfe then all the poysonous serpents of the earth, yea, then the Diuels of of hell themselues. Not so, quoth Coribant, and therefore I pray you make a stop there: for Loue is not of that bad nature, neither is hee to be compared vnto such wicked creatures, as you would haue vs beleeue: for were it not for him (whom you reuile so much) neither you,
nor any man else could liue at all. That which maintaineth all things, and giueth life and force vnto them, can that be teatmed an euill spirst? So farre off is Loue from be∣ing such a one, as he hath made the Fiendes of hell themselues, milde and gentle, when the faithfull Orpheus went downe thither, to bring backe his deare espouse. That which doth not vsurpe vpon publike honestie, but hath respect vnto euery vertuous action, may it be called an enemie of Nature? Loue hath preserued, both honor, respect, and vertue, then why should anie blame him? The sonne of Seleucus, falling in loue with his stepmother, chose rather to be brought (euen vnto deaths doore) then to declare as much as his passion, for feare least he should haue offended the honor, respect, and the obeisance of a Father, through the dutie of a louing Sonne. There is no doubt, but that man is to be commended highly, who rather consenteth vnto his own death, ruine, and miserie, then to commit a most notorious and vnnaturall fact. Loue forceth the Louer, to chuse (rather) to die,A Sentence. then to perpetrate any hainous fault. Is Loue then the subiect of blame? Loue resembleth wine, which taken moderately, and with measure, nourisheth the bodie, but being vsed too excessiuely, it burneth and inflameth the same. Euen so Loue, being well and wisely applyed, may bring much profit & glorie, as it did vnto the Romans & Sabines, who being ready to encounter, and to kill one another, they agreed so louingly, as (euer after) they were but as one bodie, or a Citie within themselues. Indeed if it be ill imployed, then I must needes say, it may doe much hurt: but it is the Louer himselfe that is in fault thereof, and not Loue. The grape of the vineyard, of it selfe is good, and was giuen for a nourishment vnto man, yet neuerthelesse, man sometimes dyeth, with taking ouermuch thereof: but is this the fault of the grape, or of him that abused the same? Is there any precious treasure to be found, throughout the compasse of the wide and spatious world, that is to be compared vnto a loyall & faithfull friend? What happier contentment can there be, betweene man and wife, then chast and perfect loue? The greatest blessing that euer Mithrdates found in this life, was his kinde wife, that in all his troubles, still did assist and accompanie him, shee being attired in the ap∣parell of a man, and doing him all the serurce she could, as if shee had bene the meanest of his ordinary followers. Manie things are there (bestowed vpon vs) by the Heauens, which of their owne natures are good, and yet the malice of man doth alter them, into a bad propertie: As weapons, with which they kill one another: Fire, wherewith they burne whole Cities and townes: Gold, with which vertue is corrupted: and the cloake of Religion, wherewith they couer their proud ambition, with many such like. Yet although these things are (thus ill vsed) and wrested by the corruption of man, we must not therefore say, they are bad of their owne selues: but rather, by reason of the malice of others. Euen so, Loue being perfect and good (in his owne proper nature) and of his owne selfe, be abused and made worse, through the default of men; it is not he, but they, that are to be condemned for the same. Had Iupiter neuer loued, the earth had neaer bene clensed, nor purged of such monsters, as much did trouble it, for then the mightie Hercules had neuer bene borne. Marke I beseech you, how much wee all are beholding vnto Loue. Many times when men fall a discoursing, and from words to quarrels, so farre is Loue off, from being the author thereof, as quite contrarie, (were it not for his presence) contentious Discord would animate one against another, euerie one to murther his companion & acquaintance: for where Loue is, there neuer is seene any disagreement at all. And therefor is Loue the father of concord and peace, and not of brawling and strife:A Historiz. yea, and so puissant and forcible is hee, as his power also exten∣deth to force wilde beasts to be milde, as was that Lyon which was brought before Titus the Emperor, which in steed of deuouring the poore slane (who was flung vnto her, to staunch her exceeding great hunger) gently fell downe at his feete, stroking him, & do∣ing him all the reuerence that might be, and louing him most deerely, by reason that this slaue (flying away from the seuere crueltie of his maister, and lighting into a wood, where this beast was, had pulled out a great thorne out of his foote, which most pitious∣lie did grieue him. Now if brute beasts are taught to loue, out of doubt then, such men shall be much condemned, as will not follow the like example. The graue Spartans put in practise this counsell, to the intent to haue children, in as much as they imagined that such as were begotten, through a firme and passing kinde of good liking, would prooue
farre more valiant and couragious, then such as were borne of the husband and wife, without louing one an other. And surely we see by experience, that such children are more gallant, and of a bra∣uer spirit, then those that are brought forth into the world lawfully: whether it is either because the loue of such persons is more affectionate and passionate, that are the cause of their byrths, or whether it be, for that they see by reason that they are Bastards, they are depriued of their Parents inheritance, and therefore the more willingly thrust forth themselues to seeke their owne aduancement. Iefpha the Iudge of Israel, and William, surnamed the Conqueror, that got the Crowne of England, were of this number, with infinite other braue personages. So that by this, we may gather, that Loue not onely bringeth forth honor and profite vnto men, but al∣so an vnspeakable kinde of comfort withall. They that haue tryed the pleasure there∣of, can better iudge then I: For the delight that Loue affordeth, is so sweete, so gentle, and so delightfull, as it is not possible to set downe, no, nor scarce to conceiue the same, in anie thoughts: So that in comparison of that, all other mortall ioyes are but;A Bomparison as it were, small sparkles, and like vnto litle stars in respect of this, which for the glorie there∣of may be compared vnto the splendent Sunne. Heerewithall Coribant kept silence, lea∣uing Arcas to follow this discourse, and to make an end of this disputation, which he did, in these termes following. If it be lawfull for one to say something, and to argue of that which wee cannot see, (as of a Deitie or Godhead) then must we reason by the effects of the same. But these which exceede our humane capacitie and conceit, giue vs a most certaine and sufficient testimonie, that we ought to belieue, that there is a certaine puissance and power, farre greater then is our owne, which we cannot attribute vnto anie other then vnto GOD. As in a wildernes, the houses there built, testifie that men be dwelling therein, because they are the worke of mens hands. So may we say of Loue, and so it is with him, for ne∣uer hath any person seene him, nor viewed him at any time; yet notwithstanding,A Similie. eue∣ry one is able to talke and to discourse of him, by reason of the wonderfull effects, which proceed from his diuine power and might. Where you say, that Children borne out of marriage, are valiant and couragious; At that I maruell nothing at all: for Loue being a Bastard (as the sonne of Mars and Venus) cannot doe lesse, then like, support, and affect his brethren, they hauing the same beginning that he hath. Neuerthelesse, (for all they haue some particular gift incident vnto them) yet are they (as illegitimate) depriued both by Nature, and by the Ciuill Law, from bearing any charge or office in the common-wealth, as their birth is contrarie vnto the custome, as well of honestie, as of all ciuill order and Lawe. Therefore Loue is not praise-worthie in this point, for manie times hee confoundeth Right, and maketh a gallimalfrie, or a mingle-mangle of Iustice, bringing such vnlawfull Brattes as these, to inherit with those that are lawfullie begotten, either for default that they are not knowne, or taken to be such, or else, because their presupposed father, will not publish them for Bastards, for that he will not offend the honor of his wife. But say the world were freed from such kinde of men, and that there were no more such to be found: yet for all that, it should be (neuer a whit) the lesse honored, nor lesse defended, I confesse and yeelde, that Loue is mightie, and of great power, in the procrea∣tion of such children. But as all Countreyes and Realmes (without the execution of Iu∣stice) are but plaine & open theeueries, and robberies, liuing as licentious Outlawes: So Loue without reason and Iustice, is but a disordinate appetite, trampling vnder his feete, all respect, all Iustice, and all Law, to satisfie and asswage his hote and burning passions. And how much Sumiramis, the nieces of Augustus the Emperour, Poppea, Agrippina, Faustina, and diuers others, haue bene condemned, for following such kinde of Loue, and giuing ouer themselues, most voluptuously, vnto all sorts of people, you knowe as well as I am able to report. Where you say, that Loue is not the author of vice, but ra∣ther men, who applie the same ill, and abase it, through the badnesse of their owne na∣ture; I answer, that it is nothing so. For as the prisoner, cannot dispose of him, who is his keeper, and holdeth him captiue: Euen so, men are so farre off from ruling Loue, ac∣cording as they would, that hee vseth them as he list, holding them so fast (in such sure
bands) as they can doe nothing but what shall please him. There is difference betweene him and wine: for a man may take heede if he will, that he drinke not so much, vntill he be drunke, but he cannot (so easilie) resist Loue, in as much, as that reason being sup∣prest which is in man (vpon which presently, Loue, as a tyrant ceazeth) he (can then) doe no more of himselfe, he being constrained and compelled, to follow the will and commaund of him, that doth signorize ouer him. For if Loue were in the free libertie, & at the deuotion and disposition of men, and that they might imploy him as they should thinke best, then would not so many wretched Louers, endure such cruell torments and bitter anguish as they doe, but would quickly ridde themselues from out his cruell hands. But (alas) they can no more get from him, then the poore bond-slaue, can get out of his chaines, except it please his Lord and maister. Therfore, we must not say, that men can order and bridle Loue at their owne pleasures, turning him, to good or bad purpo∣ses, as they shall thinke best, when it is quite contrarie, (and as they say, Allo reuerso) he playing the vsurping tyrant ouer them. In the end of your speech (to make amends) you tell me, that this selfesame Loue, maketh a perfect and an eternall league of friendship, betweene Gods and men, in such sort, as it forceth the husband to offer his life most willingly, for his wiues sake, and that the wife, doth the like for the conseruation of her husbands welfare. As Craccus,A Similie. who to cōtinue his wiues life, shortned his owne. And as Alcesta did, who offered her selfe to die for Adentus her husbands sake. Yet as sharpe and strong medi∣cines, engendred much danger and feare, yea and many times, are much hurtfull to the bodie of man, so Loue (during this amitie) bringeth forth many bad and vntowardly children, which alter and chaunge their mindes very much, and are not a little hurtfull vnto both parties: as the burning Iealousie which so much galled poore Iuno long since, as the whoredomes, with which Venus defiled the bed of Vulcan her husband, with the number of Rapes vsed by Iupiter, and such like bad stuffe. So as you see so many euils to proceed, for one small little good. But as he cannot be called a bountifull and liberall giuer indeed, who presenteth and bestoweth a small trifle, to purchase huge and mightie riches. Euen so, Loue cannot be counted, neither good, nor healthfull, when for one (onely) good turne he doth, he yeeldeth forth so many sufficient proofes, of his wicked and bad nature. In no one action, doth Loue merrit commendations, for he respecteth neither reason nor Iustice, and such things, as are voyd of those two qualities, can neuer deserue honour, nor cause themselues to be counted perfect: he is without reason, in that he re∣gardeth neither law, nor kindred, friendship nor acquaintasce, no good turne, nor any kinde consideration else, so as he may come to obtaine what he desireth. One while violating and breaking the lawes of hospitalitie: another while, those of marriage: and then, those of parentage and kindred. He is without Iustice, because he rauisheth, and taketh away by force, that which is none of his owne, applying the same to his owne aduantage, as if it were his owne proper goods; raising and procuring, by these bad meanes, thousands of brawles and brabbles, debates and quarrels, and continuall warres and battaile; In steed of seemely, and fitte exercises, he should acquaint young men withall, he oftentimes maketh them so mad and furious, as they sticke not to commit rapes, to offer violence, and to doe all the villainies that may be, thereby infringing the peace and lawes of the common-wealth. Well may he be compared vnto the Snake, which the husbandman carried in his bosome to warme, it being nie dead for colde, which afterward went about to sting him for his paines. So Loue, in requitall, and for amends vnto vs, for the honour we haue borne him, and because we haue so curteously entertained him, stingeth vs with furie and rage, and with iniustice and miserie, these being the fruites which he bringeth vs, and which are (as it were the precursors and fore-runners, of a most wofull and wretched death, which end, (most commonly) lighteth vpon Louers: for furie is the daughter of sorrow, and not of pleasure, which our desire doth ouermuch couet.
And that I alledge nothing but Truth, I will prooue it most apparant and plaine, by a goodly Historie, which if you please to giue mee audience, I will deliuer vnto you. Wherevpon they were all silent, when the Shephcard thus began his wofull Tragedie. LOVE, author of all euill, (the nurse of dainties delicate,The strange historie, and wofull ende of proude Sycambra, and loyall Zersira. That chuseth for to soiourne proude, in Pallaces of State: Who makes himselfe be honored, as Father of the skies, In Courts of mightiest Kings, and in the heauens, mongst Gods likewise. As yet scarce haunted had the Plaines, congeal'd with Ice and cold, Nor solitary Desarts strange, which snowy mountaines hold. He had but little in the Woods (yet) vsed for to be, Permitting Shepheards quietly, to ioy their libertie. Who, not so much (as thinking once, on him) had no more care, Then their small flocks forth for to leade, along the medowes faire. To watch, and to defend them, (arm'd) for armed still they were, From roaring Lyon, howling Wolfe, or from the rauenous Beare. Right happie is that man, that hath, then (this) no worser foe, The pleasant sweetnes of his life, to make him to forgoe. Happy indeed, if other thought, he hath not in this life, This trauaile being the cause of all content, and foe to strife. Withouten carke and care, they past their time deuoyd of feare, And from the Fatall sisters sheeres, exempt and freed they were. As iocund, and as meerrily they liu'd, as day was long, No mestfull griefe was intermixt, their sweet discourse emong. Nor were their cheekes beblubbered (still) with teares cominually, As wretched Louers, who bewaile their woes, with weeping eye. Withouten sighes, and sorrowes sad, they liu'd most blessed than, Nor they, their Fortunes did reuile, and as accursed ban. No pittious Tennor, such as this, their Songs or Chantings had, No mournfull note came heauily, forth from their brests ore-sad. As Louers vse, their Musique sweet, and merrie warbling voyce, Much like that of the Gods of Woods, that each thing doth reioyce. No enuious malice mongst them was, no poyson at their Table, No proud desire, the spring-tyde of their youth, made miserable. Exempt from all ambitious thoughts they were, whose mounting dart (Piercing into the minds of men) doth make them often smart. Nor any other passion strange had they, or did endure, Then such as did an earnest care, for their poore flocks procure. They thought they could resist Loues force, and oft did iest at him, Thinking he was not able, them vnder his yoake to bring. And as a stubborne Rock (we see) the Tempests rage doth scorne, Who growing angry at his pride, renues afresh his storme. Vntill, with flashy Laghtning-claps, in pieces he doth breake His flintie stones, whilst to resist, his furie is too weake. And with a boysterous Whyrle-winds blast, on sudden casts downe all, So as being cleft in midst, it doth, in thousand pieces fall. Transporting (here and there) apart, by violence so burst,A Similie. And with the clap of Thunder-bolt, becommeth black as dust. Alongst the medowes and the fields, whilst they as trembling stand, To see how raging Tempests fell, ore euery thing commaund. Euen so, these Shepheards mockt at Loue, they scorn'd at his renowne, Who, chafing at them, (quickly) puld their Peacocks plumes adowne. Taking them prisoners in the snares, which they for others set, Whilst (idlely) they went to hunt, the light-foote Leueret. So long they gib'de at him, till at the last, they bought it deare, As did the Muses heretofore, when as they amorous were.
And had him taken fettered fast, within a Flowrie line, He thinking them to haue embrac't, through his great power diuine. For Cupid in meane time, as one enuious of their glorie, Thinking the fairer that he tooke, the more his victorie. Resolu'd to vanquish them, and in his yoake to make them draw, And force them prooue (against their wills) the rigor of his law. He at anynch doeth follow them, watching most warily, As doeth the Hunts-man when his game (the wilde Boore) he doth spie. When they were set along the bankes, of some cleare running brooke. Or on some little Hillock small, or Oake for shade had tooke. Or whilst (like Fairies) they sat downe, about some siluer spring, Some working, and some doing one, and some, another thing. Some, tuning their Rebeccas rude, and some their Cornets shrill, Each one, themselues applying to what sport they had most will. Whilst in the thickest of the grasse, and meadowes coloured greene, Their prettie foolish Flocks to daunce to feede, and bleat, were seene. Meane time, LOVE watch't with wary heed, aduantage for to take, To spoyle their pleasures sweet, and them his prisoners for to make. But he did find that this could not vpon the hast be done, To vanquish such as prudent be,A Sentence. is not effected soone. This Fort of Vertue to assault, he could not find the feate, Sore doubting, lest in skirmishing, he should (repulst) be beate. Not easily can Loue surprise, the double fenced brest Of such a one,A Sentence. who for his Loue, of vertue is possest. Where (through preuention graue) he knew, he no good there could finde, Whilst, mongst chast harts, his force was like, a little blast of winde. In th'end, when long he had attempt (although it was in vaine) He playeth the subtile Spie, with craft, his purpose to obtaine. Thrusting himselfe in middest of, this chast and harmles flocke, As doth the Wolfe, when he doth meane, the silly Lamhes to mocke. Dauncing within the eyes most faire, of fairest Shepheardesse, To make himselfe be honored there, with lowly humblenesse. There doth he take his lodging vp, this practise for to prooue, And rauisheth thousands of harts (most chast) with her sweet Lone. Meane while, vnto the Shepheards all, this Shepheardesse doth seeme So faire a Creature, as her face, immortall they do deeme. They, her adore within their soules, and loue her perfectly, They seek to serue her, honoring her with zeale, religiously. But she makes no account of them, she thinks her selfe diuine, Whilst mortall men, for her to loue, she scorns, as t'were a crime. Thus Loue, with pride, such minds doth fill, as with such heat is firde, And who, with such disdainfull spirits, most hauty are inspirde. So (oft) fine coyest Dames,A Sentence. most proud, and insolent become, When, men they'le haue to account of them, & yet mens sights will faun. Euen as that Souldier, who doth back returne to natiue soyle As victor, not a little vaunts, and bragges of golden spoyle. So with vain-glory,A Comparison small is not, this angell possest, Whose insolencie is such, as Heauens themselues the same detest. Honor, oft-times, engendred is, of the most perfects thing, Each one belieues his owne conceit, (his passion following) Accounts of what is excellent, within his proper soule, But yet such faults as him disgrace, he neuer doth controule. He seeth the goodliest gifts he hath,A Sentence. to be distaind with pride, Yet on this vice so palpable, to looke he cannot bide. This Shepheardesse, Sycambra proud, was call'd, and christned so, Whose high aspiring, wrought (in th'end) her finall ouerthrow.
A faire young Shepheard did her loue (her) did he lone alone, But at her hands (poore silly soule) contentment found he none. For though she knew affection his, did towards her surmount, Yet she, not of his friendship waide, nor of him made no count. Too too diuine, she thought her selfe, for any for to loue, Loues selfe, (so high she lookt) her will could hardly change or moue. Yet, by the selfe-same Loue, her pride was punisht to her cost, And this presumptuous minde of hers, was cause her life she lost. For now behold, LOVE (who to'th Gods) for might yeelds not at all. (Brauely) totame proud stubborne hearts, that pride might haue a fall. Beyond, this loftie minded Girle doth soare, the prize to haue, Whilst to a heart more proud then hers, he makes her stoope, like slane. This was a Springall young, who of his youth was in the prime, Sanguin, as Adon, faire, as faire Nurcissus, in his time. As trim, and fresh as May, whose chiefe delight and exercise, Was hunting of the rauenous Wolfe, as was his vsuall guise. The poysoned darts of restles Loue, which loyall hearts doth slay, His wonted rest, brake not at all, by night, nor yet by day. He neuer dream'd of, nor ere knew, what those sad waylings means. Which gripes the Louers oft with griefs, and makes them pule & leane. He carefull, looking to his sheepe, his time away did passe, In hunting was his chiefest ioy, his loue, wet fishing was. Thus doe you see, how Loue reueng'd himselfe, on that coye Dame, Who ore-presumptuous, both his grace and fauour did disdaint. Thus, hurlie burlie makes he, being the sire of leand debate, Confounds all orders good, and sense, and changeth our estate. So braue Achilles lou'd, yet could not lou'd be of his friend, So did Apollo, Daphne like, but tw'as vnto no end. So thousands loued haue, who nere could right rewarded be. Whilst they true tryall made of Loues most vninst crueltte.A Sentence. Sycambra, she (whom others lik'te) did loue, ss being lou'd, And seeking others to transforme, herselfe transformde she proon'd. The louely Swaine which she adorde, Armanda, (epedso,) Armanda, whom Sycambra sought, yet nere could find him the. Of stature he was tall, well made of personage and face, And in discretion bare himselfe, with trim and seemely grace. His chestnut haire, was like vnto the whitish waters wet, Which dangling downe in tresses faire, did waue alongst his necke. His faultlesse for-head, large and broad, as outward witnes gane, By secret instinct (as it were) of his stout courage brane. His eyes in colour like to blacke, with twinckling eye-browes hid, The swift flight which from bowe doth flie, resemble aptly did. His Currall mouth was Rubie red, like to the ruddyrose, When through the heat of Sunne, himselfe he daintily doth close. His checks, white as the Creame, wherein red strawberies one flings, His Gate and port, like to the state Maiesticall of kings. His naked chinne, declar'd his youth, on which no haire was yet, His well-growne armes, his valour stout: his speech, his prudent wit. By this same gentle Shepheard, was Sycambras pride tooke downe, Since (carelesse of her care for him) he on her still did frowne. Cruell he was without remorse, vnto her endlesse paine, As she vnto her Louer was, retchlesse and hard againe. His great disdaine, this crueltie made her to feele the more, Which (through his beautie, ouer proud) he made her suffer sore. Thus, oft by selfe-same punishment, which we doe others make To feele, for our offences bad, like penance we doe take.A Sentence.
So (oft) the Heauens, by selfe-same Blade, to slay our proper Coarse, (With which we others slaughtered haue) doe iustly vs inforce. Now whilst this Shepheardesse did burne, infancie, with vnease, Nothing, (vnlesse Armanda t'was) her eyes bewitcht, could please. Yet nothing did Armanda loath so much, as when he spide Sycambra, hatefull to his sight, for then, for spite he dide. Thus, their desires (quite contrarie) the one vnto the other, Could not but bring forth thousand griefs, which they were forc't to smother. Sycambra curst that haplesse Loue, which made her for to burne, For him, who vnto her againe, like Loue did not returne. And contrarie, that she must hate the Amitie so rare, Which Zerphir, Zerphir, Louer hers, most loyall to her bare. For so that gentle Swaine was call'd, whose friendship was not fainde, And who, for honoring her so much, much sorrow had sustainde. Meane space, Sycambra night and day, laments her Fortunes hard, Accusing her crosse Fate, and Loue, from all good luck debard. Whilst all this while, Armanda blythe, his hunting followeth fast, And chasing of the Hart and Hynde, his time with pleasure past. He sleepeth soundly in the night, withouten dread or feare, Whilst amorous (onely) of his health, himselfe he seeks to cleare. But weladay, the other Swayne, poore Zerphir, Zerphir poore, As did Sycambra, so did he, most grieuous paines endure. As well as she Armanda lou'd, helon'd her, or as much, Whilst with the flame of selfe-same fire, Loue his true hart did touch. Yet could he not this vncoth flame, extinguish, coole, or quench, Loue, so from case and remedy, did keepe him as a fence. Sycambras griefe, and Zerphires paine, alike were in like case, Whilst from their blubbered eyes, salt tearesran trickling downe apace. Both wounded with like Loue, and yet with diuers sundry darts, Encreasing more their dolours, and their pangs within their harts. Sycambra nere Armanda could, attaine as oft she sought, Nor to affect Zerphir, her Swaine, she euer could be brought. Most wretched her hard happe, to place Loue, where she reapt disdaine, Withouten any remedy, for to asswage her paine. Nor to haue power to succour him, who was her Louer true, Whom she did force (yet could not chuse) through her disdaine to rue. Thus many dayes, in this estate, these strange desires remaind, Whilst neither length of time, nor wees, their Fortunes euer chang'd. Sycambra louing still the man, that would not her requite, Nor she once smiling on her Swayne, whose ioy was in her sight. But in the end, vnable more this choaking rage to smother, She did resolue, at resolute, her toments to discouer. To trie if she Armanda could, perswade to ease her smart, And if a gainfull purchase she could make, of his deare hart. For one day (as his fashion was) as he was on the wayes, Attending on his flocke of sheepe, which want only did grase, Not thinking he of any Loue, (detesting such a fee) Deuising thousand toyes himselfe to please, as he did goe. Sycambra sweetly him accosts, and prayeth him doe her grace, To giue her leaue, her Fortunes hard, she may discourse a space. And not her prayers to disdaine, nor yet her secret vow, Nor crueller then Gods to be, who vnto prayers how. Vouchsafing mortall men to heare, and them not to despise, But mou'd vnto compassion, heale their wounds in pittious wise. These words Armanda galled much, (who nought for her did passe) Yet she so vrg'de him, as to heare her speake, content he was.
She then as one amazde in minde, quite out of countenance, Her vitall spirits bereft of hope, her ioyes for to aduance. A cold swet ouer all her face, quaking with frightfulnesse, Her eyes halfe shut for shame, her heart fraughted with much distresse Her sences, daunted sore, her breath still panting too and fro, All which, as true fore-runners, did her griefs at hand fore-show. Her tongue stuttring, & stammering thick, her voyce trembling & soft, Now weeping, and then sobbing fast, and sighing then full oft. She thus to him (vnkinde) did speake at last, though (first) t'were long, To him who pleasure small did take, in this her wofull Song. Ah my Armanda, wilt not take on me compassion? Nor of these torments which doe vexe me, in this vncoth fashion? Wilt thou her send most cruelly, vnto her fatall Tombe? Her, who in soule hath vow'de thine owne, alone for to become? Hast thou the heart, the wight that liues, onely for thee to slay? To th'end shee might thee dutious serue, and chastly thee obey? Sweet Shepheard, euery labour great, deserues a recompence, And (lesse men iustly deale) the Heauens with them will not dispence. They must respect vnto them giue, and awfull honor chiefe,A Sentence. They must their Louers loue, and seek to swage their inward griefe. Else are they not so curteous as is the Lyonesse, Who sheweth to him that feedeth her, a kind of thankefulnesse. Ah then regard my pittious plaintes, reward me for my paine, And suffer me to ioy thy loue, which I deserue to gaine. After a long laborious toyle, the Husbandman doeth reape, The wisht for fruit, which Haruest doth with plentie on him heape. Whereby hee well is guerdoned, for moyling so before, Forgetting quite all former care, which troubled him full sore. And wilt thou I, that partie be, afflicted with such crosse? That I alone, shall merite none receiue, for all my losse? That I shall alwayes liue in Dole, in sad lamenting still, Nor finde no ease for all my griefes, is this thy pleasures will? Wilt thou be without pardon sweete, and mercie all alone, Like to a Furie full of hate, wilt thou be such a one? Ah sweete Armanda, (hart too faire) so cruell for to bee, Beautie and Mercie, as two Twinnes, together stillagree.A Sentence. Euen as the Iuye with his armes, the wall doeth close embrace, Winding himselfe most hard thereto: So Beautie cleanes to Grace. And wilt thou then by Bedlem rage, thy Beautie rare defame? Wilt thou through thy strange crucltie, purchase a Murtherers name? Wilt thou (ore-come with ore-much spite) force her vnwilling die? Who thee adoreth as the Gods aboue, most reuerently? Alack Armanda, doe not so, thy Vertue so to wrong, Wise men, themselues so carrie, as (they after death) liue long.A Sentence. Wee must not haue respect alone vnto the present thing, But hope that future praise, great ease vnto our soules may bring. Ah then (deare Shepheard) mercie showe to mee, which shall redowne, To thy immortall Glory much, and much to thy renowne. Be thou content to see her breathe, who by thy Grace doth liue: And who to view thy hurts, in soule (more then thy selfe) would grieue, No Treasure like a faihfull Friend, so rich you can denise, Who to himselfe gets foes, in minde, much diseontented dies. Friendship from Heauen first come, and as a gift diuine is held,A Sentence. And mortall men from ouerthrowes, it saued hath not seld. Then (Deare) vouchsafe for to appease the torments I endure, Appease my sorrowes, and my wounds (nigh mortall) daine to cure.
Nor force me not, lest dying, I (when life from me shall part) Doe call vpon thee in my death, as if chiefe cause thou wert. Ah speake then (my Delight) and cleare from me this bitter storme, By comforting my deadly woes, which I too long haue borne. To th'end thy kindnesse milde, to helpe my sicknesse may be seene, As hitherto, the Author of my troubles thou hast beene. But why doest thou so long delay to answere vnto mee? Hard harted more then flintie rocks, which in the mountains bee. Ah cruell man, I well perceiue, my loue thou doest disdaine, Nor wilt vouchsafe in cheerfull wise, to staunch my bleeding vaine. I see thou meanst with those thine eyes, prides dartes, still me to pierce, To close me in my fatall Tombe, through rigor thine, so fierce. Well, be it so, I am content; For happie I them gesse, Who dying,A Sentence. see to dye with them, their griefes, which then doe cease. And since I finde that sauadge-like, thou wilt not rue my state, I am well pleasde to end my dayes, because thou doest me hate. Then (yet but daine to speake to me) say, if thou wilt asswage, Or still increase these plagues of mine, which doe within me rage? (Cruell, dispatch my loyaltie, which nere from thee did swerue) Say in thy conscience, doeth it not, one word of thee deserue? Alas,A Sentence. answere, but I, or no, what lesse thing can one finde, Or baser priz'de, then is a word, which is but sound of winde? Thus said, she sighing ceast, whilst teares from cheekes, like showres did fall, Yet, nor her selfe, nor teares, nor speech, Armanda mou'd at all. Nay more, so cruell was he growne, as he disdaind to looke Vpon her face, her beautious face, which hardly he could brooke. Her passionate words, could not perswade, they made him hate her more, That he so long had giuen her eare, himselfe he blamed sore. In th'end, forc't by the vrgings oft, and importunitie Of sad Sicambra, who like Ghost, did haunt him with her crie. With furious lookes, and frowning brow, these words at last he spoke, Which (like a dismall Oracle) her heart in sunder broke. Foolish Sicambra, (thus in vaine) to vexe me, what doest meane? From these fond fittes of idle Loue: thy minde, why doest not weane? T'is thou, that makst Armanda die, in worse then wofull wise, Armanda, who thy speech and loue contemnes, as worthlesse prise. Thy tedious tale, told to no end, to heare, he little ioyes, He dies, tormented, tir'de, and gaul'd, to heare thee make such noyse. Now prie thee, prie thee, let alone Armanda miserable, Who for to take his wonted rest, is not through thee scarce able. He at thy follies doeth but smile; his chiefe delight and loue, Is for to chase wild beasts of prey, his strength gainst them to prooue. He cannot like of any thing, except his flocke of sheepe, With which, (to pleasure his, not small) he in the fields doth keepe. To force one loue against his will, is, what can neuer be, Neuer the same hath bene as yet. nor shall you find't in me. For loyall Loue, that it may dure, and neuer prooue to faint, Doth of himselfe,A Sentence. seaze on the heart, without force or constraint. Where being forc't, t'is alwayes bad, vnperfect and vnsound, For nothing's goodly, but what's built, on Friendships firmest ground. Then why, fond Gyrle, art thou so mad, to loue, me to constraine? By this thy earnest vrging speech, which thou too well canst faine? I tell thee, I in those false eyes, nor face of thine, delight, Nor doe I pittie ought at all, thy hard and heauy plight, I laugh to see thee (heauie) weepe, to heare thee sigh, I smile: And in thy martyring, much doe ioy, whilst thou complainst the while.
Poore wretch, thou doest but loosethy time; nor euer shalt thou finde, Armanda will his fancie change, to thee for to be kinde. He'le neuer loue thee; For before his heart should so conspire To quench so worthlesse flames, a death most strange he would desire. For neuer greater mischiefe vile, can any, himselfe bring, Then when he tries the lawes of Loue, and feeles his poysonous sting. Vnhappie they that know the same, and wise I him account, That with this bedlem passion mad, will not at all confrount. My yeares are too too young, mine age not ripe enough as yet, My selfe to subiect as a slaue, to Loue his furious fit. Nor haue I time enough, to be a scholler in his schoole, And I am wilde enough, although I play not so the foole. Then leaue me to my selfe, that I may of my selfe dispose, Whose pleasure, hunting is, whose sport, is quiet soft repose. And come not thus to trouble me, with these thy bawling cries, Which I assure thee, I disdaine, in most contemptuous wise. Be gone, nor looke (here) any more, thou come this text to preach, For, for such sicknesse as these, I am no pleasing leach. And therewith all the Shepheard sterne departs, and all alone Sicambra leanes vncomforted, Sanus pittying of her mone. Alacke, what should she doe as now? She could doe nought but waile, Which rather did encrease her griefe, then cause the same to quaile. No teares our passions can represse, which from the heart arise, A signe they are of woe, but want the perfect remedie. It is but lost time to lament, whil'st weeping we reuiue Afresh, these cruell torments which doe martire vs aliue. Now as she wofully thus tooke on, in this her desperate plight, Kinde Zerphir, who had sought her much, on her by chance did light And seeing her afflicted thus, all desolate and sole, He (sighing) weepes, to view her weepe, and with her doth condole. So suffereth the Louer chast, for his sweet Ladies sake, If she but grieued be, the same he at his soule doth take. He of the paine participates, which in her minde is growne, And more her hurt doth trouble him, then that which is his owne. Zerphir then, did endure as much, as did the Shepheardesse, Her teares were his, his pensiue plight, then his was nothing lesse. But after much lamentings sad, with many a bitter sob, He sweetly thus gan comfort her, whil'st fast her heart did throb. Sicambra, who (thus miserable) thy life hath made to me? Who hath thy fortune brought as mine, thus pittious for to be? Whence comes these sighes, true witnesses of thine in interuall troubles? Whence slow these teares apparant showes, that care within thee double, Ist possible a wight, to fiad so cruell in his will To worke, or once in minde to thinke so faire a Virgin ill. What heart so harsh, degenerate, can liue here on the ground, That to so rare a beautious face, he dare a foe be found? The all doing Gods, whose Essence is immortall and diuine. Haue heretofore sought fauours out, lesse faire a thousand time. Phoebus, of not so faire as thou, did dearely like and deeme. And Ioue, inferiours thine by far, did fancie and esteeme. Who then hard hearted so could be, to play so vile apart, As for to seeke to trouble thee, who more then Goddesse art? Neuer was yet diuinitie to be offended seene, But for their rash temeritie, it hath well punisht beene. Then Lady speake, who could ecclips thy Sun-shine glorie thus Or ore thy feature faire, who could become so tyrannous?
The hearts of many Shepheards proud, hast not thou vanquished? Thy diamond eyes, their haughtie spirits, haue they not rauished? Then why should'st thou thus mourne, and weepe? Ah cease to keepe this guile, And from thy heart, all dismall care, abandon and exile. Too louely is thy countenance, thy coarse too sweete to see, That in the flower of youth, thou should'st withouten Louers bee: Mong'st which, thy loyall Zerphir still, most dutious thou shalt finde, And who more then his proper good, thy seruice aie doth minde. Whil'st on the Altar of good will, his heart in zealous wise, Vnto thy Saint-like beautie he, (deuout) doth sacrifice. Ah, if thou wert acquainted with this heate so vehement, With which Loue doth incensevs so, whil'st he doth vs torment; If thou but knew'st this ill, by which such crosses sower we haue, Nere leaning vs, vntill our coarse, it bringeth to the graue; Or if thou canst imagine by thine owne experience, How much they suffer, whom Loue keepes within his warlike fence: Then by the selfesame bitter panges, which tortor thy sad heart, Doe take some pittie on my woes, and rue my deadly smart. If thou desir'st to haue thy wound to be recur'd with ease, To heale mine inward festring sore, let it not thee displease. Chase hence mine ill, drie vp my teares, and by one selfe same way, Driue thine likewise from hence, which else will soone worke my decay, Liue after Zerphir thy true slaue, withouten teene and care, Happe liue thou Sicambra sweet, in beautle, enerrare. Passe cheerfully thy time with him, who merily would liue, If he might see these ioylesse fits, thou ouer once would'st giue. (Deare) let me holde this life of mine, as tennant vnto thee, That freede from all disasters bad, thy heart he mighten see. Helpe thou thy selfe (Physition sweet) and driue away these fits, These fits, companions vnto griefe, which in thy countinance fits. And bring not him vnluckilie, before his time be come, (Who is thy secret seruant sworne) vnto his dismall Tombe. Ah speake to me mine onely ioy, and wipe thy watrie eyes, (Of late the clearest lightes of heauen) they were not made forcries. Giue to my frighted heart some breath, and yeeld to him such scope, That (one day) he of that his ill, may be acquit through hope. Put him in comfort, that (though now his fortunes in the waine) He may once fiade it at the full, and franchisde be againe. But why Sicambra speak'st thou not? And why art thou so sad? This humour thine melancolie, doth make me almost mad. Ah answere me, and by thy paine, what I doe suffer indge, Being ore loyall vnto thee, at which I doe not grudge. The parly portall of thy mouth, at last yet open breake, Vntill hold me not thus in suspence, but some what to me speake. For to importune thee with words, I neuer meane to leaue, Vntill some happie blest repile, I shall from thee receaue. Speake, then at last, that my poore heart may know if it shall cease From doubtfull dread, or if thou meanst to graunt it wished peace. Thus Zerphir woo'd, but she that had her minde (as then) not there, No answere to him gaue againe, nor what he said, did heare. She not so much as thought on him, nor what he had indur'd For her owne sake, (Loue all her thoughts so strongly had immurde) Yet he so earnest was with her, desiring her to show, What her intention was towards him, whereby he might it know. That in the end with choller mou'd (outragious through griefe,) Her passions ruling ouer her, and desprate of reliefe;
With pale and wanny looke, she forth to him these words doth send, The heauie sentence of his death, and of his fatall end. What moues thee (Zerphir) vnto her so troublesome to bee, Who cares not for thee, nor accounts of thy griefe, nor thee? Who through her dismall fortune hard, hath so much for to care, As other mens misfortunes, she (to heare) no time hath spare. Say what I haue to doe with thee, or with thy constancie, When I nere meane to goe about to quit this courtesie? Thou nothing feel'st compar'd to me, my griefe to thine is small, Thy sicknes in respect of mine, no sicknes is at all. To helpe thy maladie, I am too much diseasde in minde, To chase away thy cares, mine owne troubles too great I finde. A sickly Patient sore attatch't with sharpe diseases rife, Vnto another soule diseasde, cannot restore him life. I cannot helpe thee, for, for want of succour I my selfe, Complaine withouten remedie, yet cannot I finde health. With selfe same paine, as thou art, I am vexed through Loue, Nor Fortune, me to fauour more then thee, as yet I proue. Seeke then elsewhere to swage thy woes, mongst such as (so) are bent, And suffer me that I alone my sorrowes may lament. Nor me importune any more, for fore I pittie take Of thee, the Sunne shall leaue the skie, and firie coach forsake. Enough tis, I alreadie burne, with more then extreame paine, Withouten entertaining more, a second worser gaine. It neuer shall be said or seene, Sycambra burnes with fire Of nouellchange, as if to rage, she had a swift desire. For she, vnkind Armanda still, will loue and euer shall, Nor euer any but himselfe in heart she will enstall. She death will chuse, before her faith, she once doe falsifie, Though churlish her, he (Sanus remorse) doth vse discourteously. Thy seruice nere of me shall finde reward or recompence, Then get thee gone, goe Shepheard goe, dispatch I say from hence. Thus said, she angrie flings away (in minde tormented sore,) As scarred wolfe, from thickest flies, or foming saundge Boore. When they doe heare the Eccoing woods, with noyce of Hounds toring, Which of their taking (at their prey,) vnluckie message bring. So went Sycambra, who did leaue poore Zerphir in a sound, Whilst banning his hard fortunes all, he grunting falls on ground. He stood amazde, Enon like, and as a Bedlem mad, When as (how Paris false had her forsooke) she tidings had. He hauing lost his Mistris, loathes to liue, such life to rew, As Piramus, for Thisbies sake, himselfe vnhappie slew. The Nymph, he followeth heauily (who galde was at the hart,) As th'Iron doth the Adamant, so drawes she him to smart. Whilst metamorphisde into teares of woe, he knoweth no meane, His torments being so cruell, as his griefes are too extreame. He thinkes no more of his poore sheepe, he hath forgotten those, No other thought now troubles him, but how to end his woes. His voyce, his crie, his gesture sad, and his most morunfull speech, Are all of Loue, and how they Loue for succour may beseech, His colour now is chang'd, and gate, so is his wonted grace, Nored nor white as heretofore, remaineth in his face. Like ashes he lookes pale and leane, whilst sorrow drieth his bones, Nor hath he strength for to doe aught, except to send forth grones. Without all hope, or comfort, he doth draw his loathed life, And for his refuge, death doth seeke, torid him of this strife.
But death, is deafe vnto his call, as fieree Sycambra is, And therefore thou, and th'other too, he gainst his will must misse. Well may he call, but they'le not come (once) comfort for to bring, But leaue him, when he needes them most, to liue thus languishing. In briefe, the heauens, death, and men, with destuies doe conspire, Gainst him, that he shall burne, yet haue no meane to quench this fire. Nothing preuailes him to auaile, whilst on the other side Sycambra, in like predicament as he is, doth abide. Of thonsand bloodie passions she participateth, vext, Yet nothing can relieue her, whilst she languisheth perplext. Armanda, iests, and her, when she doth speake, at euery word He skoffes, nor fauour he at all to her will once afford. He laughes to see her weepe, to heare her sigh, it makes him smile, Nor will so much as one small dram of pittie yeeld the while. But growing too too insolent, and puffed vp with pride, He wills her to depart and die, nor cannot her akide. Swearing by all the Gods, that he will sooner seeke his death, Then fancie her, as long as he shall draw his vitall breath. She, seeing her selfe disdained thus, doth ban her destinie, And after many strange conceits, resolueth for to die By some strange kinde of vncoth death, she meanes to cure her wound, Which Loue (as foe) had giuen her, her sences to confound. Without imploring any more, sauadge Armandas aide, Who neither her, nor her kinde sute, respected aught or waide. So loyall Hero, of her life, an end would willing make, When faire Leander she did see drowned for her sake. Ah fretting corsie worse then death, with neuer endles smart. When cheating Loue impoysoneth, the constant loyall heart. More cruell then the rest by odds for dying, we but range From this life to another, while we make a better change. Whereas the for lorne Louers life, so bitter is and fell, As thousand deaths they chuse before, they will abide the hell. Of all the torments then on th'earth, Loue most outragious is, Loue, that our youths makes wither fast, depriuing as of blisse. Sycambra therefore now resolu'de, to die doth soone entend, That so at length her Agonies, and senselesse griefes may end. A trenchant blade she taketh vp, but viewing it so kright And sharpe, she straitway lets it fall, so much it her doth fright. Her heart will not endure her hand should set it to her brest, And therefore with such inchauntment, to die she doth detest. A throtling halter doth displease, as much as sword before, So rusly to be strangled stiffe, her faire necke doth abore. She poyson takes, but her conceit that drench hath ouerthrowne, Which makes her, halter, poyson, sword, (all three) to let alone. A gentler kinde of death (though strange) she hath found out as the, Which is, t'entombd her selfe aliue, torid her of her woe. She meanes within a Rocke obscure, from other Rockes far wide, With thousand Ditches compassed, and bushes on each side. Fearefull to Sauadge beasts themselues, and horrible to men. Her selfe there to enclose, and there her selfe doth closely pen. Thus lanquisht she most wrethedly, no meate she had, nor bred. But sighes and sobs, no drinke at all, but teares which fast she shed. No meate she would, but mone, no drinke, but dole to end her life, Meaning hereby her coarse to spoyle, through starning famines knife. The skriching night Owles dolefully, her wailings did assist, And lucklesse Rauens moand her Loue, whilst they to her did list.
Death, whom she wisht for (oft) at hand was still, though not so nigh As she desirde, and sorrow was with her continually. No voyce she vsde but cries, no speech, but drerie drie laments, So heauily she mournes, as Rockes for pittie doe relent. Yet no man answeres her at all; The comfort most she findes, Is when false Ecco, her last word againe vnto her windes. But he that of her miserie, is cause and motiue chiefe, Is deafe vnto her praiers become, nor yeeld will her reliefe. More hard, then stubborne Rocks, then hills more Sauadge and more fierce, He will not mollifie his heart, no pittie can it pierce. His weale it is to see her waile, her bale, to him is blisse, Whilst in a state most pittilesse, far worse then death he is. O Tygers whelpe, monster of men, worthy of any blame, Too much vnworthy to be lou'd of such a constant dame. Ah may that fortune chaunce to thee, as to Adonis coy, Who (of a Goddesse dayning loue) a Boore did him destroy. And let it hap to thee, as to Narcissus peeuish Elfe, Who (others Loues refusing) did, in loue fall with himselfe. Yet can I not say, that the Gods are partiall, but most iust, The selfe same measure, others we doe giue, we looke for must. So (Ladies) had Sycambra, kinde vnto her Zerphir bene, She had not (then) such tortors felt, nor had abid such teene As she did bide, still languishing, desirous for to die, Whilst she to death (Armanda like) to come to her doth crie. Yet hopes she thus, she cannot liue, and that her times not long, Her heart she findes alreadie broke, for bearing so great wrong. Besides, her fainting bodie fraile, prognosticates to her, (By reason nature's growne so weake) death is not from her far. Much doe the gastly dreames she hath in slumber, her affright, And fearefull apparitions strange, which she beholdes in night. Sometimes they to her bring dispare, then her with hope they feede, With hope in vaine, which when she wakes, her wounds more fresh make bleed. For he that nothing hath to loose, needs not to waile his losse, Nor needs he feare that Fortunes wheeles (swift turning) should him crosse. Where, he is in most pittious plight, that viewes his chiefest stay, (Which should from ruine him support) on sudden tooke away. Long time Sycambra in this wise most vncoth liued thus, Like to the shape of gastly death, in case most dolorous. Whilst in meane space, Famine and Griefe, with neuer ceasing cries, Her flesh did turne to bones, her heart tormenting in strange guise. Her colour which before was fresh, and daintie as the Rose, And that same beautious varnish pure, no more (now) in her showes. Like to the Flower, which trodden downe within the Medowe greene, By bastie foote of trampling steed, or plodding Oxe is seene. Such one this dying Shephardesse did seeme, quite changde and faint, Her quondam louely face, the teares with blubbring, foule did taint. Her faire eyes, darke and heauie shewd, as when the skies we see, With thickned storme of winde and raine, ore shadowed for to bee. Those shooting Glaunces, which of late were in her rolling Spheares, (Controllers in Dan Cupids Court) no more as now appeares. No more as Diamonds glister they, nor Sun-like doe they shine, But looke like Phoebus, when his place to night he doth resigne. And (now) death which did heretofore long linger, comes apace, And gently seemes by many signes, her offer to embrace. Her for head faire, whose verie frowne, of all did fauour winne, Was now become deepe furrowed, with sharpe and wrinkled skinne.
Her sallow visage, pale and thin, and hunger-staru'd did seeme, One of th'in fernall hellish hagges, for shape you would her deeme. Her brests, too pretious Iuerie mounts, were fallen lanke and bare, Her body (that rich shop) had lost her wonted pretious ware. Her feeble armes, and shoulders weake, supporters of her coarse, Were nought but ioynts of skin and bone, withouten strength and force. So short and thicke she drew her breath, sighing so deepe and sore, As one might easilie gesse she was, not far off from deaths dore. And had not bene but for her teares, which on her cheekes she shed, You would haue iudgd, she had not bene aliue, but stonie dead. Had she not throbs and sighes sent forth, from fainting brest like storme, That all her sences had bene past, you would haue vowd and sworne. Ah too too haplesse Louers chaunce, like her no wretches such, So Dido dide, the Troyan Duke, for louing ouer much. Enon so for Paris died, so, Hero for her friend, (When him she could not saue from death) her life did willing end. Meane while Zerphir, most haplesse wight, on whom fortune did frowne, This dying Shepheardesse echewhere, doth search for vp and downe. And as we oftentimes the Hart, with furious raging moode, Doe see to seeke (his mate) the Hinde with eger pace in wood. (Who is retir'd alone for nonce) into some priuate way, Or running through the forrests wilde, wandring (perchance a stray.) He scales the matchlesse mountaine tops, the hugie hilles most bold, And then he rangeth longst the bankes, of streaming waters cold. Now, through the thickest quickesedge thicke, he venters far to gee, And (now) the Caues he visiteth in hollow dales below. So Zerphir (franticke like) doth runne, to seeke that beautie, which Did (long before) vnto his paine forespeake him and bewitch. One while, he wandereth by the Sea, the sandie shore along, An other while, he skales high hills (through Loue enforst so strong) And then, againe, most desperately, with courage he doth creepe, And diueth into'the bottomes lowe, of rockie Caues most deepe. He, scoures the vallies, and the plaine, through medowes he doth runne. Gainst Gods and man, he murmureth, as one thats quite vndonne. He calls Sycambra, still, the same Sycambra he doth sound, Whilst Ecco, pittying him, againe Sycambra backe doth bound. In th'end so long he searcheth, that at last he findes her out, When now his voyce was almost lost, with hollowing all about. A Ghost he findes, no lining coarse, her haire about her eare, Which blustring blasts of froward windes, abroad dispearst did beare. Her brow, did pale and earthly show, whose colour naturall, Death chased had away as now, and ceazed ouer all. Her obbone eyes were dull and dimme, suncke deepely in her head, Ore whom the Fatall sisters three, too much tyrannized. Her bloodlesse lippes, like ashes showde, her sweet alluring lip, From which a iuyce did come, which Loue (being ill at ease) did sip. Those Cherries, Roses, Rubies, which you once might there haue spide, Were vanished, and in their steed, worse colours were descride. No fauour was within her face, no cheerfulnes of looke, For some dead coarse, not liuing wight, you might her then haue tooke. This heauie sight and spectacle, did stop his fainting breath, And forct, his inward powers to be as cold as any earth. Withouten mouing, he did stand, and seemd to be one Of those which fierce Medusa chaung'd into aworthlesse stone. But lucklesse she (the Touchstone true of Loue) to trie all wrongs, Who onely to bewaile her griefes, exceedingly still longs.
Perceiu'd him not, when first he came appearing to her nigh, Whilst with her passions she partakes, which makes her peece-meale die. Which when the Shepheard throughly vewed, awakt from out his sound, He wondred, that for very woe, he died not on that ground. He draweth neerer vnto her, yet loth to offend the faire, And though her fault he blames, yet he not to reproach her dare. Vpon the sudden, backe he startes, and from her doth recoyle, And then with stealing pace, returnes to her another while. Nor for his life dares he to speake; For where Loue loyall is, There no respect nor due regard at any time doth misse. He seeth how she doth sigh and sob, and how she teares doth shed, Apparant signes and witnesses, that (yet) she is not dead. This makes him sigh and sob (as she) and weepe with pittious dirme, Yet all this pittious stir could not (once) moue her looke on him. So much the wretch was rauished, and earnest in conceit, About resignement of her life, which sorrow did her threat. Whilst she doth leane her aking-head, vpon her hand belowe, Giuing scalding teares, passage into her panting brest to flowe. Teares, that not quencht, but did encrease the flames that burnt her heart, Teares, that euen to her inward soule did pearce, like glauncing dart. In th'end, the Shepheard cloyd with noy, with griefe hardued and bolde, In pittious voyce and low, to her his mind did thus vnfolde. Woe is me Sycambra is it thou, I see so miserable, And, haue I liude (so long) to view, a sight so lamentable? Ist thou whem death by vncoth Fate, and Fortune ouer strange, Doth force vntimelesse thus into thy darkesome Tombe torange? Ist thou, which nothing hast but teares and cries to entertaine The sharpe assault of death, the which thou couetest ore faine? Ist thou, I see to runne vnto thy end ore desperate, By cruell Planets hatefull doome, to ill. predestinate? Ist thou Sycambra, whom thy Fates, and fatall Destinie, As iealous of thy praise, thy daies to shorten doe agree? Ist thou that hast that colour faire no more vpon thy face, Which as the colour of my griefes, in heart I did embrace? Ist thou that hast no more those flames, within thine eyes now dead, Through which before with brightest fire my soule was daily fed? Ist thou, that hast no more that shew, of more then beantie rare, The prison of my libertie, the cause of all my care? Ist thou, ist thou, whom partiall Gods inforce vnwilling me, Of thy departure from this life, a witnesse for to be? This thou, I know, but too too well, whose perfect Picture right, Is too too liuely portraide forth, within mine inward spright. Tis thou, I know, but too too well, though changd thou art the same, I, for Sycambra thee will know, thou still shalt be my dome. Tis thou, tis thou, that diest with sobs and sighes tormented thou, Whilst blest thou thinkst thy selfe, to leaue a life so delero Tis thou, that parting from this world, this wold is maked left, And voyd of pleasure and delight, which with thee is bereft. Woe is me, and must these eyes, (yet no eyes, but streames of brine,) Liue for to see eclipsed to be, so faire a Sun-shine? Whose glittring Lampes, my chiefest light of yore were wont to bee, Without whose glances bright, nor day, nor morning I could see? Alas (my God) why was I not, when that I first was borne, Transformd into some stone, then thus to be false Cupids scorne? Why died I not, before the time in loue with thee I fell? Since thy plagues vndeserude, doe proue my soule a Criminell?
Why doe I not miscarrie, but (against my will) that liue, Through force of this so vmust Laewe, the more my soule to grieue? Which forceth her to die, that doth deserue to liue for are, Whilst wretched me, who merrit death, it will not take away? Ah too too partiall lawlesse law, of miserable Loue, Accursed be that day, wherein thou first this life didst proue. O Gods, dart downe your thunder bolts, vpon my hatefull head, Plague me, not her, tis I, not she, that should be punished. This trunke of mine vnprofitable, of vitall breath bereane, Since that mischieuous Loue doth me, in my best loue deceiue. Ding downe to hell, this coarse of mine, this wicked periur'd carse, (Consuming it to powder small) by flashing lightnings force. Kill (Zerphir) kill, that by oue death, he end may all his wee, And with the same rid all his plagues, that in him daily growe. But (fairest Faire) must thou needs die? O losse inestimable, No, no, thou canst not die, for death to kill thee is not able. Thy glory, mongst both Gods and men, shall neuer haue an end, (Despite of Destny) Vertue this, from Tombe shall still defend. Within the hearts of liuing men, shall be thy lasting graue, And as another Pallas thou; shalt reuerence of them haue. Thy soule hath heretofore too rich, and royall tired beene, Thy beautie eke too sacred, and thy Faith too constant seene. Then (as base seruile Bond-slanes poore, tide vnto Vassalage) Subiect to be, or homage yeeld, to deaths ore hastie rage. No (louely Ladie) thou shalt liue, and Zerphir he shall die, Because he came not as he should, to helpe thee speedily. Zerphir must die, who by his death (atrue certificate) Shall shew, how through the want of thee, that be to liue doth hate. Zerphir must die, because he cannot after thee seruine, Nor without thy sweet companie, delight to be aliue. Zerphir must die, because depriude he is, of thy sweet face, And therefore meanes by selfe same steps, the selfe same path to trace. Yet my soules ioy, if of my griefe, if truth that nere did swarue. The smallest sparke of fauour left, did ere of thee deserue. If my deare blood, to beautie thine, which willing I afford, (As sacrifice for to be shed) merrits of thee one word, Ah then looke vpon Zerphir thine, these sighes and sobs restaine, And fore he dieth, vouchsafe to speake to him a word or twaine. This is the onely boone I craue, to which, (but) condiscend, And most contented then, below to th'other Ghostsile wend. But I perceiue thou wilt not grant this fute (cruell) to me, I cannot this small grace obtaine, I finde it will not be. Why then lets brauely hence depart, lets die her face before, And lets before her seeke to gaine, the  Elizian shore. So saying, he full oft (farewell Sycumbra) did rehearce, Which done, his sword he plact against his brest, the same to pearce. When as Sycambra wakt, as t'were from forth her passions sad; To see Zerphir arriued there by her, was much arad. But more she troubled was, when she percou'd how in that place, He as one desperate, would haue slaine himselfe before her face. This forced her pittiously to looke towards him, and with her hand To make a signe, as though she would grannt what he did demand, Beckning to him, to throw his blade from him, which he ore bolde Had drawne to sley himselfe, whilst she her meaning would vnfolde. To which the Shepheard willing greede, approaching to her nie, Longing to heare what she would say, resolude with her to die.
He comforts her, he cheareth her, he praieth her leaue her mone, Whilst she with much adoe these words, (her last will) forth doth grone. Zerphir, if I haue iniurde thee, (as needs I must confesse) Yet more reuenge, then what is light on me, thou needs not presse. If heretofore my beautie proud, hath (oft) abused thee, The heauens, to punish that foule fault, thou now dost (iustly) see. I feele, (and that but rightfully) the very selfe same griefe, That thou endur'st to liue disdaind (daining) Sanus reliefe. I die (Zerphir) I die in paine, because as thou I loue, Then with my death contented be, since I this penance proue. Now, I coniure thee, if thou feelst the tortors and the plagues Allotted vnto Louers true, which neuer cease to rage. If thou dost know that sdainfull power, of Cupids matchlesse force, (Which makes vs often count of such, as yeeld vs no remorse. And such as much doe make of vs (as barborous and vngrate) To scorne their sutes, and for their Loue, them to repaie with hate. Then (Zerphir) pardon I beseech, since I haue made thee smart, Thou seest, (although not by thy meanes) enough reuengde thou art. That eye which once did thee contemne, with ouer-haughtie scorne, Death to requite thy wrongs on it, and vpon me, hath sworne. Sycambra dieth, plungd in woe, and none doth her deplore, Her countenance and complexion both, are chaunged ouer sore. Her face is blooalesse, and heate doth keepe within her vaines, Her armes are brawne-falne, in her cheekes no colour now remaines. She dyeth, she dieth, desirous more to die, then for to liue, Onely that thee she could not helpe nor succour, she doth grieue. Ah Zerphir, if to thinke on me, no anguish thee twill bring, If for thy ouer cruell Dame, it moues thee any thing. And if that Loue (of late so hot,) be not as yet growne colde, But as a valiant conquerour, thy heart doth prisoner holde. If (yet) affection thou bearst her, who neuer thee affected, And that all pittie thou hast not (from pittying her) reiected; Then humblie I doe thee beseech, by that rare former Loue, That these thy griefes, right bottomlesse, compassion kinde may mone. And that this thy compassion sweet, for me may (so) preuaile, As thou to graunt one sute to her, vouchsafe not for to faile. And this it is I beg of thee, that after th'Iron sleepe Of death shall cease vpon my coarse, possession there to keepe, When thou my coarse depriued quite of beauties gifts shalt view, My chearfull eyes to loose their lights, and bid those lights adue, When thou doest heere her sigh from forth her soule (vntimely crost,) And when thou shalt Sycambra thine, view to giue vp the Ghost, Ah then, doe this good turne for me, doe this for me straitway, Vnto my cruell vnkind friend, this RING from me conuay. Tell him, his too too flintie heart, and barborous crueltie, Hath forct me (loyalst maide aliue) for him (aliue) to die. Tell him, by that quicke lightning fire, which from his eyes forth came, Which swifter far then whirling darts, my gentle heart haue slaine. By his rich beautie, too too rich for me, too poore to enioy, Which, for my time, vntimely brought, me vnto endlesse noy. And by that heart of his, too proud, tryumphing ore my glorie, That he forget me not, but thinke vpon my pittious storie. Doe this, sweet Zerphir, for my sake, doe this request for mee. Tis all before my death to thee I giue, as Legasee. Nor doe denie me this, although in conscience I confesse, I, not deserue thy smallest grace, for my ore cruelnesse.
Ah Zerphir, this denie me not; This said, she held her peace, And presently death fore her came, with violence to cease. Whilst with a gentle quiet sigh, her soule that wearie was Of loathed life, most willing vp vnto the heauens did passe. Leauing her bodie voyd of life, withouten vitall aire, Disrobde of beautie, spoylde of forme, depriude of colour faire. Yet happie she, to die in such kinde sort as (then) she dide, Since that her griefe vanisht therewith, (which liuing she did bide. Happie to die (so) as she dide, since partiall Loue vniust, Disasters hard, and vndeserude, vpon her still did thrust. Like as we see in th'end of day, vpon the set of Sunne, When Tethis entertaines her spouse, (the light being well might done,) A kinde of cloudie sable dampe ariseth to our eyes, And with a gloomie curtaine thicke, is couered all the skies. So as vpon the face of th'earth, there nothing doth appeare, But darknesse, sleepe, and heauie care, with gastly sighes each where. So by degrees this beautious coarse, lookt pale and wanne like earth, When (once) the soule, had it depriude of his quicke liuing breath. Like to a shadow was it, of a substance faire before, No cheerfull colour was there in that face, so faire of yore. Withouten sence or motion, it remained like a blocke, Or as a comly pile of stone, carude out of marble Rocke. Yet Zirphir doth imbrace it oft, (and as ift twere aliue, The same with pittious glaunces, he to yeeld to him doth striue. But kisse her, he not dares, though she be dead, lest he offend The soule of her, who (whilst she liu'd,) he lou'd as dearest friend. Her (as before) he doth respect, and doth her reuerence, Although him no drop of grace she gaue, his amorous heate to quench. Teares like to flowers he streameth downe, yet not one word he speakes, Sorrow, so much doth seaze on him, as tongue from plaining breakes. Long was he in this agonie, at length he comes his way, Taking the Fatall Ring with him, his Mistris to obey. He hunteth vp and downe to finde Armanda, and at last, (Reuiling him) into these tearmes (tearmes fit for him) he brast. Hard hearted, cruell, Sauadge wretch, for thy vnworthy Loue, Fairest Sycambra, now is dead, since thee, she could not moue. Dead is she, for thy sake, thou liu'st, vnworthy of thy life, Thou liu'dst, her, and her loue to scorne, through thy orethwartings rife, Take here this Ring, she sends to thee, as witnesse too too true, That she destroyd her selfe for thee, though thou her death nought rue. The Flower of all fairenes is dead, slaine onely for thy sake, Whilst thou, nor her, nor on her Loue, wouldst any pittie take. More fierce then Tyger, beastly more then Lion, when as such Relent, and shew compassion more, then thou hast done, by much. Why takst thou not this pretious I em, thou that doest women kill, Which, for thee, till her dying day, she had reserued still. Happie to haue so deare a pawne, yet curst, because thou art The cause, the owner kinde thereof, was strooke with mortall dart. Hold, hold, rude carle, and thinke not but the day shall one day come, When as iust plague thou shalt receiue, for this, by heauens iust dome. Armanda, hearing him to rage in this wise, nought doth say, But smiling, flings the Ring from him, to the woods betakes his way. Leauing poore Zerphir, almost quite bereft of wit, and mad, To see what slight regard of her, and of her Ring he had. And, but he feard the quiet Ghost to grieue, of his faire Dame, He had Armanda for his pride, as he deserued, slaine.
This held his hands from slaughtring him, he (so) did her respect, The onely reason why to kill, that wretch he did neglect. The reuerence which vnto her, he (long before time) bare, Made him for his so hot reuenge, his hastie will to spare. As one enraged, this carelesse man he looketh after long, And by his eyes, his minde bewraies, he faine would venge this wrong. Nor doth he leaue to curse and ban, this more then ruthlesse wight, Vntill, through thicknes of the trees, no more he spie him might. Wherewith he riseth, and turnes backe, vnto his Ladies corse, Which he embracing oft, through griefe to fall in sound doth force. Her Ring, on finger hers againe he puts, nor dareth hee Retaine the same, as his owne goods, although now dead she bee. Fearing Sycambras angrie Ghost, once fairest ouer all, Should be offended for so doing, and him disloyall call. This causde him beare himselfe so iust, whilst in most mournfull wise, These his last wordes he sighed forth, mixt with strange dolefull cries. And is it thou Sycambra sweet, whom now I doe embrace, Whom whilst thou liu'dst, my chiefest ioy I in this earth did place? Is thy faire body, fram'd by heauens, all others for to foyle, Become deaths prey, vnworthy, death Sycambra sweet should spoyle? Are these the eyes, whose lights of late, did shine like brightest Sunne, Now darkned by dire destinie, and of their sights vndone? Is this faire forhead, honour chiefe, of Muses vertuous, Bereft of beautious feature quite, and quite disfigurde thus? Is this sweet hony mouth of thine, O griefe that makes me banne, Dispoylde of all his treasures rich, become pale, white and wanne? Are thy chast Brests, the pure ripe fruit of Paradise so faire, Which to allure, the staiedst witts, two daintie Apples bare? Dead and shrunke in, and thou thy selfe, Sycambra tirde with griefe, Hast thou thy soule to heauens resignde, there for to finde reliefe? Thou hast alas, nor liu'dst thou more, those eyes of thine, but late Like Diamonds sparkes, now dim doe show, as deaths darke Sable gate. Nor part nor parcell is of thee, from head vnto the foote, But yeelds a heauie solemne shew, attirde in deadly sute. Thy dates expirde, dead art thou now, led, hast thou me the way, High time, now tis for me, the lawes of Nature to obey. Reason it is I follow thee, for is it possible, Thou being gone, I longer here vpon this earth can dwell? My wretched daies in this vile world haue bene vnfortunate, Yet dying thus in chastest Loue, most happie is my state. The Stars haue fullie recompenst, my hatefull fortunes here, In graunting me, the libertie, to die by thee, my deare. And that I touch that coarse, by death exempt from vitall sence, Which, when it liu'd, full hardly did my seruice recompence. Ah beautious shade, of late the lodge of honour and fresh Bower, Whose praise, deaths selfe, though he thee slew, to kill hath not the power. Faire coarse, receiue these tribute teares, and let me pardon winne, If thee embracing after death, I ouerbold haue beene. Daine to accept my scalding sighes, and doe not him despise, Who whilst he liu'd, honoured thee, and dying, thee doth prise. Rich coarse, thou art to make amends to me (poore soule) in this, That for so many woes I felt, thou yeeld to me one kisse. For, what haue I for all my paines, and trauaile I endurde, Which thy hard heart continually too willing me procurde? What recompence or pardon due, did euer I receiue, But what (through sorrow) my best rest from me did take and reaue.
To cancell all which former counts, be pleasde (faire Loue) I pray, That Zerphir dying (thou being dead) kisse thee (now) chastly may. And yet alas I dare not, lest that thou shouldst take it ill Gainst me, as if I sought the same withouten thy good will. Faire shadow, now with glorie dect, take for my offerings These teares, these sighes, these passions sad, which sorrow to thee brings. Receiue this blood I sprinkle here, vpon thy sacred shrine, To th'end, my soule in dutious sort, may follow after thine. My heart was thine whilst I did liue, and fortune wills it so That it be thine, when Zerphirs dead, and lieth in th'earth full low. Daine therefore (sacred soule) and thinke not little proud am I, That tis my chaunce, I may haue leaue by thy sweet side to lie. Willing thou wert not whilst thou liu'dst, that I should be thine owne, But being dead, I for thy slaue, most loyall shall be knowne. By reason I haue well deseru'd, through griefes (long by me) borne, And by my chastest countenance, that neuer woes did scorne. The memorie whereof, me thinkes, should make thee, sometimes call To minde thy Zerphir, and not quite forget him once for all. But Zerphir (now) lets die; too long we staied haue, tis enough, Sufficient teares on this dead coarse, we now haue powred forth. The heauens are wearied with my cries, and neuer ceaselesse plaint, And my broke heart, through trembling feare, doth beate in bulcke and faint. Lets die by this one word, and as he spoken had that word, (Most cruell gainst himselfe) his side he pierceth with his sword. Wherewith, he tumbleth dead, vpon his Mistris breathlesse corse, Whilst that his wound, both soule and blood, to issue forth doth force. Thus died Sycambra, meriting for constancie great fame, Thus Zerphir died, deseruing well, to haue a liuing name. Death, ioynd them both together neere, their bodies in one Tombe Were laid, which liuing were disioynd by ouer partiall Dome. And (not long after) that proud youth, Armanda for his pride, (As well he aid deserue the same) full dearely did abide. For presently vpon their death, like to Narcissus fond, He died (in loue, being with himselfe) whose losse not any monde. Thus Cupid's in his Lawes, vniust, as by this Tale you see, Yet (Ladies) learne to loue, if lou'd (againe) you meane to bee. The Shepheard hauing made an ende of his Tragedie, helde his peace, bringing vnto the whole companie, a kinde of mournfull and solemne silence, vpon the ricitall of the same, with a secret, still, and inward sorrow, for the lamentable end of Zirphir, and Sycambra. O how miserable are those, who seeme as (it were) to feele their owne losses, through the recitall, and reporting of other mens mishaps, being as bad almost, as to awake the happie patient (sleeping) by reason of his soporiferous potion, iust at that time, when the Chyrurgian beginneth to cut off his legge. Too too much doe I prooue it, find it, and trie it, to touch me to the verie quicke, (cried out) the sighing Arcas. The misfortunes of euerie man, reuiueth mine owne, which (before) lay closely couered vnder the cinders of my former Distasters. The remembrance of things prosperous, is nothing so pleasant, as the recalling to minde, of what is vnhappie, is bitter and sower. For the pleasure thereof, hindereth the true knowledge of pleasure aright: and so by the contrarie, the contrarie is the more to be commended. But, O how cruell then is the conceit, and apprehension of a mans euils? For the felicitie of the other, doth not oppose himselfe against the crueltie of this thought: those which are fortunate (being exempted) through the ioy they conceiue of their ill chances which are past and gone.
Old Hecuba, when shee was captiue, rendred the memorie of her miseries more cruell; by reason; shee (alwayes) thought vpon her happie time that was already gone: For one is not so much grieued to be wretched by Nature, as when he is brought downe so lowe by Fortune: and the cause is, for that wee are (naturally) borne to suffer, and that he accounteth not his ill hap to be vnsupportable, which he receiueth of Nature, in that he is accustomed to endure, and beare the same alwayes. But euen as where both Fortune and Nature abound in anie notable spirit, it is the more excellent, and accomplished for the same. So twise miserable is hee, who (as my selfe) feeleth him selfe to be iniuried, both by Fortune and Nature! By Fortune, she ha∣uing made shipwrack of my libertie: of my Goddesse, and faire Mistrisse,A Sentence. and of the sweete aire of my Countrey: By Nature, I hauing nothing in me, that can draw any commen∣dations for me, amongst the learned, or win vnto me any credit, amongst such as are ac∣counted rare and admirable persons in the world. Then why loue I? or why should I desire to breathe any longer? Vnfortunate that Marriner, who arriuing safely into the Hauen, will needs venture againe, to thrust him∣selfe into the tempests of the Sea, to drown himselfe most wilfully, in the bottom of the waues. So fareth it with me, for after I had bene cruelly plagued with the chast loue, of the learned and famous Iulietta, I fell to loue the renowmed Diana; The fire of this af∣fection, being far more hotter then the other: but although this my first fault may be well pardoned, yet the second falling againe into this error, is to be greatly doubted & feared. Ah Arcas, thou shouldst haue contented thy selfe, with thy first imprisonment, with∣out seeking to commit thy selfe afresh, into a new captiuitie. But Souldiers in warre, may be taken three or 4. times, in that they be not of power, to withstand the Conquerour: Euen so, if Loue hath so often taken me prisoner, what resistance could so weake a wretch (as my selfe) be able to make against him? But vnluckie is that prison, into which, wee vnwillingly enter: and so too vnhappie were my chaunce, if I should be depriued of the diuine and chast loue of my Diana. I resemble that Captaine of warre, who complaineth of the paine he taketh, lamen∣teth for the trauails he endureth, grieueth at the perils he is subiect vnto, & murmureth against warre & warfaring, and yet (in the mean time) while he desireth to returne home, he would take it far more heauily, if he should be put from this painfull kind of exercise. In like sort, most happie should I thinke mine estate to bee, if (were I neuer so wret∣ched) I could, with the losse of all other things, repossesse my libertie, as I had it before. For they liue (although but poore and needie) who are not subiect vnto any one, where such as are slaues, liue not at all, (although they be full of riches) because they are not maisters of their owne liues, but be vnder the coutrolment of other. Leaue these vnnecessarie and friuolous complaints (said the old man) and follow the discourse of thy Loues alreadie begunne. The minde that hopeth, is galled, when the hope of what hee desireth, is prolonged with delayes. Tell on then, for it may be, thou shalt receiue comfort by thy speech, and helpe,A Sentence. and assistance of those, which shall heare thee: in as much, as what one mans will is ignorant of, another may know it: and he that seeketh remedie for his griefe, of the Maior part, in the end, findeth that he doeth the sooner recouer of his disease. Therefore (good Shep∣heard) continue the course as thou didst begin. Father (replied the Shepheard) tell me, I pray you, is it forbidden, the Traueller, who hath wandered out of his way, to reprehend and blame himselfe, after he perceiueth that hee is faultie? Euen so, if I haue done ill, in beginning the recitall of my mis-fortunes, (the only remembrance whereof, doth astonish & amaze me) can you be angrie with me, if I found the retrait, giuing ouer a subiect so lamentable, & so far diffring frō my desire? Couet not I beseech you, to know, and to be acquainted with that, which you cannot remedie, it being a case desperate, and past recure: Or, if you will needs pursue mee, in my promise, then yeelde me a place fit for my Fortunes, finde me a place horrible, and sadde, to the intent that my paines, my speeche, and mine abode, may be conformable and alike. I will not sticke with thee for that (answered the olde man) doe but follow mee, and I will bring thee to a Receptacle, very conuenient for such a conceit as thou hast.
Come then, & I wil lead thee, into the hollow bottome of a Lightning-blasted-rock, which, for frightfull darknes, and darksome fright-fulnes, is as bad as Hell it selfe: and therewithall, the aged man went before the Shepheard as a Guide, hee following his slowe steps heauie and sadde:A Smilie. not vnlike vnto a young Childe, that followeth (aloofe) the partie that leadeth him to schoole, to tell some tale vnto his maister, for some fault that he hath done. Thus they two, leauing the rest of their companie, walked all alone, toward this ob∣scure lodging, where onely horror doth inhabite: and beeing now come to the watrie Seaish shoare, they heard (vpon the suddaine,) one scriching out most pittiouslie, and therewithall, might perceiue a sadde and weeping Shepheardesse, to come running to∣wards them, her golden Tresses hanging about her eares, which the wanton winde blew heere and there. Her face was pale and blood-lesse, like vnto the fall of the leafe, whilst for want of breath, she remained almost windlesse, being hardly able to crie, or runne a∣ny longer. Vpon the ruddie Roses of her lips and cheekes, and all along the white A∣labaster of her luory brests, streamed downe teares, like drops of peerlesse deaw, issuing forth from her mournfull eyes, as betweene two valleyes, runneth a most swift flood of waters. Faire was she and louely, although feare (at that time) had disrob'de her of her beautie, and frightfulnes taken away (at that time) the vermillion Die, from her cheekes. In this sort did shee flie away (as the Hinde doeth from the Hounds) being followed af∣ter, by sixe tall and lustie Theeues, all Pirates of the Sea, who hauing their naked swords ready drawne, pursued her hard, threatning to massacre her, vnlesse she stayed and yeel∣ded her selfe vnto them. Alacke poore soule, what likely hood of helpe was there, in that vncoth place, to saue her selfe? but that the Almightie and puissant IEHOVA, contrarie vnto her hope and expectation, prouided meanes for her escape and safetie: giuing sufficient proofe heereby, that hee not onely helpeth such as trust in him, but al∣so, those that are quite without hope, and (in a manner desperate) of all succour what∣souer. The olde man, moued with compassion, presently tooke his booke, opened it, and red certaine Spelles in the same, whilst rolling his eyes wildely, too and fro, the manner of his proceedings, being not so fearfull, as the casting of his lookes, seemed to be ter∣rible, wherevpon the Rouers were forced to stand stone-still vpon the suddaine,An example. as the Shippe that is cast vpon some sandie shelfe, can no way moue. Liuelesse and senselesse did they stand, as whilom did the Louers of Medusa or as the companions of the Duke of Ithaca, the old man hauing changed them, some into Trees, some into Lyons, some into Tygers, and some into Wolues. A worthy punishment for their so fowle a fault. The Almightie God (sometimes) seruing himselfe, with others, skilfull in the same Science, as this old man was, as hee did with the three Magi, or Kings, that came to worship his SONNE, our onely Sauiour. But of this strange aduenture, wee will talke, at a more conuenient time heereafter: Comming againe vnto the aged man & the Shepheard, who followed onwards on their iourney, the one, mourning for the cruell execution he was so lately forced to put in pra∣ctise, and the other ioyfull, hoping to find some comfort of the olde man, by reason of the admirable effects of his skill, which he had seene alreadie. In the end, they came vnto the foote of a Rocke, halfe-eaten, through the continu∣ance of time, which oftentimes, had felt the furie of Lightning, and not seldome asswa∣ged the choller of angrie Iupiter. On the top of this, (with much adoe they got) where they found a certain straight and dark Caue, beset with sharp thorns and briars, & sensles Serpents, Serpents turned & changed by this olde man, into blacke and vgly stones. O place, passing fitte and conuenient, to report the miseries of the melancholike Shepheard, which seemed (somewhat to come nigh vnto the horror of his paines, and to participate with part of his misfortunes, wherevpon the olde man saide thus vnto him. Speake gentle Shepheard, haue I not (now bene as good as my word with thee?) and is not this (thinkest thou) the still Cell, where heauie sleepe remaineth, and the dreadfull lodge of the fuskie daughters of blacke Night? Hither did Iuno come, to finde out drousie Slomber, shee as then abiding here, when she wrought so cunningly, that she cast Iupiter into a dead sleepe, whilst she in the meane
while, fauoured the Grecians in battaile, who before that time, had bene forsaken, both by her Brother, and her Husband. Heere did Pluto hide his deare beloued Proserpina, before he conueyed her into Hell: And heere Aeneas vnderstood the Oracle of Sibilla, which was his sufficient warrant, to descend downe vnto the pitchie kingdome of the youngest sonne of Saturne. If this place be agreeable vnto thy mind, then onwards with that which I haue so ear∣nestly vrged thee to bewray, & faile not to perform as much as thou hast promised vnto him, who will shew what testimonies possible may be, of a gratefull mind towards thee. With all my hart (replyed kinde Arcas) for it is no losse nor trauaile, to seeke to dis∣charge and satisfie, such as wee are bound or beholding vnto, there being no remedie, but we must needes one way or other, cleare with them, who are our Creditors, and vn∣to whom we are obliged. Let vs then sit downe (reuerend Father) & giue mee leaue to take breath for a while, to the ende I may call to minde, and knit vp the broken threed of this my last discourse with you. For (already) haue I told you (if you haue not forgotten the same) how Loue (against reason and iudgement) had quenched the affection I bare to Iulietta, mine en∣forcing me (in steede of the other) to affect my Diana, as the Smyth maketh his coales more hotter, by flinging water vpon them. And to say truth, what is hee that could not haue bene ouertaken by her faire fea∣ture? For if there had bene exception taken against the beautie of the Goddesse of beau∣tie (as did Pallas and Iuno) no doubt, the Phrygian Shepheard had yeelded the prize vnto her, and had not needed to haue trauersed the Seas, to bring away Heliene, because she was lesse faire then shee. By her onely, Zerxis, had bene able to haue drawne the counterfait of Iuno (through which, hee thought to make himselfe to become admirable and di∣uine) without drawing together so manie faire women of Crotona as hee did, to borrow from euery one of them such beautie as they had. This then, so much inflamed my heart, at euery word shee spake in her daunce, see∣med a swift dart, which thwirled into my soule & euery step she moued in the measures,An Example. proued a firebrand to burne my heart withall. Whilst shee (minding her dauncing) ne∣uer marked me, nor once so much as cast her sight vpon mee, except it were by great chaunce. Great personages, hauing their mindes busied about matters of importance, seldome or neuer; wouchsafe to looke, or to behold miserable persons, which are alto∣gether vnprofitable vnto them. Meane space, Loue lying in waite, let not the least of her looks fall vnto the ground, but that with the same, he pierced, and through pierced my soule, as a young childe gi∣ueth a thousand pricks vpon a peece of paper, in which hee would set out the shewe or resemblance of some figure or shape. What should I say? I forgot euery thing, onely to thinke vpon her, and to marke (if peraduenture) she did cast her eyes vpon me, and (like a foole as I was) I flattered my selfe, made my conceit belieue, that she perceiued my meaning, and that she would take some pittie of my disease, construing and interpreting all her gestures and glaunces, vn∣to mine owne aduantage: not vnlike that fond Captaine, that dreameth he hath vanqui∣shed his enemies, giuing the spoyle away, before he hath wonne the field. But, O (how much was I deceiued I when the daunce was ended) seeing her,A Similie. where I stood, to goe on the other side where I stood) retiring (as it were) her selfe fat from me. Yet was I so foolish for all that, that I thought she vsed this pollicie, to the ende she might bleare the eyes of the rest, and conceale the great good will shee bare me, as if she had had a great care of me, when (as God knoweth) she was far off from the same. Thus Desire, causeth Louers to interprete euerie thing to the best, and for their owne conceits, imagining that they cannot loue, but that they must needes be loued a∣gaine. But Phedra, loued the chast Hippolitus, yet was not shee beloued againe.An example. Apollo lo∣ued Daphne, yet found no requitall at her handes: and Myrrha, doted vppon her owne Father, yet could neuer obtaine, what she so much requested. Notwithstanding all this, Loue grewe so extreamely within me, as he beganne to make me couragious and bolde, as that Captain which taketh into his grace, his enemie whom he hath ouercom, putteth
newe life and valour in him. So I would not giue ouer, nor play the coward in this extreame perill: but as a second Theseus, began to deuise how I might draw my selfe out of this intricate Labyrinth: wherevpon, plucking vp my heart, and setting a good face vpon the matter, I aduentured to approach, and to come nigh my faire mistrisse. O diuine force of LOVE, how great his puissance is? Being a farre off from her, I was hardie and bolde, I made reckoning that I had gotten her, I deuised sundry sorts of speeches, which I meant to deliuer vnto her, and began to grow proud in my gesture, wordes, and countenance; But no sooner came I neere vnto her, but that I was ano∣ther kinde of man, quite changed and altered, hauing (in steed of my former brauados and bragging conceits,) feare and respect, awfull dutie, and graue reuerence entred in∣to my minde: all which, tooke possession of my heart, so that I was as timerous as could be, not knowing what to doe. So Casar staied a long time, doubting about the passage of Rubicon, although before he was throughly determined to wade through it.An Example. I then might haue bene compared vnto that miserable creature, who calleth for death, prayeth, and most earnestly vrgeth death to come, and to carrie him away. (With a good will faith death, behold me here ready) but when the poore wretch seeth him, he is astonied, amazed, and terrified, wi∣shing rather his roome then his companie. So soemed it, that death had feazed vpon me, I being so confounded vpon the suddaine, that I knewe not whether I had anie hart, life, or sence, within me or no. The Foole perceiueth not his owne follie, which the wiser sort take notice of, be∣cause they are wise.A Sentence. So I, being taken with this new desire, which had blinded as well (the eyes of my bodie as of my minde) tooke no knowledge of my foolish carriage, one∣ly being rauished with the faire contemplation of my sacred Goddesse, I neuer thought of any thing, but how to stare her still in the sweete face. O how hard are the entraces in to Loue, where dutious respect, timerous feare, vncertaine doubt, and bashfull shame, keepe the doore, through which we cannot passe, without their permission and leaue, we being bound to content them all (one after another) before wee can goe any one foote further. My beautious Ladie, nothing sicke at all of my disease, gaue a gesse presently of my maladie, shee quickly found out my fault, which I my selfe could not see, and being wa∣rie and graue, soone descried my vaine and idle follie. My cruell passions, which con∣founded my sences, (bringing mee to be as an idiot, or as one deuoyd of sense) moued her nothing at all. For vertuous she, had neuer knowne what Loue was, she hauing bene (for her most exquisite beauty, at the first beginning of her life) consecrated and bestow∣ed vpon that Goddesse, whose name she bare, and whose sacrifices she most solemnely did performe. But all Natures are not subiect vnto Loue. The right Diamond can neuer be cut with all the yron tooles that may be, neither can Cupid be counted the commaunder ouer all such soules as liue heere belowe in the world: whether it is, for that he can doe nothing with vs, except we giue him leaue, and so submit our selues voluntarily vnto him; or whether it be, because he being blind, and an infant, he canot see, how to strike such rightly, which scape shot-free frō his tyrannies. She then perceiuing my folly, & acquainted with my sicknes, began thus to schoole me. Shepheard, who hath so suddenly taken away thy voyce and countenance from thee? And what is the matter thou carryest thy selfe so strangely? I am no Medusa, that chan∣geth men into stones, neither any Circes, or Medea, to alter the shapes of men, by in∣chaunting potions. Who willed thee to come hither, thus to lose, both thy selfe and thy speech together? what foolish imagination hath seazed vpon thy spirits? what for∣tish disease doth bridle thy tongue? and what sensles dolour doth possesse all the partes of thy body? Am I so ghastly a sight to behold, that my very face maketh such become amazed and astonished, and those mute and dumbe of speech, that doe but looke vpon the same? What vncoth frenzie hath brought thee hither, to giue vs so many testimo∣nies of thy extreame and witlesse follie. Fond man, that thou art not sufficientlie satisfied and content, that thy neigh∣bours should know of this thy madnesse, but thou must needs make strangers acquain∣ted with the same also, who (before) knew no such matter.
Either withdrawe thy selfe from my companie, or else declare vnto mee, the cause, and the occasion of this thy comming hither, and of these thy brain-sicke fittes and humours: For what profite or credite should a man looke to get, by talking with such sortish companions, as will belieue nothing but their owne grosse follie? and who are without reason, to take in good part such wholsome admonitions and warnings, as shall be for their best benefit and behoofe? Speake then, or be gone, for a dead truncke of a withered Tree, would performe as much as thou doest, thine eyes being onely they (of all thy other members) that swift∣ly moue, and strangely stare vpon me. As the way-faring man, heauy a sleepe, vnder some shadowing Oake,A Sentence. awaketh vp∣on the sudden, in the morning, when he heareth the Hunts-man, with his yelping dogs, to passe along by him; Euen so I, with this sweete voyce of hers, awaked out of my drousie slumber, and contrary to the companions of Vlisses, whom the Songs of the Sy∣rons brought to sleepe, I was much reuiued with the same. Or as the watchfull Louer, depriued of his Mistris, (dreaming in his bed, that hee speaketh vnto her) waketh, and starteth vp suddenly, verilie imagining that he seeth, and discourseth with her. So likewise, this short and sharpe Oration of hers, rowsed me (by force, as it were) from my dull and leaden musings, and brought me into my right wittes againe. O how Loue resembleth the Sunne! For it taketh away from vs both our voyce and force: As the other giueth life and vigour vnto vs, and by the selfe-same heate consumeth vs againe. This made me sore ashamed, blushing to looke about me. But in the end, I pluc∣ked vp my spirits, being bold to answere her in these tearmes. O fairest, amongst all that be faire, lesse perfect then thou art, haue (heereto∣fore) with their presence, taken away the speech of more excellent Orators then I am by oddes. If in beholding the ordinarie workes of GOD, which daily present them∣selues before our eyes, and which we continually see, wee become mute and dumme at the same, wondering and admiring at the puissance of such an immortall and merci∣full Creator. How much more them (most gratious Nymphe) thinkesh thou, we should be asto∣nished and amazed, seeing so rare, so perfect, and so exquisite a  as thou art, com∣ming so neere vnto the beautie of God indeed? If the Infernall powers in hell belowe, haue (in times past) bene moued with the sound of a melodious Harpe, and if that gentle Orpheus could by his Musike, allure and drawe after him, such things as had no foule; Ah then, by how much more shall out soules be enticed, with that which is both comely, liuely, rare, and faire, and such as is diuine beautie? Nothing delighteth our eyes so much, as that which is beautifull,A Sentence. neither do they take anie pleasure to behold that which is deformed, foule, or il-fauoured. And as the greedy and huugtie starueling, who hath not seene any victualls of a long time before, finding himselfe at a great feast, is so rauished with ioy, as hee looseth his colour and speech, confounded with the sent and sight of the meate; Euen so, in see∣ing an Obiect so admirable, and so pleasing as thy beauty is, why shouldest thou wonder, if I be rauished with the same? Hath not Loue had the power to race out of the heart of Theseus, as well the sweet fauour of Ariadne, as the great good turnes hee receiued at her hands, forcing him, whollie to affect and like of Phoedra? And the same Loue, did it not take away all the remembrance from periurde Iason, as well of the pleasures, as of the beautie of Medea? repudiating her to take Glauce, vn∣to his espoused wife? Then (comeliest Creature of all others created) muse no more at this my fond be∣hauiour and carriage: and if I haue offended, condemne (not my minde) but thy peer∣lesse countenance, which (as the Sunne pierceth the Christall) so can it penetrate the power, the puissance, force, and might of Constancie it selfe: yea, and through the hardest hearte of the most barbarous people that are. This was the first speech I made before her, and which, God knoweth, I could hard∣ly finish, by reason I was so afraide lest I should offend her. But this preuailed no more
with her, then an earnest and vehement perswasion doth, with a right braue and con∣stant minde, vrging it to breake his Oathe and promise, or to commit some horrible treason, or extreame vile and egregious villanie, shee being throughly resolute, to serue still the goddesse Diana, and neuer to loue any man, Cupid himselfe not being able to o∣uerthrow or remoue, her firme and loyall determination and intent. Thus did the amorous intreatings of foolish Phodra, displease chast Hippolitus; So did licentious Myrrha, anger her father, she being ouer importunate in her lawlesse loue. And so did my vnwelcome speeches make her frowne, euen through anger & disdaines Vertue forcing her faire face to blush with shame and despite, which shee, like (as with a pensill) to temper with the vermillion of her bashfull modesty. Me thought I felt my selfe condemned, with that controlling looke of hers, and the changing of her colour, seemed to execute me (euen aliue) as I was; Loue being of that nature, that one onely countenance or gesture, increaseth or diminisheth the hope of Louers, as in a sick Pati∣ent, a little good or ill dyet, killeth or reuiueth the health of his life. And now, though too late,A Sentence. I repented me, that I had spoken any thing. Often is a man blamed for spea∣king, but seldome or neuer for holding of his peace. I confessed (now) that I had done a fault, yet knew I not thereof, vntill I had committed the same. The Marriner ouertaken with stormes, and wel-nigh sunke with surging Billowea, hath leisure to repent him, that he tooke Sea in such foule weather, and must endure the pennance for the same. Too late did the Troyans perceiue their owne ouersight,An example. in hauing permitted the Grecians to bring in their horse within their Citie walles: and so was it with me. But a∣lack, what people be there liuing in the world, that are so much subiect vnto repentance as Louers be? in as much as the more their losse is, the greater is their repentance, for that they kept the same no better. Nothing is so pretious vnto the Louer, as is the affe∣ction of his Ladie, because it is the chiefe nourishment, both of his body and minde. Oft did I wish, that I had brideled my tongue within my mouth, but the byrd flying in the Ayre, cannot flie but must be seene, and a word once spoken, cannot be recalled back againe, being no more able to be recouered, then the Time, which is most vainely and sondly lost.A Similie. The  once shot, cannot returne backe to the bowe, but must flie to the mark, at which it was aimed. Neither can the stone that is flung vp into the aire, come againe into the hadde of the stinger, before it hath mounted vp aloft. What to doe I knew not, only I hung downe my head (and as one vnworthy to fee that face, which was most iustly offended, with my foolish temeritie) I held mine eyea fixed vpon the ground. Wherein, I resembled him that playeth at Tennice, who loo∣keth vpon his Racket, after he hath made a fault, not knowing whom to blame for the same. The louely Virgin, not any thing at all moued in mind, as I was (for though the Fellon that hath offended,A Similie. is troubled before the Iudge, we must not therefore say, that the Iudge himselfe being innocent, and the father of the Law, should be astonisht at all:) tooke courage brauely againe, and as it were (in disdaine) thus began to iest at me. How now man, what cheare, all amort still? Tell me, thou rash and vnconsiderate Swaine, doest thou not feare the paines of Ixion, or to be plagued as that amorous Hun∣ter was by Diana, for his ouermuch sawcie boldnes? I well perceiue thou findest that I am more curteous and gentle, then thou art bolde and ouer-foolish-hardie (farre more then any way becommeth thee indeed) thy fault deseruing as great punishment as the others did. But it may be, thou art one of that accursed race of the Titans, whom Iupiter blasted with Lightning, for their notorious pride, taking downe their proud glorie, with the hor∣rible dartes of his all-daunting fierie Thunder. Doest thou not know, my nature, my calling, & my birth? In going about to mocke me, thou wouldst seeme, to make me belieue that I am otherwise then I am: making Loue to be author of thy follie, and my beautie, the mother of thine error. But thou playest, as almost euery one doeth; For who (euer) hath done a fault, that layeth not the blame thereof, rather on another, then vpon himselfe? You Louers are happie in one thing, for that you haue this Loue alwayes at command: vpon whome, (as vpon a Rocke) you founde and build all the buildings of your faults, when it is a meere grosse
Error, to thinke that there is any such Loue at all. Man, if hee list, may keepe himselfe from Louing: For brideling his appetites, with the snaffle of Reason, and holding them in their right places, they can no way of∣fend, and they no way offending, he can neuer be forced to loue.A Sentence. Thou art the first that like bold Bayard, durst be so audatious as to trouble me with such speeches as thou, euen now hast done. For to what purpose seemeth it the Hus∣bandman, to goe about to remoue a huge stone or Rocke, from one place to another, whose blacke and cold shade spoyleth his Corne? Or what profite is it for the Pilot, to seeke to tarrie the course of the flood, because it hindereth his Nauigation? I am vowed vnto the Goddesse Diana, and am one of her Virgins, which (onely) I will serue. Hence then all loue from mee, and thou, that hast presumed (as the first) to speake vnto me therof, shalt be him that shalt be first refused: protesting vnto thee, that if thou returne againe vnto thine olde Error, I will so punish thee, as thou shalt be a warning vn∣to all other whatsoeuer. Ah (good Father) I yet stayed for a more hard and cruell answere of this angrie Nymph, resembling the guiltie person, who not fearing the arrest of death, contrarie to his feare, is onely condemned to pay a Fine. Which was the cause that hope and assu∣rance came vnto me againe: Whilst with an humble reuerence, I thus began to excuse my selfe vnto her. Glorious and resplendent Lampe, the purest Golde in the world, hath sometimes bene dispraised of men, and counted as base, because they knew not the value and worth thereof: Euen so, if not any before my selfe, haue not attributed glorie vnto thy beau∣tie, the reason is, because they were not acquainted with the excellencie of the same. Say what it best pleaseth youre sweet selfe, yet shall you neuer keepe me from worshipping, admiring, and adoring, that which is so precious and rate, as it approcheth neere vnto the Gods; because it is not in the power of man, to hinder the same, no more then the bond-slaue can contradict whatsoeuer pleaseth his Maister. If the diuine Goddesse Diana, hath entertained you for her owne, doe you admire and wonder, that mortall creatures, after the example of the Gods, doe vnto you ho∣nour and reuerence? Too bold I must needs confesse I am, to trouble you, with these my harsh and tedi∣ous importunities. But (O worthie Diana,) what famous deedes, and memorable acts, haue euer bene accomplished and brought to passe, without extreame boldnesse, and ex∣ceeding great venturing: yea, and many times, without all apparance of Reason? They which spare to venture, prooue for the most part,Audaces For∣tuna iuuat, the midos{que} repel∣lat. poore and beggerly wret∣ches; For Fortune most commonly fauoureth such as be be bolde, and of a desperate spirit, whereas cowards, and such as be white-liuered, shee reiecteth, and bringeth e∣nought. The Gods themselues, vouchsafe to accept men for their seruitors, nothing disdai∣ning at all their sincere oblations and offerings. Neither do you iudge aright of mine in∣ward affection towards you. For, in louing you, I doe honour you: this my loue, not being the childe of an vnchast Venus, but of renowmed and illustrious Honour. Too too diuine is your Beautie, too braue your Vertue, too chaste your mind, and too sacred your honor, to be tainted or once touched with the dart of Cytherea. Besides, Vertue it selfe, neuer disdaineth dutious affection, and loyall constancie, for her attendants and seruitours: which, if it be so; Then why should not you enter∣taine the poore Shepheard Arcas, for your slaue? The selfe-same Goddesse which you honour, hath deerely loued a simple Swaine, shee descending downe from the heauens, to come vnto him, and to search for him, with all delightfull and pleasant shewes that may be. Venus likewise, hath not thought scorne of the amitie of louely Adonis: why then, should you disdaine mine? Well may you forbid me, but hinder me you cannot. For loue you I must, nor can anie thing turne me from the same. Easilie may man tame his couetous passion, his losses, and hinderances, his sor∣rowes and griefes, but hardly or neuer, can hee ouercome Loue. For neither Dame Nature her-selfe, nor anie cunning Art, are able to giue vs anie such precepts, as are suf∣ficient
to bring the same to passe. Dauid, nor Dauids wise sonne, Hercules, nor strong Sampson, Plato, nor wittie Aristotle, Ouid, nor learned Virgill, were neuer able to doe it, hee hauing forced them all, to trie his conclusions. Bee then perswaded (most excellent Nymphe) and esteeme not so lightly of the puissance and force of LOVE, lest hee make you to feele of his powerfull effects, as that Prince vseth to deale hardly with such of his people and subiects, as goe about to reuolt from him. Fond man,A Sentence. (replyed shee smiling.) The faults of great personages, excuseth not the follies of the meaner sort, whom wee must follow, not in their riches, but (rather imitating them) in their Vertues, for their mightinesse couereth the faults which they doe, the other, not being able to doe the like, because they want the authoritie the first are in. If Diana and Venus haue loued, therefore thinkest thou, that I am bound to follow them, and Loue as they did? If so thou thinkest, thou art much deceiued. A King∣dome may well suffer a wicked and an vniust Prince, and yet it doeth not followe, but that his subiects may be both faithfull and godly. Vertue is as much commendable in the poore,A Sentence. as in the rich: and the sillie wretch, dught as much to doubt to offend, as hee that is most wealthiest, and mightiest of all, because the violating of Vertue, admitteth no excuse at all, in as much as men are more bound vnto her, then vnto any thing else in the world. Thinke not then, that either these thy examples, or these thy reasons, are able to change my minde, to alter my will, or as much as once to make the least breach that is, into the inuincible Forte of my chaste thought. Subtill Sophisters in their schooles, (to maintaine their bad opinions) neuer want Arguments, which carrie the shewe and face of Reason. So you Louers, learne in the Academie of your Maister, manie goodly discourses, which resemble such fruite as is faire and ripe outwardly, but within, is rotten and vn∣wholsome, and good for nothing. For how can they be good or iust, when the Doctor that teacheth them (by your testimonies) is without reason, and blinde, and without all equitie and iustice? The beginning of your Song is alwayes this, that it would please vnto entertaine you into our seruices: Because (forsooth) your Loue is most sacred and chast towards vs. But good wine, in time, groweth to be sower and sharpe; And so these your goodly considerations, and chast respects, waxe daily worse and worse, so that in the ende, they come to be starke naught indeed, and much disagreeing with our Honours, as the sweetest meate is soonest spoyled, through the heate of the Sunne. Giue ouer then, good Swaine, and neuer talke vnto me more of these errors, which make both high and lowe to forget themselues: otherwise, I will stoppe mine eares, as the Serpent doeth his, with his taile. I seeing her choller to be somewhat abated, replied thus. Rich Treasure of Ver∣tue (vnder correction) your owne wordes condemne your owne opinion which you holde; For if wee must not iudge by the example of others, and if particular acti∣ons, be they good or badde, binde not the generall; Then, why thinke you, that all Lo∣uers are scarce chaste or vertuous? when there be diuers found to be of a contrarie dis∣position and Nature. All the Goddesses were not like to Venus, nor all the Gods, of the humour of Iu∣piter. He that hath abused himselfe no way, but doeth his businesse honestly, and well, (not going about any Treacherie or Treason) ought not to abide the punishment of a Traitor. For that were to doe against all Iustice, there being great difference betweene the guiltlesse and the guiltie, in the manner of their liues. When I shall haue spoken, or done any thing (against my former meaning) then may you well enroll mee amongst the number of those infamous Louers, but vntill I shall so doe, you cannot iustly accuse mee. Did I thinke you were otherwise, then you say you are, and that Honor, Vertue, Modestie, and Chastitie, lodged not in your brest, I could not (I assure you) loue you so much as I doe: For that Loue that is not immortall, is but a Loue, false, deceitfull, and counterfait.
The Loue which one attributeth alone vnto Beautie, passeth and dieth, without the the same: but that, which respecteth Vertue, continueth sacred and sure for euer, because it neuer dyeth, no more then Vertue it selfe doth. If wee will loue rightlie, then must wee loue the soule, which is the receptacle of Reason, which neuer perisheth, and not the bodie, which in small processe of time en∣deth and decaieth. My conclusion is thus, that I honour you for your vertue; I loue you, for your beautie; hoping you will accept of my poore sacrifices, least you be condemned to be more haughtie and high-minded, then the Gods themselues, who disdaine not to listen vnto the supplication of a sincere and loyall heart. No more Shepheard (answered the Virgin) importune me no more: Hee that is wise, ought not (alone) to be without spot or blame, but must as well be free and cleare from all suspition of the same; Taking away the occasions of vice, to the ende he may not sinne at all: For he that is graue and considerate, can finde no excuse when he hath offended. For mine owne part, I will neither loue, nor be beloued, much lesse, be the cause of anothers miserie. But O you blinde and frantike Louers, who alwayes make your Mistresses the mo∣tiues of all your misfortunes. As if a faire Christall Riuer, and such a one, as is profita∣ble vnto the whole Common-wealth, should be condemned, for drowning such as cast themselues headlong into the same, and not their owne foolish and desperate fault. But (saiest thou) I cannot hinder thee to loue mee, (a Gods name) let it be so, but yet this cold comfort I will giue thee, loue mee as much as thou wilt, yet neuer would I wish thee to looke for any requitall at my hands: for if thou doest, assure thy selfe, thou shalt be mightily deceiued. And take this also for a warning from mee besides, that if thy indiscretion or want of gouernement, shall (by chaunce) bring the least spot, or blemish vnto mine honor, (yea as much as any small colour of the same) I here solemnely protest, that in reuenging it vpon thee, I will likewise punish mine owne selfe, in that I haue suffered thee, so farre to runne on, and not to haue plagued thee for thy offence. For I will wash my hands in my best blood, and so purge my selfe cleare from the fault. Fond Shepheard (that thou art) this fraile and withering beautie of the bodie, is nothing worth, in comparison of that of the minde. And that woman that hath the first, and wanteth the second, is like vnto a dead bodie, which is nothing but a faire and fat-feeding for wormes. If thou louest me indeed, (as thou wouldst make me belieue) then loue that, which I esteeme of, more then of mine owne life; that is, mine honour: and louing it, (euen for my Loues sake, withdraw thy selfe from dooing that which may hurt it, and so by consequence, mine owne person. For, (Shepheard) assure thy selfe, this mine honour can neuer die, without my life, and they sailing both in one Boate, neuer shall Diana see the one without the other. Admirable Ladie (answered I) great wrong doe you offer vnto me, to account me as an enemie, of the thing which you so religiously esteeme of in this world. But if I so much displease you, yet can I easily content you againe, in absenting my selfe from you, by a gentle kinde of death. Permit me onely to execute the same, and then shall you see, how willing I am to be seruiceable vnto you, in all my best deuoires. If I haue forgotten my selfe anie way, I craue pardon for my fault, I beeing ouer rash, in that I haue presumed to loue you so much as I doe, and not that I euer went about to offer outrage or preiudice, vnto your good Name or Fame, in any sort what∣soeuer. Or if without making satisfaction for mine offence, you will not forgiue me, yet I beseech you, suffer me to die: For neuer will I wish to liue, to be holden for an enemie vnto that, which I hold to be so precious, and which I esteeme more off, then of all the wealth in the world. Shepheard, Shepheard, answered the curteous Damzell, I take little delight or pleasure in blood. Neither am I descended from those Gods, which demaunded men to be sacrificed vnto them, I will endure all; yet not with force, as Tyrants doe,
but rather with sweet mildnesse, as gentle Princes vse, I am content thou liuest, but yet whilst thou liuest, I would not haue thee, kill her, who hath giuen thee so much li∣bertie, or to bring her vnto her latest home; if by thy fault her chaste credite be anie way impaired or diminished. What shall I say more vnto thee, to content thee? when I haue alreadie (I feare me) said enough, if not too much. I must now leaue thee; for I perceiue my Sister is about to call me, to begin our dauncing againe. Heauens graunt that thou maist liue, freed of this thine euill, and that my losse, make thee not wise too late, after thou hast wrought mine vtter ouerthrow. Hauing so sayd, away she goeth from me, comforting her selfe, amongst her diuine companie: And I, being not a little proud, of this my gentle good fortune, withdrew my selfe from the companie, making my prayers vnto the Muses, who deuised these two Sonnets, which (after the daunce was finished) in the best manner I could, I presented vnto her. SONNET. I. My thoughts, a new cleare Sunne, (now) whollie do adore, My hart (pale, through great feare) doth march vnder his light: This Sunne, thy sweete Face is, where beautie keepes his store, Which being diuine, diuinely prized is aright. Sacred Diana, worshipped in Heauen and Hell, Thou, ore my hart (alone) deseru'st to signorise, Men vanquisht, by rare Deities, that do excell, Thee taking (so) should honor in most sacred wise. If then (I) by thine eyes, am ouercome and slaine, Yet I esteeme myselfe, most happie so to be: Men (seruing Gods) Cannonized Saints, are for their pains, Ah then, these humble prayers, and vowes, accept of me. The greatest Gods vouchsafe,A Sentence. ment presents for to take, And meaning good (the sacrifice) most perfect still doth make. SONNET. II. Faire Dame, which with sweet bonds, in bondage holdst my hart, Daine, that he may thee serue, his raunsome so to pay: Or, if thou wilt not that from prison he shall part, Then as a guiltie wretch, in bis best time him slay. He cannot see thee, lest (he dutious) thee may serue, Needs must hee rest thy slaue, for who hath venim tane, A counter-poyson seekes, himselfe so to preserue, Or findeth Death out, for to ease him of his paine. That torment (sudddainly) which gentle Death doth kill, Ought not to be lamented, when it riddes all griefe: Whereas my woes are heauie, during (alwayes) ill, Ah then, kill me (on suddaine) or yeeld me reliefe. For happier is the Tombe, then is his vitall breath, Who rightly liueth not, but (wretchea) languisheth. These were the first verses, which with a Viole, (pleading for pittie) I presented vnto my beautious Diana, who accepted of them, and read them, with an indifferent kinde conntenance. O diuine Muses, euen vice it selfe, loueth, honoreth, and reuerenceth you: Neither is there anie, be they neuer so ill giuen, but liketh of the praises, which you (with your melodious harmonie) attribute vnto them. Diana, finding mee to be somewhat fa∣uoured of the Muses, beganne to thinke somewhat better of mee, then she did beforce
imagining that they would not suffer vice to raigne in my Loue, because they are of themselues diuine and chaste. So Maro, by the helpe of his Muse, obtained the fa∣uour of Augustus the Emperour, recouering his lands againe. Wherevpon, I began to conceiue better of my selfe, then I any way deserued, and as Pompey, because hee had forced some of Caesars armie, to retire backe, as farre as their owne Trenches, imagined with himselfe, that hee had alreadie got the gole, and wonne the victorie. So I (because of this small grace I obtained at my Mistris hand) beganne to per∣swade my selfe, of things, that neither might, nor could well be brought to passe. A small matter, maketh Louers, to hope or feare. I now tooke vpon mee, to make this Dittie following, which (as sweetely as I could) I sung before my Ladie. Heare it then, though vnworthie it be of your patience. (LADIE) how much doe I respect and loue Your beautie rare, which doeth my heart controule? When (lest that you to anger I should moue) I bite my tongue, and silent am in soule. Ore me you haue (still) such a hand, As, none but you, may me command. I rather chuse, a thousnd times to die, Without offending your most heauenly face: Then like to Dedals sonne, fall foolishly, And so, through rashnes, end my youthfull race. Borne was I, for to be your slane, My seruice you (alone) shall haue. If I of you, such reuerent regard Haue, as to you, I dare not tell my griefe: Ah then, but gesse my Crosses ouer hard, By these my teares, I bide without reliefe. Thinke that (as others) I doe mourne, The fire kept close, more hote doeth burne, Before, to you, my cares I will bewray, Ile perish, as your loyall seruant true: Death cannot be so grieuous any way, As for to be offensiue vnto you. So you be not displeasd by me, The losse of life, no losse shall be. A double burning burthen I doe beare, My selfe consuming with a two-fold woe: First, for because I loue, and hold you deare, And next, because I dare not tell you so. A pittious paine, that to conceale, Which most we couet to reueale. The Law doth men (sometimes) compell and make, All that they know, not to disclose or tell: But LOVE all speech away from vs doth take, Which is a plague, as bad as second Hell. We must not for our selues once speake, Whilst silence makes our hearts to breake. But though my tongue most secretly, this ill Doth keepe, my pittious eyes yet shew the same: Thus whilst I loyall do contiuue still, I counted am a coward, to my shame. Because that I am ouer kinde, I am condemn'd of abiect minde.
To reape for louing true, a mortall wound, I holde is as a sacred thing diuine: And so I rather wish, dead to be found, Then a deniall, should cause ruine mine. What neede I (then,) my griefes her show? When what I would (faire shee) doth know. Ile rather flie to Heauen, with swiftest wing, Then that mine earnest sute, my Dame should grieue To speake too much,A Sentence. much danger oft doth bring, When warie silence nere doth blame receiue. Of Gods we learne secret to bee, Little to say, and much to see. Then (Dearest) since thou art not ignorant Of my hard state, rue on my pittious plight: Which though in colours, forth I do not paint, Yet they, in conscience merit fauour right. Who serueth well,A Sentence. though he (not crauing) stand, Yet doth his good deserts enough demand. After I had sighed forth this amorous Dittie, it pleased my Ladie, to allow it for passable and currant, shee doing mee the honor to sing it her selfe (now and then) vn∣to the sweete sound of her daintie Lute. But O thrice happie Song, to haue bene thought worthie for to liue in the sacred memorie of my Mistrisse, and to be warbled forth, with her sweet & melodious voyce. This (reuerend and graue Sire) was the beginning, and first progresse of my chaste Loue, which made me so carefull, as I could take no rest, in somuch as (like one ouer-cu∣rious) I would needs know the euent of the same: and therevpon (one day) I addressed me, vnto an Ecco, of whom I demanded many things, which shee resolued me of sud∣dainly: But yet her answere was so fatall and heauie vnto mee, as it not a little irketh me to repeate it. Neuerthelesse, because I will hide nothing of my proceedings from you, listen if you please; For thus it was. ECCO. Harke (Goddesse of these Woods) vnto my neuer ceaslesse cries, Who here most blessedly dost liue, exempt from vanities. Thou Goddesse, which through knowledge thine, of prudent fore-seeing Fate, Doest know our endes, and deaths, and of our liues, the course and state. Goddesse of heauenly Nature right, to whom Ioue doeth reueale Great secerets of importance, and nought from thee doth conceale. Thou, that of vs, according to thy owne will, doest dispose, Thou, which one while doest make vs liue in ioy, and then in woes. To thee, to thee (doe I appeale: To answere me) then come, Whose voyce seemes for to flie from out, a hollow ghastly Tombe. Who shall relieue my woes, and breathe into me vit all breath? Into my soule ore-chargde with griefe, and ouerwhelmde with death? Death. In what estat shall Loue (which cuts my wings of thoughts ore-glad) Finde my poore minde, which when it left it, left it ouer sad? Ouer-sad. What, with my heart once strong as steele, gainst griefes shall then be done? Since hardly it was made to yeeld: shall it be ouercome? Ouercome. After so many wearie toyles, where-through I needs must perish, What will my Lady count of this, my too too deare bought seruice? Vice.
But shall I from this wretched state, whilst I doe liue, be free? Or shall I still, vnto her will (as seruile) Bond-slaue bee? Bond-slaue bee. Ah say, what good at length shall I find, in this my cold damage? What new come nouell Accident, shall set a fire my courage? Courage. Shall Rage and Furie then, within my bones vnconstant burne? And for to quench this flaming fire, to me shall none returne? None returne. Who is the cause of this my griefe, and of mine vsuall paine, Since I haue alwaies honoured the great Palladian? Palladian. Why sencelesse find I sences mine, from Reason (thus) to mone? Who workes this vncoth feare in me? Say, is it cruell Loue? Cruell Loue. And is it cruell to one, that is the authour of my griefe, The greatest of Gods, that will mongst God, be honoured first and chiefe. First and chiefe. Shall I then be vnfortunate, starre-crossed in my will? And (without succour) succourlesse, must I continue still? Continue still. Ah Arcas, miserable wretch, behold now (here) the life Which thou must lead, whilst thou dost liue, begirt with sorrow rife. Chuse rather death, then thus to liue, in endlesse miserie, (By dying) all thy griefes doe end, they woes and anguish die. Seeke in this vncoth Desart sad, some kind of gentle death, Who's plungd in paine, should nere desire to draw his vitall breath.A Sentence. One plague's as bad, as is some death, one death ends torments all, Then death, not life, Ile chuse, and take of euills what is most small. This was the pittilesse answere of cruell Ecco, which made me bedeawe my cheekes many times, with brinish teares, and to wish my selfe to be as lowe vnder the ground, as I was high vpon the earth; whilest I consumed peecemeale away in most wofull plight. Stay there Shepheard (said the old man, interrupting him) for thy misfortunes haue put me in minde of a dolefull Historie, which I will report vnto thee. Hearken then, for thus it beginneth. In the raigne of Emanuel, King of Portingall (who with his Armie Royall,The pittifull Historie of the Vertuous Iza∣bella, and her incontinent Husband Don Horatio. scoured all the Seas thereabouts, planting the faith of Iesus Christ, in the hearts of the vnbeleeuing Moores, who then had small knowledge in the same, and at what time he vexed the In∣fidels of Affrica with continuall warres, hauing wonne Saffin & Arsillias, too famous and strange Cities (of that countrie) from them, fortifying them with sufficient, braue & va∣lant Garrisons) there (then) liued a young gallant Gentleman, called Horatio, who for the great proofes which he had (alreadie) shewed abroad, of his rare and admirable chiualrie) was growne to be verie famous, and had gotten great fame and renowme a∣mongst the Portingalls. Hercules, though he was valiant, yet did hee loue, and through loue died. Achillis, for Brissesse, left the defence of his owne Souldiours and countrimen,An example. & for the affection he bare to Polixena, lost his life. Mars and Cupid (as the Father and Sonne) walke most (commonly together, and fewe generous Cauailiers haue there bene, that haue not vouchsafed to loue. Amongst the number of which, this youthfull knight was one, who was forced to submit himselfe vnto the good liking, and to seeke the fauour of a faire Gentlewoman (as then attending vpon Maria the Queene) and one of her Maidens, of Honour) being the daughter of Samperius, an auncient Baron, and defended from a most honourable house.
Neither was he much to be discommended in suffering himselfe to be ouercome by this young Damozell, he hauing made his choyce so well, that for vertue and wit, for stature of body, for good colour and complexion, and for perfect properties in all partes of her, there were fewe or none to be preferred before her in all the court of Por∣tugall, yet, though his fancie was great, he mightily concealed it, vntill (maugre his force) the fire discouered it selfe, bursting out into a great flame, and that at a very bad time for him, the King then dispatching him presently away, for Sassin, to follow the old warres against the Affricans. Although Don Horatio was by nature borne to be a Souldiour, being farre fitter for the field, then to dallie in a field-bed, warre, being his most pleasing pastime, and that he delighted in nothing so much as in battaile, yet did it wonderfully grieue him, to be absent from his Mistris, wishing in his minde, that he might haue giuen ouer his wea∣pons, and haue spun by her side (as Hercules did sometimes) rather then to haue depar∣ted from her. But there was no remedie, bound he was by oath, and needs must he obey. Besides, this Nation is wonderfull respectiue and dutifull vnto their Prince, and (which was of most importance) his honour, would haue complained vpon him, if he should haue refused so worthie a charge. One thing there was, which did not a little grieue him, and that was, because he could not make knowne vnto his Ladie, the sincere affection he bare her, to the end she might (sometimes) thinke vpon him, and for feare, lest in his absence she should enter∣taine some other stranger into her seruice, he being not able (by reason of his quicke dispatch) to talke with her in priuate, for occasion offereth her selfe (now and than) vn∣to such as are willing to seeke her. Whereupon he thought it not amisse to write vnto her his minde by Letter, which being done, he knew not how to conuey it vnto her: Much did he studie about the same, one while, deuising this way, and another while that way, but in the end none pleased him at all, he being as farre off to find out any meanes, as when he (first) began to thinke thereof.A Similie. Not vnlike the couetous wretch, who doth nothing else night and day, but stu∣die how to encrease his rich substance and wealth, beating his braines, onely how to get gold and yet is neuer contented nor satisfied. But behold how Fortune was Horatios friend in his busines. Samperius, the Father of this Gentlewoman, was (by chaunce) as then, in the Indies, two great Caracts, being sent by him from thence, vnto the King, the verie same day, that Horatio departed from Lisbon to passe into Affrica. Now our young Louer, whom Loue roused vp, as the Hūts∣man doth his game, counselled him, to get some of these, who were (newly) come to the Court, to deliuer this Letter, as if it had come from her Father, which as he wished, was quickly brought to passe. For a certaine friend of his, offered him to be the messenger, and to deliuer the same, with his owne hands vnto her, which he did, so orderly, & with so great cunning, as none perceiued, no nor the Damozell her selfe, but that they were sent frō her father, vntill she had opened and red them: for there she found the sweet entreaties of a friend, in steed of the graue counsell of a Father: when being deceiued (like him that returning home from a farre country) findeth his house (seazed vpon by his enemie) she thought to teare the Letters all in peeces, before she had throughly red them. But as it is generally seene, that nouell sights, though bad, doe please our eyes, ma∣ny men of the better sort, thinking that a sudden change and alteration of things, will breed their great contentment and ease. Euen so, this Damozell, moued with this strange case (after many doubtfull determinations within her owne selfe) first readeth one line, and then another, and at the last the third, and then foldeth the paper vp, resol∣ued to reade no more of the same, but to burne it. Yet as he, that tasteth good wine, al∣though (at the first) he is resolued not to drinke much, by little and littile, swalloweth downe a great draft, allured by the sweetnes of the same; So this Gentlwoman finding somewhat that pleased her, in the beginning, made no more adoc, but read them quite out: the copie whereof was this.
DON HORATIO, his Letter, to IZABELLA. FAire Gentelmoman' if it be an irreuocable Doome, that men, be they neuer so valiant, or coura∣gious, shall be subiect vnto a brauer and more liuelier force then their owne; I hope you will not meruaile ouermuch, if I humblie yeeld vnto your diuine Graces; and if as a Captiue vnto your beauties, I resigne my weapons vnto you, and yeeld my selfe as ouercome, by your beautious selfe. The valiant Champion, taketh it for more credit, to be vanquished by a famous Conquerour (accustomed to vanquish) then to haue subdued, some base and cowardly enemie, because glorie is the mother of trauaile, and of labour. And seeing the heauens haue appoynted ihat I should be ouerthrowne, I take no small pride and contentment, that it is my fortune to be prisoner vnto the resplendant sunne of your beautious eyes, I hauing neuer beheld any thing, so faire and diuine, throughout the world. But as mortall men, deserue norecompence from the heauens, vntill they haue by thousand good proofes, testified the faithfull and dutifull seruice towards them; So I will not presume, to im∣portune you to affect me at all, much more to yeeld me any guerdon for my paines, vntill that by in∣finites of dutious deuoyres, I shew myselfe (insome part) worthy of your gratious seruice, which hath bound me, so firmely vnto your peerlesse beautie. Mine onely request vnto you is, that it would please you, to haue me in your louely remembrance, and not to entertaine any other as your loyall seruant, before you shall haue iust occasion to discard, and giue me ouer. For, as (no doubt) it will be little pleasing vnto you, (hereafter) to repent you, that ye haue made a worse choyse, than of my selfe, so will it be farre more bitter vnto me, than a most desperate death, to be discharged from ser∣uing her, whom I loue, more then mine owne heart, and cherish, more then mine owne life, yea then mine owne soule, which is (now) wholy yours, seeing that he that is owner of the same, is the inuio∣lable slaue, vnto your incomparable beauties. DON HORATIO. Izabella, (for so was her name) not acquainted with the humour of Loue, as she ie∣sted at his amorous passion, so did she scoffe at his Letter, making no account, either of the one, or the other. But as Cremona, and Mantua, were giuen by Augustus the Empe∣rour, as a spoyle vnto his men, at Arius: and Souldiers, because they had taken part a∣gainst him, holding with his enemie, the inhabitants thereof being driuen from thence, and hardly entreated) and as such Subiects of that Prince are worse vsed, and with farre more rigour and crueltie, who proue Rebles vnto him, then those which haue bene al∣waies faithfull and true. Euen so, such proud, audatious, and disdainfull harts, who at (the first) make no account of Loue, and refuse his yoke most stubbornly, are more fiercely plagued after they are once taken downe and conquered, then those who (betimes sub∣mit themselues vnto this seruitude, accustoming themselues by little and little, to sup∣port and beare this bondage patiently; of which, Sabella may be a sufficient witnesse, as (ere long) you shall heare. Horatio was then forgotten (as the Infant that hath forgotten his lesson which was taught him) and his Letter torne in peeces, which afterwards the proud Virgin bought at a high rate. Meane space, as two Riuers which mingle themselues together,A comparison. enuiron a whole countrie, and became a little Sea; And as the fire being blowne with two paire of Bel∣lowes, kindleth more, then when it hath but one. So Don Horatio, pricked forward, by valour and Loue, began to doe incredible matters against the Infidels of Affrica. So that he became to be famous in euery mans mouth, there being no talke, but onely of his worthie and valiant exployts. Izebella hearing him to be thus praised, & marking how the King himselfe, with all his chiefe Martialists, did highly commend him, began by little and little to grow gen∣tle and milde. As the hard Diamond, becommeth soft (put into the blood of a Goat; and that great Masse and lumpe of crueltie of hers, beganne to waxe more kinde, and to breake in sunder, as the Snow falne thicke vpon the top of a hill, at the shining of the Sunne, melteth and droppeth away to nothing, in small time.
But yet these light motions, were not sufficient, nor strong enough for Loue, where∣on he might build a firme foundation: he knowing the presence, and the speech of the braue Portingall Knight, would doe more good then all these, which were no other then castles built in the aire, or conceits framed by an idle head, they passing away as the clouds do poste from one to another in the firmament. Not long after, newes was brought vnto the Court (for certaine) that Horatio had wonne a notable victorie of the King of Fesse, kild many of his enemies, and gotten a notable rich bootie and spoyle: a∣mongst which, was taken prisoner, a maruailous faire Ladie, sister, vnto the Barbarian King, married vnto the Lieftenant of that countrie. Izabella; who cared not much, whether she lost Horatio, or no, before these newes, be∣cause she made no great account of him, began now to doubt, that this captiue Dame, would take her conquerour prisoner, robbing her of that, which she refused to take for her owne: so as now she began to wish for to haue him playing as young childrē doe (who after they haue resused some certaine thing) begin to grieue mightily when they see the same giuen vnto others: and this was the cause, she now began to wake and looke about her. Diuers strange and prodigious are the effects of Loue, which maketh me thinke, that Force onely, & not Venus, was his mother: and that Dispaire first begot him, for he doth nothing but violently: not vnlike vnto the thunder-bolt, which neuer tumbleth downe vpon the ground, but it breaketh one thing or another. But now Horatio, laden with fame, with spoyles, and with prisoners, returneth home to Portingall, vpon whome euerie one casteth his eye, whom euerie man doth highly commend, and vnto whome all degrees (whatsoeuer) doe vse much dutious res∣pect, and humble reuerence. The King himselfe doth him great grace, entertaining him with high commenda∣tions, giuing him many kind thanks, for his so valorous & honourable carriage against his enemies: yet notwithstanding all these fauours, he rather chose to haue had one amo∣rous glaunce from his Mistris, then all these Royall curtesies. He seeth himselfe honoured by the King, made much of by the Nobles, respected by the inferiour sort, and to be accounted of and commended by euery bodie. Nothing wanteth for the perfection of his glorie. He cannot wish for more then he hath, nor de∣sire more, then is alreadie attributed vnto him: yet neuerthelesse, he maketh no ac∣count of all these his good fortunes, no more then that man doth, who enioy a most pretious and inestimable Iewell, disdaineth and refuseth other little rich stones, although they be much valued and accounted of by other. The onely presence of his Ladie, was that which pleased his minde, and the least sweet looke cast from her smiling counte∣nance, bred more contentment in him, then all the honours and entertainments what∣soeuer. Euerie man hath a particular affectection that gouerneth him, and some one thing which he esteemeth more then all the rest, to enioy which, he accounteth his chiefe glorie, pride and contentment in this world, despising all whatsoeuer else might happen by any other meanes vnto him. Some delight in greedie couetousnes, some in renowmed Chiualrie, some in aspiring ambition, and the most part in hote and furious Loue. Nothing pleaseth these kind of men, but onely what is affected through these things, not esteeming ought to be good or allowable, which commeth any other way, although it be profitable, praise-worthie, and faire. And this was our Portingall Knighs conceit, who now was growne into such credit in the court, with the King hauing wonne himselfe such commendations by reason of his valour, as he might commaund that which other Gallants and Gentlemen (scarce durst not open their mouths to entreat for) so that hauing egresse and regresse at all houres, and to euerie place, he one day espi∣ed (a fit time) to breake his minde vnto his Mistris, whom he finding alone, began thus to giue her the onset: he that is troubled with any griefe, is much lightned of the same, when he hath vnfolded and discouered it vnto his friend. Now faire Gentlewoman, of all euils that I haue knowne (in my conceit) there is none that commeth nigh vnto Loue, in respect of crueltie, for all other diseases haue their remedies onely, he is (as it were) without recure.
Notwithstanding, as he entereth in at the eyes, who stand him in steed of torches, to set him a fire in the heart, so will he (perforce) passe from forth the mouth, taking (the tongue for a Herold) or Trompet of his dissignes. I speake this by experience, although vnto my no little sorrow: vnlesse your harsh and hard rigour growe to be gentle and milde, and except you lay a side this cruell vaile which hide the pittie of your inward thought. Alas sweet (Ladie) if sometimes we loue those who hate vs, & such as beare vs no good will at all, how much more (in reason) then ought we, to affect those that loue vs indeed? For although their friendship is not profitable vnto vs, yet neuerthelesse, ought we to accept of their good wills, inasmuch, as we cannot loue one, vnlesse we wish, couet and procure the credit and good of such whom we fancie: which me thinkes should binde vs in conscience, to shew the like good meaning againe: considering that the bruit beastes themselues, fancie those, that doe good vnto them, doing a kind of re∣uerence vnto their gouerners, that gouerne and bring them vp. That your beautie, be∣ing so rare as it is, cannot suffer or indure any thing, that is bad or vitious, I doubt not at all: for (most comonly) that which is perfect of it selfe, is not so easily through vice cor∣rupted, which put me in good hope that you will not blame my loyall amitie, my true intention, nor the chast desire I haue had (alwaies) to serue you. If therefore it shall please you, to entertaine me into so happie an office, you then shall quickly perceiue many true effects, to spring forth, from this my faithfull seruitude, a double band, tying me, against the harshnes of your rigour, and I being double wise moued and compelled to serue you; the one is your admirable & incōparable vertue, which admitteth no cōpa∣rison: and the other is your excellent beautie, which glistereth among other faces, as tho Sunne doth among the startes. May be (you will say) that Loue hath set me downe this lesson, teaching me what I should speake, and that neuer any Louer thinketh that Sub∣iect foule which he loueth. To which I will answere you, that if you were not worthie of the praise I haue giuen you, and meriting euery way, to be beloued, Loue neuer had made vse of your singular perfections, to ouerthrow my libertie, as he hath now done; because he can neuer make a shew, of the greatnes of his power, but by such rare Sub∣iects, as Nature doth furnish him with all, through which he helpeth himselfe, to take prisoners, the harts of greatest Monarks: this being the reason, we seldome or neuer sees foule or vitious woman to be affected or loued, for that Loue refuseth to doe such a one as, she any seruice at all. It is no vnhonest desire, that inflameth me with your kind a mitie, for rather would I chuse to die, then once to holde within me such a bad thought, and much lesse, doe I make Eburting mine exercise, to passe the day withall, now I am free frō warres. For too pretious a thing doe I esteeme Time to be, to consume and lose it without any good occasion: neither is it my meaning any way, to goe about to deceiue you, for so doing I should but deceiue my selfe; and deceiuing my selfe, I should (quickly) be the authour of mine owne proper ouerthrow, my pretence being to seeke you with a chast minde, in the way of sacred marriage, with the consent of your friends, according vnto all orderly proceedings. Thinke then (sweet Lady) how plaine my meaning is, how holy mine intentions are, and how chast my desires; remēbring that Wedlocke is a matter you can hardly a∣voyd: & therefore I beseech you, if you find me any way worthie of your friendship, cast him not away, that honoureth and adoreth you, more then his owne soule: neither fru∣strate him of that good fortune, which he hopeth to find by enioying of your seemely selfe, because he neitheir will, nor can be fortunate, but to make you blessed: neither seeke for any renowme, but onely to make your selfe, the more glorious for euer. This was the summe of the Caualiers speech. Who, silent (now) attends his Ladies kind replie, Whilst to his heart, she wounds doth dart, with her faire eye. Our saine Maide of Honour, vnaoquainted altogether with such busines as this, whose chast cares (vntill now) were alwaies shut vnto such Orations as these, was much amazed, to heare such a speech as this, not knowing what answere to giue vnto Horatio,
vpon the soden; She saw his vertue, his reputation, and his glorie, had made him fa∣mous and commendable, his loue to be chaste and laudable, and his modest, and pudic∣que intentions, worthie of all succour reasonable. But yet on the other side, a number of these odde contrarie conceits (which hin∣der men much in their first proceedings, and so hardly bring it to passe, when they haue begun the same, as the most part of them, like faint-hearted cowards) giue ouer in their pursuite, without doing any good at all) made her to pause, and doubt vpon the matter, fearing lest, as into vnknowne places, all entrings and beginnings are dangerous, so this his eager chasing in loue, was followed, either for some mischiefe, to light vpon her bodie, or else for some staine or blemish vnto her honour. Besides, such Virgins as are not practisde at all in the Art of Loue (although they thinke well of such as are suters vnto them) alwaies imagine (so simple are they) that their (credits should be much disparaged, if they should not giue two or three proud or disdainfull answeres vnto their seruants, when they first begin to court them: and there∣fore for fashion sake, this Gentlewoman thought to doe the like: but yet bethinking her selfe somewhat better of the matter, she thought it was as good to forbeare, as to doe it, one while she thought vpon one thing, and another while, vpon an other, in the end she resembled The Rosie bad, which winde bloweth here and there amaine, Holding his head downe, which he raiseth vp againe. She loued Horatio, admired at his valour, honoured his Chiualrie, highly prized his glorie, and found her selfe tickled with the great praises he gaue vnto her. But as too much good fortune, is not the best, & too much ill fortune, is as bad, the moderate and temperate, being that which is the golden meane; so this Damozell compoundeth her answere of sweet and sower, nourishing the minde of her Louer, as well with hope, as with feare; following herein, the cunning Pothicarie, who couereth his bitter Pill with gold all ouer. And thus she answered vnto him. I willingly confesse (noble Lord Horatio) that your worthie valour, deserueth great commendations, but though it be of great force, against the enemies of the King, yet bath it no power, nor interest ouer me. For although I highly prise it (as euerie one else doth) yet doe I farre more esteeme of mine honour: and therefore perswade your selfe of this, that in comparison of that, I scorne the greatest things in the world be they ne∣uer so pretious. I, most strange and monstrous is it, for vertuous Maidens to loue, whose liking ought to be tied, vnto the good will of their parents, and depending vpon their pleasures, they can make no promise without their consents. This maketh me to smile at you, and to thinke such Louers to want their right wits, that so foolishly follow in pursuite, the loue of such Virgings as are wholy subiect vnto the disposing of their kindred. For what good answere may they looke for (to please themselues withall) from such as cannot bestow themselues as they would? And such an answere, must I be faine to giue vnto you, for that I cannot assure you (for certaintie) of any such thing as you defire. For, of my selfe, I am no bodie, but as it were vnder co∣uert barne, my good ill and my bodie, being wholy in the possession, and at the dispo∣sing of my gratious Ladie and Mistris the Queene, and of mine owne Father, my Lord Samperius. Besides, I so well like of a Virgins life, which is not subiect vnto cruell Himen, as I wish not, nor willingly would giue it ouer, to be come a Bond-slaue of a free-woman, not forgetting, that as long as men are woers, they are seruants: but no sooner haue they ob∣tained what they would, but then (strait) they become Maisters and Lords ouer vs. Againe, I am not ignorant, that they will not spare for faire speeches, that they want not pithie perswasions, and aboue all, they will not sticke for golden promises. But the old saying is, that he that scoreth best, paieth euer worst: and great braggers, are least per∣formers of their words. And me thinkes you do great iniurie vnto these beaue qualities in you, to spend your time, in courting a sillie damozell, who cannot pleasure you: when you might better employ the same, to the great profit of your King and Countrie.
Then (valiant Horatio, follow the Warres againe, and loose not your glorie and Honor) through vaine and idle LOVE: to the ende you may not be blamed, neither I suspected to be the cause of your loytering (heere) at home, without doing any thing: as if I had pulled your Armour off, from that warlike, couragious, and valiant bodie of yours. And this perswade your selfe, that the renowmed credit which shall come vnto you, by your gallant, venturous, and braue exploits, shall sooner winne mee to be yours, then all the cunning traines that you can deuise by Loue to take me: and that I make more account and estimation of them, then of all the Oathes and protestations that you daily vse. And this, when you shall haue accomplished at the full, and when my Father shall be returned from the Indies, (if it shall stand with the good liking of the King, the Queene, and him) I then shall be well content and pleased, to take vnto husband, such a braue Caualier as yourselfe is: and vntill then, you shall pardon mee. For as I am now, so will I keepe my selfe, whilst you (in the meane time) may studie how to shewe and make triall, of the rare and admirable proofes of your vndoubted and inuincible courage and vallour. But will you then (sweete Mistris, replied the Knight) be euery way as good as your word, and performe what you promise at this time? That will I (answered the Ladie) as I am a true Maide. Prouided alwayes, that you take that vertuous course, which I haue set downe vnto you, accomplishing euery thing orderly, and all obstacles and lettes taken quite out of the way, by the consent of all my foresaid friendes. It is enough (said Horatio) and I take your, faire promise, vpon which I will build, as vpon a flintie Rocke, assuring your selfe, that ere long, you shall heare some newes of mee. Heerevpon, kissing her daintie hand, hee departed from her, most luckilie perfor∣mnig his promise. O mightie LOVE, not Ioue: (though mightiest God be bee) Can bring to passe such wonders, as are done by thee. Horatio making all possible haste to be gone, and prouiding euery thing necessarie for his iourney, (presently) saileth vnto Saffin, where hee atchieued many straunge and wonderfull enterprises, ouer the Infidels in Affrica: burning their Cities, slaughtering their people, and ouer-running all the whole Countrey: Insomuch, as his glorie euery day, grew greater and greater, he being now growne a terro vnto his foes, and a great Honor vnto his owne Countreymen. Which done, hee commeth backe againe vnto Portugall, whither also Sampeius the Father of Izabella, was returned from the Indies: who hearing such a generall applause of prase giuen vnto Horatio, began to affect him wonderfully, whilst hee, following his Loue businesse in chase so earnestly, and with such good meanes, as with the consent of all parties, as the King, the Queene, and Sampeius himselfe, the marriage betweene vali∣ant Horatio and faire Izabella, was concluded, consummated, and finished, with the grea∣test pompe, and most Princelike solemnities that might be. Our Louers, so entierly louing one another, as they could scarcely abide to be one small minute asunder. So rare and admirable was their loue, as that of Priam and Hecu. ba, was not the like: Nor that of Scipio and Cornelia, to be compared vnto the same. Their two heartes were but one: their two bodies, but one minde and thought: and their will and affection, was all one, without any difference at all. In respect of their kindnesse, let that of Seleucus and Stratonica be voyde, and the rare fancie that was found to be betweene Vlisses and his constant Penelope, there hauing bene (neuer) so earnest, or ardent a kinde of affection, as theirs was. But what is too violent, can not be permanent and firme. Tempests and stormes, the more furious and raging they are, the lesser time they continue and endure. Euen as
that bodie is suddainely ouerthrowne and killed, that is surprized with a most suddaine dangerous disease. Meane while, Horatio grewe euerie day in more fauour with his King then other, In so much, as not long after, hee chose him Gouernour of Ansillies, whither he must needs goe, to keepe possession there. O how sweete is Honour, (be it neuer so painefull) vnto generous and couragious Spirits, as vnto Hercules, and to others? They leauing all soft, ease, and safe pleasures, to runne desperately to winne Honour: passing through many thousand Pikes, and wa∣ding through infinite dangers and perills, with great labour and paine, before they could attaine vnto the place where it was seated. So the prudent Prince of Ithaca, left his constant wife, to follow the long and te∣dious tenne yeares siege of Troy. And so the great Gueslin, high Constable of France, left his Spouse, to venture for that glorie, in the middest of wonderfull daungers, which made him famous for euer.An example. And so our renowmed Portuguise, although hee held nothing so precious, nor so religious in the whole world, as he did to liue with his sweete Izabella, whose companie was his Paradice, and whose presence, his heauen heere vpon earth. Yet would he needes leaue all this felicitie and happinesse, to endure in steelie Ar∣mour, the brunts of bloodie Warre, and whole worlds of Trauailes and painfull labours, to the ende hee might winne Honour: which Noble and Heroicall mindes hunt after so much. And (which many times, they dearely buy) with the losse of their most pre∣cious liues. Hee therefore resolued to depart, (although not without exceeding great griefe,) to leaue his faire and beautious Spouse, and the rather, because hee hoped to attaine vn∣to more Honour, through his worthy demeanure, and braue carriage, hee hauing excel∣lent meanes (as now) to shewe afresh, some fruites of his former towardnesse and forward∣nesse (in his Princes seruice in the Warres) by reason of that great and worthie Com∣maund, which was bestowed vpon him. He thought, that (who alwayes) should liue drowned in pleasures, resembled the Companions of Vlisses, changed into Swine, and that nothing was well gotten, but what was purchaste with the hazard of a mans life. Wherevpon, with manie sighes, with many bitter teares, and sorrowfull laments, hee taketh leaue of his dolefull wife. For commonly, we are admonished (by GOD) through some secret knowledge, when some mischaunce is comming towards vs, which wee can no way auoyde. So that the woefull Ladie Izabella, (foreseeing as it were, be∣forehand) the mischiefe that was like to light vppon her; did nothing else, but powre forth whole showres of teares, hauing not the power to let her Husband loose, from out of her armes. The winding Vine, neuer held the Hasell or Filberd, more intangled within her leaues,A Similie. nor the greene Iuy, neuer cleaued (so fast) vnto the olde stonie wall, as this young Ladie clung about her heauie Spouse; whome LOVE, whilest sought by violence, to hold still, sterne HONOVE plucked him from thence by maine force, carrying him away with him. Hee was ordainde for further ill, to goe his way, Nor doth the life of Man,A Sentence. stand alwayes as one stay. His wife prayeth, desireth; and coniureth him to breake his voyage, to giue ouer his enterprise, and to continue still with her: teling him, that shee had (as yet) but onely tasted the blessed pleasures which chaste wedlocke acquainteth faithfull Louers with∣all, without hauing had the lawfull fruition of those sweete contentments, which she so much desired. But shee pleaded in vaine, and to no ende, her Husband was deafe, and would not yeelde vnto her demaund. Honour dryed vp her teares, making them to be of no force, whilst glorie was the hatchet, that cut off her precious speeches: and desire of praise, the fire which consumed her most passionate prayers.
And therefore (though passing loth, hee taketh his leaue and departeth,) carrying away with him the wounded heart of his louely Spouse, in exchaunge of which, he lea∣ueth hauie mournings, and sadde laments, which followed her, euen vnto her verie graue. Horatio beeing now arriued at Ansillies, followeth his businesse most fortunately, Mars chasing away Cupid: cruell warres, gentle Loue: and hautie ambition, the sweete re∣membrance of his wife. It is a common fashion of manie men, to follow a thing most earnestly and eager∣lie, and then presently (and vpon the suddaine) when they haue gotten it,A Sentence. they giue it o∣uer, nor caring a whit for the same any more. Resembling heerein the way-faring man, who (a far off) seeketh a fountaine or spring, to staunch his thirst, and hauing freed him∣selfe of his drinesse, maketh no more account of the water, nor would stirre one foote to finde it againe. But this was not all. For the Heauens aboue, abounding in good or bad Fortunes, rayne not one downe alone, but many other, all together and at one time: and we see (for the most part) that one mischiefe neuer commeth, but that there falleth another, vpon the necke of the same. For so it was, that Horatio beeing farre off from his deare Spouse, and depriued of her company (by reason of the warres, wherein he was so much busied) chaunced to be∣come amorous of the faire Prisoner hee had of late taken in a Battaile, as I haue saide before: yea, and so much doth he doate of her, that as the flaming Torche, darkneth the light of the candle, so likewise this loue, quenthed the loue hee had before borne vnto his wife. O vngodly Husbands, which so wickedly falsifie your faiths, vnto your lawfull and louing bedfellowes: deceiuing them so shamefully, vnto your owne shames.Against had Husbands. Haue e∣uer any of you liued, without being punished of the Almighty, for your hainous faults? Was not Paris the ouerthrow and breake-necke of all his House and Countrey, for de∣filing the bed of Menelaus, and reiecting his betrothed wife Enone? Came not Iason to a miserable ende, being depriued of his Children, of his Wife, and his Pallace, for aban∣doning Medea, and for taking another false wife? And did not Theseus staine his hands in the chaste and pure blood of his owne sonne Hippolitus, for giuing ouer his deare Spouse Ariadne,Examples of bad Husbands. to the ende he might satifie his lust with Phoedra? And so was Horatio well plagued for his licentious pleasures: For God most iustly punished him, defacing his former glorie, weakning his vertue, ruinating his credit, and vtterly ouerthrowing his vallour. So (long since) Salomon, through Harlots, lost his diuine wisedome: they forcing him to become an enemie vnto God. So the strumpet Dalila, was the cause of the death of Sampson the stout. And so haue many other braue and great personages bene vtterly ouerthrowne, by this inticing Sexe, and seuerely chastised by God, as hee did our great Commaunder of Ansillies, who was so besotted of his slaue, as hee liued not, but onely by her lookes. Her eyes, was his bright Sunne, he none desirde but her, She onely faire was, her aboue (none else) he did prefer. A strange thing, that (many times) these foolish and wicked Amours should be more hot and liuely, then such as be lawfull and chasse. The reason being, either because they are forbidden by the Law (man commonly, louing that which he is prohibited to doe) or, because they are (as it were stolen) or enioy de but seldome, keeping such Louers in a perpetuall appetite and desire. As those who rise from the table (their bellies halfe filled) come to their dyet with better stomack, then such as are ouer-satisfied & glutted before. Or else, it is (as I thinke) for that the diuell is in these leaude liuers, who more and more enticeth and prouoketh them to follow this sinne, from which they can neuer, (without the great grace of OOD) retire nor withdraw themselues, vntill such time, as vtter ru∣ine and destruction falleth vpon their heads.
But now Horatio began to loose his wonted reputation and credit, euery one spea∣king ill of him, for his new Minion which he had gotten, hee being then, as infamous for his bad life, as he was (before) renowmed for his worthy vertues: yet was he so shame∣lesse and so impudent, that he would stoppe his eares vnto such as sought to giue him good counsell and aduise, making a shewe as if he knewe no such matter, and that all was well: whilst he was so bewitched with this raging and incestious Hellena, as he could not be quiet, nor rest any where, except this notorious Curtezan were by him, inso∣much, as hee carried her with him into the Warres, wheresoeuer he went, which shee made earnest shewe to desire, faining that she loued him so dearely, as she could not liue without his companie: when the truth was, (shee sought all the wayes that might be) to be with her former Husband againe, and to be reuenged of Horatio, who kept her sore against her will. Such foolish women, doing much like vnto Lice or Fleas, which leaue a dead coarse, (presently) assoone as they finde whereon no more to bite: and so these kinde of com∣mon ware, neuer loue, but for their owne commoditie or profit. No more then the common Queanes, who sent packing away the prodigall Childe, without as much as one crosse or pennie in his purse, to blesse him withall. Now whilst our Gouernour of Ansillses, liued thus licentiouslie, the chaste Izabella, chanced to heare how badly her periurde Husband had vsed her, how ill he had demea∣ned himselfe toward her, she vnderstandeth of his follies, and hath knowledge of his ouer-lustfull and raging fault. O how cruell is the wound that one receiueth of his friend! and how grieuouslie doe we take an iniurie of those, whom we account and holde as chiefe defenders of our wellfare and our good, reputing them as our best friends. To receiue a wrong of a foe, is an vsuall matter, but to be abused by ones deare friend, doth gall the very heart. Too true doth this poore Ladie finde the same, who hearing of these vnwelcome newes, thought presently, as gallant spirited Portia, to giue ouer her life. Diuers con∣ceits ranne in her troubled braine, whilst shee is vexed and tormented with rage and dis∣daine, with griefe and iealousie. One while, she thinketh to die, and then chaunging that aduice, she determineth to reuenge her selfe of her vnconstant Husband, but she bare him so loyall an affection, and loued him so dearely, that this also was quickly out of her minde. Now shee resolueth and determineth to commit her selfe vnto the mercie of the Seas and windes, and to saile, to seeke him out at Ansillies, to complaine iustlie of him there, to reprehend him for his fault, and to be obiect vnto him, in his vicious kinde of life. But disdaine quicklie altered that deuise, thinking with her selfe, that in so doing, shee should too much abase her selfe, to venture and indaunger her selfe so much, for a most leaude and vile licentious Palliard, hee no way deseruing so charitable an exployt at her hands. Manie times did she send vnto him, and often did she write, one while sharply, ano∣ther while sweetly, but all was one with him: for neuer would he vouchsafe her any an∣swere, by Letter, or by word of mouth. Onely hee would Iest and gibe at her messengers and messages, whilst being in∣chaunted with the vnhonest loue of his enemie, he studied how he might satisfie and content her alone; which, his last bad vsage, grieued her more then the rest, enforcing her to beginne to lament afresh. Ah (said she) how iustly am I punished for mine owne error. Who will bemoane him, that would not be warned by the harmes of his neighbour? What reasonable excuse can that man alledge for himselfe, that falleth into the selfe-same pit, into which hee hath seene him fallen, that hath gone before him? How many wretched Ladies like vnto my selfe, (most vngodlie abandoned, and cast off by their wicked Husbands) might I haue had for examples, not to beleeue these flatte∣ring men? Shall I come and complaine vnto thee, wofull Ariadne? Alacke I dare not. Shall I make my mone vnto thee haplesse Enone? No, no, I must not: seeing the least of your misfortunes, had bene enough to haue made me wise.
O iust God, reuenger of all Oathes broken, that so cruelly diddest punish Laomedon, for infringing his promise: Canst thou suffer the most periured wretch in the world to liue, and to scape scotfree? Am I so cruelly destined, that he must follow me, with thousand torches of griefe vnto my Tombe, who should haue hene (in right) vnto me, as the comfortable Sunne∣shine of my life? O faithlesse Husband, how quickly hast thou trod vnder thy feete, thy faire promises? And how little a while, hath lasted the care of loyall Loue betwixt vs? And (now) thou hast so miserablie deceiued mee. What canst thou haue of mee, more then my death? which I know thou wouldest be wonderfull glad of, to the end I might not vrge thy guiltie conscience, for this so foule a fact against me. And certainly, were it not for this, I would most willingly die, but to the ende, I may somwhat vexe, and reuenge my selfe of thee, I will, although vnwillingly, liue a little longer; knowing nothing can be more greeuous or vnwelcome vnto thee, then my companie and presence. Yea, I will come before thee, (face to face) and vpbraide thee for thy fault, euen vnto thy teeth. I will pull out those shamelesse eyes, of that impudent Strumpet, who keepeth (vn∣iustlie) that from me, which is mine owne: and whome thou preferrest before thy law∣full and chaste spouse. That done, I will hasten the heauens to shorten my life, I will make my daily prayers, that I may die quickly. The foming waues (therefore) shall not hinder mee of my iourney: the colde Seas shall not freeze the hote desire I haue to see thee: neither the feare of the rising billowes, shall let me from comming vnto thee, I being not able any longer to liue, vnlesse I may come to put thee in mind of thy fault: not doubting, but the raging waters will be more kinde vnto me then thou art, at (lest-wise) I meane to trie them, by reason of the small ioy I haue of my life: which I neither esteeme, nor make account of at all. Thus lamrnted this comfortlesse Ladie, whome Loue and Iealousie egged for∣wards, to goe onwards with her iourney. No perill (to giue ore her purpose) can her make, So little care, shee of her loathed life doth take. (Often) is it seene, that such desperate persons as are wearie of their liues,An example. scape the soonest the greatest dangers, which neuer offend them: whether it be, because they are (alreadie) throughly satisfied and contented with their miseries, beeing loth to wrong them any more. Or whether it be, for that some good Angell doth accompanie and guide these wretches, who without diuine helpe and assistance, would vtterly damne themselues for euer. But (now) by this time, the desolate Ladie, had caused a Shippe to be throughly fur∣nished at all points, into which, as a couragious Medea, she entreth, cutting and slicing the salt waters, so long, till at last, she happily arriueth at that Citie, vnto which her Hus∣band had with-drawne himselfe, the better, and more safely to liue, in his secure and sensuall pleasure. When, hee hearing of her arriuall, being farre more sauage then the bruite beasts themselues, (who heare the voyces of their little ones, and of their companions) cau∣sed the gates of the Towne to be shut, commaunding her, vpon paine of his displea∣sure (without vouchsafing so much as once to see her) to returne backe againe into her Shippe, with all her traine, and so to hoyse vp sayle and away, to the place from whence she came. O farre more cruell then Iason, who suffered Medea to be present, and to set out the Marriage of his newe wife: farre more vnkinde then great Agamemnon,An example. who per∣mitted his wife to liue, and keepe companie with her Louers. And more shamelesse then Marke Anthony the Romone, who left his vertuous and Princely wife, to satisfie him∣selfe with the embracings of that impudent harlot Cleopatra.
There is no better vineger, then that which is made of good wine when it sowreth. Euen so, the best Natures commit the grossest faults, when they giue themselues ouer vnto euill; I knowe not whether it is, because they haue the more meanes to doe the same then others: or whether it be, for that vice (waxing proud of so rich a prey) will neuer giue them ouer, still keeping them to execute her wicked will in euerie thing. This pittious newes so appalled the sences of the poore Ladie Izabella, as she fell downe into a dead sowne. Her vitall spirits faile her, and she falls for lorne, Like one that is vnto his graue (vntimely) borne. In the ende shee came vnto her selfe againe, for an exceeding kinde of griefe, dri∣ueth away paine from the bodies of women, by reason that their sorrow floweth forth with their teares, and so waxeth lesse, because of the helpe that they haue by sighing: which is not so with men, who for that they cannot shewe forth, eyther by their eyes, or by their voyce, any part of their griefe, are in the ende stiffed and choked with the same: Not vnlike vnto an olde Oaken tree, that breaketh before it will bowe, which by rea∣son it cannot bende (according vnto the winde) is torne and rent vp vnto the verie rootes. Izabella then, hardly distressed, must needes swallow downe this bitter potion (and patience perforce) must doe all he hath charged her, not being able to contradict him in any thing. For the woman by the ciuill Lawe, is subiect vnto her husband, whose fault neuerthelesse, is not in danger of punishment, as that of the wife. Certainly, a most vniust Law, which (two being culpable of one and the selfe-same offence) punisheth the one, and permitteth the other to goe scotfree. Man by his sword reuengeth the wrong his wife hath done, if (by chance, she brea∣keth the bands of Marriage, whereas the poore woman, in steed of vsing the like punish∣ment vpon him, is forced to see, to suffer, yea, and to allow, and beare with the vnlaw∣full adulteries of her husband. But such men, God (no doubt) will punish, as hee did our forgetfull Pertingale, not long after. Izabella, seeing no other remedie, putteth her selfe (once more) to the Seas, being often in the minde to throw her selfe therein, had it not bene, but onely that shee feared the losse of her soule. Which custome the Paynims oftentimes vsed, to rid themselues from their trou∣bles, and for that they respected not the immortalitie of the soule, in that they knewe not the true God. All day long shee wept, but the waters carryed away her teares, and all the night shee sighed, but the blustring windes whirled away her sighes. The Sea, storming at the iniurie she had receiued, beganne to swell for anger, to whistle for rage, and to fret and murmure, for despite and choller. It could not suffer such a great wrong, beeing farre more pittifull, then her care∣les and cruell husband: And therefore meaneth to bring backe the Shippe (once more) wherein his saithfull spouse remained, driuing it to the selfe-same Hauen, where it had bene the day before. Horatio not dreaming of anie such matter, but still glutting himselfe in his amo∣rous sport, with his subtill friend, seeking nothing so much, as how to please her, by all meanes possible. Euen as Achilles did himselfe, a slaue to Brixis yeeld, Although shee was his slaue by law, and wonne by him in field. But (LOVE is saide to be blinde) and respecteth not the condition of Crea∣tures, neither hath hee anie respect of persons at all. Onely hee accounteth of their beautie, with which, hee oftentimes helpeth himselfe to tyrannize ouer the proudest hearts, forcing the Prince (sometimes) to yeelde vnto the Peasant, whereby hee may bring himselfe to be (thought to be) more admirable in the eyes of mortall men.
The comfortlesse Ladie, seeing her selfe to be brought backe againe, by the proud and imperious windes, into the same port (much against her will) wherein she had har∣boured but a fewe houres before, fearing sore to offend her wilfull Husband, (whose onely pleasure and delight was to worke her iniurie) beganne a fresh to renew her for∣mer complaints, sighing and crying out after this pittifull manner. Ah God, ah God, was it not enough, that I had mine husband to my mortall ene∣mie, but that I must (needs) haue the waues of the Sea also to bandie against me? for what remaineth to come, or what can there be left behinde, to make me more miserable and vnfortunate then I am alreadie? seeing that he, who hath promised me so great loue, so great friendship, and affection, and vowed so much, and so many oathes vnto mee, is the onely man, that persecuteth me, as if I were the deadliest foe that he hath vpon the face of the earth? Ah hard harted, and forgetfull Knight, ill wouldst thou passe so many dangers, ven∣ter through so many perills, and hardly wouldest thou endure such a hell of disquiet∣nes, for the loue of thy wife, as Vlisses did for his, seeing, when I come vnto thee, with so great trouble, thou not onely disdainest me, but also refusest to admit mee to come into thy presence. Ah good and kind Graccus (who to prolong the life of thy wife, didst shorten thine owne) how farre doest thou differ from my iniurious Spouse? Such as are guiltie, and doe (but worthily) suffer for the euils they haue done, complaine (vniustly) and with∣out cause, but oh how hard and vnsupportable griefe is it, to reape iniuries, in steed of reward, for doing good turnes? and how bitter is the paine which we endure, through the malice of those, whome wee loue best, and of whom we expect the like friendship againe? The offence we receiue of our enemie, is tollerable, because the law permitteth reuenge in that case, whereas the law of friendship, forbiddeth to reuenge vs on such whom we affect, for feare of their displeasures. Ah my good God, what fault haue I committed against my husband, that he should vse mee thus despitefully: Haue I as Clitemnestra, defiled our Nuptiall bed? Haue I as Hellena the Greeke, run into the armes of a rauisher of women? Or (as Semiramis) haue I polluted mine honour and chastitie, with incestious kind of liuing? Oh no, I feare no such matter; God that seeth the sectets of all hearts, knoweth my conscience is free of any such ill. What haue I then done? Alas I know not. Alas, for what sinne am I thus seuerely punished? But O sweet Lord, as thou art diuine in thy miracles, and terrible in thy iudge∣ments (the exemption of which commeth either, soone, or at last) so (I confesse) thou now doest punish mee, either for some fault of mine that is past, or else, for the sinnes which my forefathers haue committed against thee. And yet this is some comfort vnto me, that I am not the first Innocent, that hath bene sore afflicted. For so was Susanna, so was Iob, so was Ioseph, and so were diuers others, farre more godly then my selfe. O miserable Dido, and yet more happie then I am, though thou wert left forsaken, by forsworne Eneas, for short was thy paines, not long was thy griefe, and sodaine was thy complaints: a gentle death ending (with thy life) all thy sorrowes and cares toge∣ther, whereas I haue not the selfesame libertie, to die as thou hadst, an other respect holdeth my hands, death being not in my power, as it was in thine. But (now) in the meane time, what shall I doe, whether shall I goe, or what shall be∣come of me? The Sea will make mee no way, to returne from whence I came: and the furious rage of my husband, will not suffer me to come on land. Am I become some Patricide, whom the lawes of man, depriue of aire, of earth, and of water? O lamentable chaunce of mine, pittifull death receiue this my wretched carkasse into thy bosome, there to be huried, and rather sinke this vessell, wherein I (now) abide, before thou carrie me backe vnto that place, wherein I haue receiued so great despite and wrong. Alas (mine eyes) what can you see to delight you any longer, when he that is most pleasing vnto you, debarreth you from his louely presence? To whom wilt thou my voyce speake, seeing he hath closed thy mouth, whose speech before was most agreeable vnto my soule?
And (you my feete) whither now will you take your coarse, seeing that he, who was wont to guide your steps vnto the Lodge of pleasure, hath now shut the gate against you? Ah gentle death; if euer the wailings and lamentings of a most distressed wretch, haue euer moued thee to compassion and pittie, ah then let me obtaine the same at thy hands. Do that which my cruell Husband (ere long) will put in practise, making meas happie, as I am now vnfortunate. Thrise blessed Portia, death came vnto thee, (to helpe thee) at thy need, and thou ac∣ceptedst of his helpe: happie Ariadne, for God tooke care of thy life, made much of thee, and in steed of Theseus, accepted of thy companie. And O luckie Olimpia, though abandoned of Birannos thy forsworne Husband, yet a great Prince, reuenged thy wrong, and tooke thee to wife, where thou liuedst after∣ward in much ioy and delight. But alas, no man helpeth me, none succoureth me, neither doth any come to assist me, in bewailing my misfortunes. Who (then) hath euer had so strange a mishap as my selfe? Ah that the spirit and Quintesence of my griefe could dissolue into teares, that it might distill forth from out mine eyes: and that I might die like him, that hauing his vaines opened in warme water, loseth both his life and blood together. Or that my sor∣rowfull heart (wearie with ouermuch sighing and sobbing) would breake, and burst in peeces. Might I (but die) I would not care what kind of death I suffered, so that once I were dead: for no death (be it neuer so monstrous) is equall with the least anguish that I sustaine. Degenerate knight, and voyd of all remorse, seeing thou meanest to entertaine all kind of cruelties whatsoeuer, that haue bene found in any creature (yea cuen worse, then the bruite beasts themselues doe vse) why doest thou not put in practise, the bloo∣die execution of the same, by cutting in twaine my throat, as thou hast most irreligious cut in sunder the sacred band of Marriage, which should haue bound vs (still) fast toge∣ther? Thou canst not do me a greater pleasure, nor a better satisfaction canst thou make me, for so many bad parts as thou hast plaide against me, than to make an end of me, with that hand which hath (so often) vowed and sworne, in most solemne manner, that I onely maintained his Maister aliue. But I forget my selfe, let God (I beseech) worke with me as it pleaseth his holie will: for iust he is, and iust are his iudgements, he knoweth the hearts of euerie one, and he that is most culpable of vs twaine, he will I am assured, (in the end) punish. Whilst she was thus bewailing her misfortunes, behold newes commeth vnto her, that her husband was liuing, the Citie to goe forth to the wars, through which occasion, she might very easilie (if she pleased) haue accesse and speech vnto him. Which when she heard, she stood (long time) doubtfull what to doe: for as Loue perswaded her to pre∣sent her selfe before him, so the feare to offend him, the iust disdaine for so abusing her, with rage, iealousie & despite, did disswade her from the contrarie. What should she then doe, she, both loued, & feared the presence of her Husband: she (wonderfully) desired to see him, & yet (sore) doubted, lest in offring to see him, she should (too much) moue and anger him, by reason he had giuen commandement, she should not as much as once presume to come into his sight. But see the sudden changing of mans nature, and how God (oftentimes) putteth men in minde, of their owne good and soules health, when they are approaching nigh vnto their ends, to the intent they vtterly ouerthrow not themselues. For Horatio, who so mortallie hated his chaste and loyall wife, being mounted on horse-backe, to encounter with the enemie (sodenly) began to be touched with a secret aduertisement from God; sore longing (as then) to see her, whilst (from his soule) repen∣ting him for his foule fact (his conscience tolde him, that the Almightie would punish him for the same, (as he himselfe thought he deserued no lesse) marching thus forward (although not with that alacritie of minde, nor that braue and stout resolution as he was wont to doe) but rather heauily, and as one terrified and fraide, with some fatall and sinister mischaunce (his notorious strumpet riding by his side) behold, his sorrowfull Izabella presenteth her selfe before him, falling downe at his feete. As the wofull wife (to whome it is reported that her husband was slaine) is confoun∣ded with amazement, & (sodenly) leapeth vp, for very ioy and strangenes of the matter,
when she seeth him aliue before her face. Euen so was Horatio astonished, and wondred when he saw her there before him (whom hee thought swiftly) to hau bene (at that time) as farre as Lasbon: and who (quiuering and shaking for feare) began thus mourn∣fully to expostulate her cause with him. Cruell and vkind husband, was it not enough for thee to abuse me so extreamely as thou hast done, and to fallifie thy faith and pro∣mise plighted vnto me, in sacred wedlocke, but that thou must needs exile, and chase me from thy presence, I comming so farre off (as I did) onely to see thee? Ah stay a little, stay and answere me if thou canst. Be not lesse cruell vnto me, then that good Emperour Traianus was, who staied his whole armie, to doe iustice vnto a cer∣taine poore woman, which complained vnto him, that one of his Souldiours had raui∣shed her daughter. Nor be not more vngentle and discurteous, then that barbarous Tambarlaire, who did as much to all his men of warre, whilst (in their sights) he punished a Souldiour of his, who had most villainously deuoured certaine victualls belonging vn∣to a distressed widow. But it may be, thou knowest me not. Alas, I am thy miserable Izabela, (once) much loued and accounted of by thee, although thou now hatest her vnto the death: yea, I am thy lawfull and louing wife: whereas shee (there) that accompanieth thee) is no better then a beastly strumpet, vnworthy to be compared vnto me. Ah speake (then) degenerate and discourteous Lord, and let me know thy minde, to the ende I may vnderstand whether I haue lost my time and labour, or whether I shall be able to perswade thee to any thing. Remember, remember, too too (forgetfull man) thy first loue, thy millions of promises, and the many great fauours which I haue done thee, and let these iust considerations and respects, bee (as it were) flames of fire, to lighten, and reuiue in thee (againe) thy first loue, nor reiect and contemne her, with so great disdaine and displeasure, whome thou hast vowed to haue esteemed as pretious as thine owne life. Alas, what offence, what fault, or what iniurie haue I done vnto thee, that thou shouldst thus iniurie me, and dishonour thy selfe for euer? Ah then at the last (deare hus∣band) open thine eyes, and thinke of thy fault, amend what is amisse, and haue care thou loose not thine auncient reputation and renowme: Otherwise assure your selfe, you shall be seuerely plagued by God, who will (also punish me) although I am not guiltie of this offence, for that I ought not to liue without you. O what great force hath the passionate & earnest speech of a iust and rightfull person, to touch a guiltie conscience withall? and how truely speake that Greeke, affirming, that if such as did but heare an Oration of Demosthenes penning, were much astonished and amazed thereat: then (no doubt) it would in a manner haue killed them, to haue heard Demosthenes himselfe, to haue so liuely pronounced them as he did. And this was the cause that our Portuguise, so insolent (before) began now to yeeld and to be vanquisht, remembring himselfe of his fault, and resoluing from his heart, to amend the same (had it not bene for his strumpet) who very cunningly perswaded and egged him forwards of his iourney) he had (as then) returned backe with his wife vnto the Citie againe, to entertaine her according vnto her desert and calling: this had he done, had it not bene (as I say) for the other, whom (now) in minde, he began to loath and hate (the presence of his owne Spouse, making the other seeme in his eyes, loath∣some and foule, as well in body, as in minde) and but for that he could not with his ho∣nour retire backe) being gone so farre on his way, lest the world should haue thought he durst not dare to looke his enemie in the face. Whereupon, kissing his wife very kindly, he desired her to enter into the Citie, and to stay his comming (where said he vnto her) I doe solemnely vow to satisfie you euery way to your owne contentment, and to make you what amends you shall appoynt, for the amisse I haue done you. Meane time (sweete wife) I most humbly beseech you, by these salt teares of mine, distilling from mine eyes outwardly, and by these warme drops of blood, that drop downe from my heart inwardly) Pardon, ah pardon this my fowle sinne towards you: for (it may be) I may be slaine in the field, or die in battaile. And thus, hoping vpon your gratious nature, I will now leaue you, because my time is short, and the busines requireth great diligence I haue in hand, (sweete) then (for a while) be
satisfied with this, hoping as speedily as possiblie I can, to returne as a ioyfull Conque∣ror, to make you the more happie. In the meane time, let me haue your good wish and prayer, and so (farewell) mine owne deare soule. Herewithall kissing her againe, he com∣manded certaine of his Traine to attend vpon her into the Citie, who brought her into Ansillies, where she remained, expecting her husbands comming hom. Now Horatio, no sooner was come into the field, but that finding the enemie, he so brauely charged vpon him, as he put him to the worst presently. Notwithstanding all this, within an houre or two after, his foe had gathered another strong companie, and with a fresh supplie, was comming towards Horatio, to winne the day, which he had but that morning lost. Amongst the rest that were in this Pagan Armie, was the husband of that Moore, whose wife Horatio had brought with him into the warres, who hauing a sight of him, and spying a fit time for her purpose, vsed these short and sharpe speeches vnto him. Well, cowardly and faint-harred Knight, well, wilt thou still suffer me to liue as a slaue, vnder my hatefull enemie? Hast thou no shame of my shame, and doth not my dishonor touch thee any thing at all? Where is that former loue thou didst heretofore protest vnto mee? Swearing, thou wouldest venture thy best blood in my defence, and for safe-gard of my life. Base minded man, doest thou not blush, to suffer thy wife to be with thine enemies prisoner, whilst he vseth her, and forceth her to satisfie his will as he pleaseth, and when he thinketh best himselfe. Come, come, for shame, shew thy selfe valiant (now) or else neuer, and trie thy force, to deliuer and set her free, who hath done nothing else but sigh and waile (since shee was first taken from thee) so much hath shee grieued to loose thy loue: And this, if thou doest not performe, she her selfe voweth, with her owne hands to murther her selfe, ra∣ther then liue (thus) still, in such base and abiect seruitude and bondage. These speeches did the cunning Curtezan vse sepatheticallie, sending forth so ma∣nie sighes and teares, to accompanie the same, that (as I gesse) the rightfull God (to re∣uenge poore Izabellas wrongs) did so much animate the strength and courage of the Moore her husband, that as one desperate, with rage and iealousie, hee most furiouslie runneth with all his Troupes, vpon the Portugall Armie, whome as a Thunder or Light∣ning, hee ouerturneth, so that the Christians (doe what they could) were ouerthrowne, and had the worse. Which when Horatio percelued, he as a wise and politike Capitaine, beganne with aduantage, to retire, vntill such time, as the foresaid diuellish Moore came where hee was, who with his wife set vpon him, where Horatio slue them both, whilst in this conflict, ouer pressed with numbers of Souldiers, hee was strucken downe, and thrust through with a Iaueline, where he lost both force and life together. So died the companions of Machabeus,An example. being slaine by the fword, who were found charged with Thefts and Robberies. So by the decree of God, those chiefe men, and heads ouer the people of the lewes, were hanged vp, because they caused the other to commit Idolatrie, and leaue their Creator. So was the periurde Zedechias, forced to die in prison, hauing his eves pulled our, and his children slaine before his face. And so perished Ioconias, and diuers others, iustlie punished by the holie one of Israel. For Iustice diuine, neuer giueth ouer from doing right. And if it be slowe in comming, yet doth the crueltie of the punishment, make amends for the deferring of the same. Meane time, the Portingales gathered themselues againe into battaile array, and fol∣lowed their enemies, with so hote a pursuite, as they (at the last) recouered, and brought backe againe the bodie of their Capitaine, ouer which, the Moores meant to haue trium∣phed. So for the bodie of Achilles deere friend slaine, The Greekes and Troyans, hand to hand, doe fight amaine. Hardly did these Infidels let the bodie goe, skirmishing (oftentimes) with their foes for the same, yet neuerthelesse, in despite of them all, the Portingales gote it away, and brought it with them, which (as yet) breathed, and had some little life within it. But sor∣rowfull newes were these vnto heauy Izabella, who hoped, that at the ioyfull returne of her husband, all should be well, as shee her selfe could wish. But man purposeth, and
God disposeth: man hopeth of one thing, but God doth quite contrarie to that which he supposeth. So Senacherib, thinking to conquer, was (himselfe) conquered: and the Iewes, who thought themselues to be quite ouerthrowne, came in the end to be victors. So proud Goliah was slaine contratie vnto his owne conceit, and to the opinion of all men. So Amon was hanged, neuer any thinking he should haue died such a shamefull death. And Mardocheus, who was condemned (to be slaine) was honoured & deliuered. And so it fell out with this vncomfortable Ladie, who hoping to see her husband to come home well, and safe vnto her (and to repent him of his former follies) found him to be slaughtered and dead, without life or soule. O cruell mutation & change, truth it is, that she (before) had heard by certaine of her husbands Souldiours that had escaped out of the field, that the Portugalls had lost the day, but (yet) knew she nothing of his death. And yet euen then, a cold feare ran all a∣bout her heart, whilest she (sore suspecting the worst) prophesied within her selfe, that it was true, and that she had lost her husband: and (not not long after) her doubt was con∣firmed, but with too too true a proofe, when the rest of his band, brought his coarse into the citie, vnto her, where she was, and when (so denly) at the sight thereof, she sounded, it being long before they could get life in her againe: whilest (in the meane space) Hora∣tios mangled carkasse was laid in a bed, God giuing him so much time of repentance, as he craued mercie of him, and of all the world for his bad life, whilest all that small time as he (so) lamēted his sinnes, his faithfull Souldiours, with sad teares, wonderfully lamen∣ted the losse of so noble a Generall, vnder whom they had alwaies remained vanquishers. So Greckes did waile Achilles death (of great renowne,) So Troyans, Hector moande (chiefe Fortresse of their towne. Great Machabeus, one of the Nine WORTHIES, was neuer more lamented a∣mongst his men of warre, than he was amongst the Portugalls, whom he had so often brought home victorious & ladē with forraigne spoyles into their countrie; Who then perceiuing himselfe, to drawe nigh vnto his end, desired to talke with his wife, that he might take his latest leaue of her. But now what is he, that can lend mea Sea of Inke, to set downe the grieuous passi∣ons, and the insupportable sorrowes, of his pittifull wife? Where shall I find a pen of Iron, to paint forth her lamentable speeches? And what paper is sufficient to receiue in writing, the number of her more, then sad and heauie complaints? To hers, was the woes of Niobe, nothing at all. Nothing the griefes of Hecuba, no∣thing those of Portia, nor those of chast Lucretia, compared vnto hers. With much a∣doe, was she brought vnto the bed (for goe she could not, for very faintnes & weakenes) where her repētant husband was giuing vp the Ghost) who so soone as he beheld her, O griefe, O loue, O pittie, & O heauie spectacle that it was, to see this heauie meeting, such (as like) was neuer seene before: the poore dying soule, beginning in his death, to affect and loue her more entirely, then euer he had hated her before, whilest thrusting forth his dying armes with seeble force, to embrace her, and laying his cold lips vpon hers, with a hollow faultring voyce, he began (thus) to speake as well as he could. O fortunate day, in which poore Horatio dieth, reposing himselfe at ease in the bo∣some of his Izabella. O my chaste and sweet Ladie, must I needs die, leauing after my death so foule a fault, as thou shalt haue cause to complaine of me, as the authour of all thy griefes whatsoeuer. No way am I able to make thee any reasonable satisfaction, nei∣ther know I, how sufficiently to make amends for so hainous, and so detestable an of∣fence, as I haue committed against thee, which the iust God hath reuenged vpon me for thy sake, and according as I deserued. But (sweet wife) if (as yet) there remaineth any one small sparke, of that rare and loyall Loue, thou hast heretofore borne me, and if iust griefe, and rightfull disdaine, hath not quenched it all, and quite put it out; then by the selfesame affection and fancie, I pray, desire, and beseech thee, most humbly to pardon me this once, and not to be the cause that miserable Horatio, should goe into his graue with great anguish, and excee∣ding
bitternes of his soule. This pardon, as I hope for of thee, so doe I expect it at thy hands: crauing in the meane while (by reason of that litle space of time I haue to breath) thou wilt doe me the fauour to embrace me kindly, if it shall please thee, to thinke me worthie of such a kindnes: this being the last request, and latest fauour I shall craue at thy hands. Ah let me kisse those faire cheekes which were (sometimes) mine, and those sweet sparkling eyes, which had not the blacke foulnes of my fault dimmed them, they had still stood me in steed of two glorious Sunnie lights. Although I cannot denie, but thus to die in thy armes, doth much lighten and ease me of my torments I endure within my minde, yet had it pleased God, to haue but giuen me the grace, to haue suruiued (but some fewe yeares) that I might haue made some amends vnto my faithfull Spouse (whom I haue so wickedly abused) I then would haue thought my selfe, to haue bene the happiest creature vnder the heauens. Thinke (deare heart) that I make no account, nei∣ther care any thing at all to die, but onely for this cause, and for that I shall be forced to leaue thee a Widow, whom I loue, more then my owne soule. Iust and great reason hast thou to complaine and find fault with me, and farre vn∣worthie am I, that thou shouldest shed these salt teares for my sake. For why shouldest thou waile his death, who hath bene thy chiefe aduersarie? why doest thou sorrow for the losse of thy mortall enemie, and lamentest thou the death of him, who sought thy vtter ouerthrow? Drie vp these teares, for I desire them not. Leaue these thy sighes, for I not merit them: and giue ouer these thy bitter wailings, for I am no way worthie of them. Onely pardon me, & close vp these my dying eyes, when they shall lèaue their wonted light: which done, if it shall please thee to honour this miserable carkasse of mine, with thy presence, vnto my Tombe, and (now and then) to thinke on me (although thou hast small reason so to doe) then, then I say, shall I be euery way contented and satisfied vnto the full. Weepe not I pray thee, then for me, who descrues no teares at thy hands, but rather ill thoughts: for otherwise I shall sustaine a double death, thy sorrow being nigher setled vnto my heart, then my deperture hence can be any way dolefull vnto me. So saying, the fainting knight kisseth his wife, wiping her blubbered eyes, and em∣bracing her (as straitly) as the Iuie doth the wall. If the poore Ladie could not answere him, it was no great wonder, when as those that were but spectators in this heauie sight, (although they felt not as much as she) yet were they mouelesse, and much amazed for verie pure pittie. In the end, the disconsolate Izabella, began to recouer her speech, answering him in this sort. Cruell and hard-harted husband, let my pittifull paine, my easelesse griefes, and my insupportable sorrowes, satisfie thee, without gaulling me any further with this word (pardon) vnto her who neuer desired to liue, but to doe thee seruice. Ah deare Horatio, thinkest thou I can liue after thy departure hence, and that I can ioy in this world, being bereaued of thy companie? Whilest thou did dest liue, I was thine by the lawes of marriage: and when thou art dead, I will be thine also, resolued to follow thee, wheresoeuer thou goest, thinking my selfe happie, that I am so luckily come, as to die with thee. Then, if I may, or thou wouldest haue me to giue any credit vnto thy speeches, then in requitall of them all, let me againe intreate thee this one thing, which is, that I may leaue this world with thee. But why should I aske leaue of thee, when I am at liber∣tie my selfe, to dispose of my life, as I shall thinke good of: and when with ending of one life, I may rid my selfe of a lingring death, which doth continually haunt me? Thankes (therefore) to thee kind Thethis, who didst driue my shippe into this Port, where I may passe to heauen with him, who was the onely life, and maintainer of my life, and who (being dead) I can no longer remaine allue. Pittilesse husband, to debarre me from my teares, whē as I see my countrie depriued of a braue defender of his libertie, and find my selfe forsaken, of the onely, loyall, and most louing friend I had here vpon this earth. No, no, I will weepe, and shed teares, as long as any drop of moysture shall remaine within this bodie: for should I not waile for thee, for whom (then) should I reserue these teares? Whose losse should I lament but thine? and for whom should I take thought or care for, but for thine owne sweet
selfe? who was so neare to mee as thou? who so deare as thy selfe? and who is to haue interest in mee, but my best and sweetest Horatio? Then hinder not her from lamenting, who liueth onely to shead teares: and doe not enure the happines she findeth, in that she hath time to bewaile her vnhappie Fortunes. How wide is (my best Lord) from mine intention and meaning? and how slenderly doth he conceit of my loue towards him? when hee imagineth, that although I see him dye, yet should not I waile: and that his death and destruction, should not be the ende and date of my life: this beeing the least thing that I can doe for him, the least dutie that I doe owe vnto him, and the smallest testimony of my great affection, which I haue euer borne him. Gush forth then my brinish teares, and streame downe along my pale cheekes, wa∣shing away the bloud of my wounded Spouse, mingling your selues together, as my soule hath alwayes bene (with his) most perfectly mixed and conioyned, the one with the other. (My dearest Lord) if euer thou hast thought well of mee, speake neuer more of this word pardon, it becommeth me to intreate, rather then you: I hauing bene shee, that hath so often offended you: let vs forgiue & forget all vnkindnesses whatsoeuer, that our soules as most loyall friends, may die and liue together in eternall felicitie for euer. O how like an Angell (replyed Horatio) doth my Izabella speake, and how pleasing doth shee cause my death to be vnto mee? would she but promise to suruiue and liue af∣ter my death. (For sweet Lady) it is thy sorrows, and not my death, that shortens my lifes and I die not for griefe, but for sorrow, to see thee lament for my cause. Wilt thou die, and doest not descrue death? No, it is I that haue offended, and therfore merit to be pu∣nished for my fault. Liue thou happilie still, and safely returne thou home into thy Countrey againe, where thou shalt not want new husbands, who will deserue (at thy handes) far better then I haue done: & had I not so much forgot my selfe towards thee, as (I confesse I haue) my ioyes had bene at the highest, and I had departed hence, the happiest man aliue. But now mine houre approcheth; I feele death ready to arrest mee with his yron mace; my heart fainteth, and my soule beginneth to flie from hence. To you I turne my speech now (my faithfull fellows, and companions in Arms) who haue always taken such fortunes as I haue done; to you I recommend the honor of your deare friend Horatio, (somtimes your Gouernor) after his death. Most strictly charging you (as you shall answere before God) and most kindlie intreating you, (as you will haue the good will of men) to see my faithfull and constant wife, conueyed safely from hence into Portugall, according vnto her calling (after this my carkasse shall be interred) & there to doe her all dutifull seruice that may be. Farewell my brethren, my friendes, and my companions: I goe before you, to pre∣pare places for you. I goe to heauen, there to enioy eternall happinesse. Giue me your hands euery one of you before I die, and leaue now these your needlesse and vnnecessary mournings in my behalfe. Remember that God is iust in all his actions, who hath (and that deseruedly) punished mee, for abusing my constant Spouse, so hainouslie as I haue done, being so voyde of grace, as to preferre a most damned strumpet, before her chast and vertuous selfe, which was the onely occasion of mine vntimely death. Murmure not therefore at the diuine iudgements of the Almightie, neither be you grieued at my losse and ouethrow: for a far better, and a brauer Captaine may you haue then I am, Portugall being able to veeld forth men, better for desert, and for valour then I haue bene euery way. I say no more, but wish you (my faithfull Souldiers) no worse, then I doe vnto mine owne soule. And now once more againe I come to thee (my chastest wife.) Although, what to say, more (then alreadie I haue done) well I knowe not: Loth I am to leaue thee, yet leaue thee I must, and therefore I hope thou wilt remember, not the fault I haue done thee, but, how I repent me for the same before I die. And this perswade thy selfe, that if euer sinne hath bene grieuous vnto the sinner, then hath mine bene the same: My verie soule beeing sore vexed and tormented, day and night, euery houre that I doe but thinke thereof. But things past and done, are not to be vndone: and what is once remedilesse, must needs prooue to be recurelesse.
Once more farewell, my sweete Izabella, to whom I wish no lesse ioy, then I haue felt of sorrow. Thou God, that knowest the secrets of all hearts, receiue my soule (I beseech thee) and saue it from the hands of the enemie. So saying, hee gaue vp the ghost, be∣ing infolded within the chaste armes of his kinde wife, his face touching her face, and his lippes ioyning vnto hers. No sooner was his carkasse without life, and colde as a marble stone, but his mest∣full Izabella sunke downe for sorrow. So that afresh as then, began cryings out, scree∣chings, wringing of hands, and sheading of teares, the house resembling a shadow of that miserable mourning, when the Troyans saw their Citie set on fire by the Grecians in the night. So wofull and so shrill was the sorrowes that euery one made for their Lord, as the noise therof, waked their vnfortunate Lady from her passionate extasie, who being somwehat come vnto her selfe, and falling vpon the dead coarse, began thus to exclaime. Woe is me, that euer I was borne, and art thou dead, my deare Lord without mee? Ah why hast thou left her, who had rather die with thee, then liue with anie other else. Thou hast left me at the worst, now thou art gone. For what am I, but an Anatomie of griefe it selfe? What is my heart but a receptacle of sadnesse? And what are mine eyes, but a colde fountaine, that distilleth salt water continually? Is it likely or possible, that Izabella should breath, now Horatio is breathles? Can it be he should be dead, and I should be as yet aliue? No, no, it cannot be, and yet in the meane time, his bodie is without life, and senses, and mine, too full of vitall motion: but long it shall not be so; I must now resolue my selfe to follow the course my husband led mee, and to take such part with him, as he hath taken before me: vnfortunate I, to haue stayed so long, and that I died not before my louely husband. Could Portia die, when Brutus was slaine? and may Izabella liue, her Horatio hauing left her? Before that time come, the Seas shall chaunge the course of his floods, and mountaines shall remoue, and come to settle amongst lowe valleyes. As I saw thee (here) vpon the earth, so hope I to behold thee in the Heauens. And for the conclusion and ende of all my disasters, I will be in∣terred in the place where thou art buryed. Then kissing the pale lippes of her dead hus∣band, shee thus began againe. O faire mouth, from whence sometimes I sucked Nectar foorth, must thou be a Trophee for death? And must thou be despoyled of so many rich vertues, to make fa∣mous his victorie? Sweete louely eyes, must you likewise serue to honour death, resig∣ning ouer your quondam Diamond lights, vnto blacke and gloomic darknes? And thou beautious face, must thou turne vnto earth, and shewe pale and wanne, whilst I remaine here against my will and pleasure? No reason is there herein, but that I should follow my Guide, and accompany him, at whose commaund I was alwayes, and that most willingly. Ah my kind friends, I con∣iure you, by the late affection you bare vnto your Lord and Goueruor (now dead) by the faith and promise you vowed and sware vnto him, and by the sacred remembrance of his glorious renowne, which neuer shalbe forgotten, that you consent and agree to bury our two bodies both in one graue. Whilst I liued, I esteemed as my chiefest treasure, my honor & good name; and now I die, my loue vnto my Lord shall remaine as a president for Ages to come, of our loyall and true faithfull loue. I come sweet Horatio, I come, nor will I any longer linger in miserie, but will seeke thee wheresoeuer thou art, vntill I finde thee, ending this my loathed life, with a death most sweet & comfortable. Then (sweet Iesus) be mercifull vnto me, and forgiue me this my last fault: which extreame and vnsupportable sorrow, and not any desperate kinde of conceit, forceth me to put in practise. And hauing so said, shee went about to stabbe her selfe with a poniard vnto the hart; when one of the company there by, snatcht it forth of her hands, vppon the suddaine: wherevpon, shee seeing her selfe to be preuented of her purpose, looking angerly vpon them. Well, quoth she, Portia (for all her Gard that watched ouer her) had her will, and di∣ed. Cato (despite of all his attendants) slew himselfe. And thinke you for all your nar∣row looking vnto me, that I will not rid my selfe one way or another of life? Yes, yes, ye vnkind men, I will dispatch my selfe from this miserie (mauger your malicious minds) who I perceiue do enuie at my good Fortune: and I will complaine of your hard dealing
towards me vnto my deare husband, in that you go about to keep me from him, whither I will or no. Nor was she deceiued of her purpose, though thrise happie, in that it pleased God to call her himselfe, from out this vale of miserie, and so by that meanes to saue her soule. For no sooner was shee hindered of her intent, but what for anger thereof, and what for extreame griefe, for Horatios death, she fell into a dangerous and hote burning Feuer, which so violently seazed vpon euery part of her, as her weake bodie being not a∣ble to endure the fierie raging thereof, shee yeelded her tormented carkas vnto death, within sixe dayes after. At what time shee was freed from all her former troubles, and after her death, she was (according vnto her desire) enterred with her husband, leauing behinde her many commendations, for her matchlesse vertues, her losse being lamen∣ted of cuerie good bodie, as was fufficiently showne, by the pittifull laments that were e∣uerie where vsed for her sake, because of the rare examples of chastitie, of patience, of modest demeanure, of loue, and of loy altie, which she carryed towards her vngratefull and vnkind Husband. And this (Shepheard) is the historie I meant to report vnto thee, but because that Diana looking palish with her siluer hornes, meaneth to runne her course, entering into the place of her glistering brother the Sunne, wee will (for this time) vntill to morrow morning, withdraw our selues vnto our Cortages, and then, as earlie as thou wilt, shalt thou begin the discourse of thy Loue againe. Wherevpon, the olde man, and Arcas, began to retire themselues homewards, and by the way they encountered a faire Shepheardesse, who proposed a Riddle vnto ano∣ther, desiring him to interpret the same rightly. And this was it that followeth. For others good and profit, I (outragious) still Consume, what doth my proper vigor entertaine: And though my burning is not (vnto anie) ill, Where I should prais de be, they vngras of all me doe name. Father of liuing Creatures all, I am renoumde, And Lord I am ouer the Time, on earth, that staies: Yet doth a little thing dant mee, and me confound, And of a Conquerour, conquered, forceth mee strait-waies. But in the end, although that I am plagued thus, Through succour of the windes, when (all) thinke I am dead, I rise againe, to men (of times) most dangerous, And through my harmefull rage, I fill them full of dread. My mother I deuour, whilst I a straunger nonrish, (For ill) I good doe to my spightfull enemies: Iudge then, since Serpents in my bosome, I doe cherish, If I ore wretched am not, in most pittious wise. The other Shepheard knew not the meaning of this Riddle, which the old man inter∣preted in this sort. Your Emgma, (faire Shepherdesse) signifieth the fire, which being for the vse of man, to warme him, consumeth & deuoureth the wood, it being his mother, and nourisher. It is counted the Father of all liuing Creatures, who without heat, cannot liue. Although he is of great force, yet doth a very small thing vanquish him, which is water. Neuerthelesse, when he sheweth to be dead, a little blast of winde maketh him to burne more furious then before. He doth good to such as count and call him vngrate∣full, in warming them with his heate, and deuoureth his mother, which is the reason he tearmeth himselfe to be most miserable and wretched. This solution euery one commended, when (as they were walking homewards) one of the Shepheards sung this Ode following. To Louers what good doth the Sunne, If by his beames they be vndone? LOVE'S as bitter as is Rue, Blest are such, as nere is knew.
He is accurst that comes tot'h Sea Once were, and in port waist haue ease. To Louers, what good doth their Sunne, If by his beames they are vndone? A fend Louer doth not ril, Name, nor fame, of mant inberit: Since he is fee to his owne health, Whilst in fire he burnes himselfe. To Louers, what good doth their Se, If by his beames they be vndone? Griefe  Loue tendeth nis, Pleasure is his Better laugh, then wade and sigh, Who then Loues not his owne life? To Louers what good deth. If by his beames. Without teares no Louer is, Nor his sad laments doth isse: Better farre to liue at ease. Then to seeke a shrowe to please. To Louers what good, If by his beames. Wretched then be such as loue, Ile liue free, nor it will proue. For who'le count of him, that still (Like set) his wees nourish will, To Louers, what good doth the Se. If by his beames he be vndone? This Ode being sung, euerie owne departed, vntill the returne of mestfull Aurera, leauing the Sister of Apollo, to runne out her darke and gloomie course. The end of the second daies meeting of Iuliettaes Shepheards.
THE THIRD DAIES MEETING OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHEARDS. NO distance of place can hinder kind amitie, no change of aire, altar firme affection, neither can the separation of that which is loued, diuide or keepe backe the Louer from his sweet Mistris. Too true (noble Phillistell) doest thou know this to be, thou being so farre off from thy faire and sacred Iulietta and yet neuerthelesse, thou liuest in her, and still dreamest of her beautie, whilest louing her, (although she be absent) thou canst not forget her, for that she hol∣deth thy heart with her as in a close prison, thou (in the meane time) feeling, and by thine owne experience fin∣ding, how cruell vnto a loyall Louer, the absence of his beautious Ladie is: the fish, not more desiring to haue water for his nourishment, then he doth couet her companie, it being the chiefe foode of his soule. O how tedious and irkesome vnto him (who attendeth and expecteth the breake of day to come, hauing some great matter of importance to dispatch) is the long see∣ming course of the vnwelcome night: In all which time, he is not able to take any rest, looking still with open eyes, to spie the rising of the faire Sunne, which he ioyfully mar∣keth, at his first appearing, to warme the little hills, to melt the soft snow, to glister and shine vpon the earth, and with a solemne pace, to mount vp, and to settle himselfe in his glorious chariot, riding in progresse through the huge giring Vault of heauen, he seeth him brauely to chase away the sparkling Starres, as the Conquerour doth his ene∣mies, that he hath vanquisht; and beholdeth the sad and sable night, to flie from his cheerfull face, as the timerous thiefe doth the seuere Iudges presence, whilest he liste∣neth vnto the melodie of thousands of pretie Birds, which solemnize and celebrate, in their warbling notes, the arriuall of the prudent Sire of proud Phaeton. Poore Philistell, how often hast thou counted short daies for long yeares, after that malitious Fortune had sequestred thee, from the companie of thy Ladie? and how many times, didst thou dreame in the night, that thou sawest her, deuising and talking with thee, in the same manner as she was wont to doe, when those happie Desarts of Arcadia, were true witnesses of thy chaste Loues? But all these were but fond imaginations, thy desire being but vaine, and bootlesse, which so much the more vrged thy soule to see her againe, because her onely sight, had (long since) wounded thy dearest libertie. Too true∣ly didst thou then proue, that the greatest griefe which the Louer endureth (being by his sweet Loue) is nothing in comparison of that which her absence bringeth vnto him, for she (which wounded him) is (then) at hand, and presently might helpe him if she please; whereas contrariwise, O'how leane, and meger, is the hope of him that is hurt, and is farre off from a Chirurgian to heale him. Small wounds are vncurable, where none is to helpe them, and the most desperate disease may be remedied, if a cunning Doctor be in a readines to heale the same. If at any time a Louer (not hauing tried, how bitter the absence of his froward dame is) desireth to be banished farre from her, by reason he is not able to support and indure her too too rigorous and disdainfull demeaners towards him; how often then will he (afterward) condemne, and curse this his rash and hastie opinion, when (being farre from her sight) he mourneth, and bewaileth in the verie anguish of his soule, her absence,
which hee so much (although in vaine) doth wish for. If wearie Trauellers reioyce, when being nigh vnto their natiue soyle, they see their chimneys smoake,A Similie. and smell the wholesome ayre of their owne pleasant Countrey; how much more then, should Louers triumph and ioy, when (after manie yeares of absence) they are comming home towards their Ladies, to haue a sight of them againe, they be∣ing the chiefest foode whereon their hearts doe feede? Philistell, then secluded and separated from his Iulietta, staying for a calme and faire winde, to put to the Seas, being by chaunce driuen vpon this vncoth Shore, could not rest day nor night, hauing this Trumpet of Loue, which sounded alwayes most shril∣lie in his eares. And therefore one morning he rose very early by breake of day, walking along the Desart, to see if hee could driue away his melancholie thoughts, and by chaunce pas∣sing by those Trees, into which the olde Nigromancer had chaunged those wicked Theeues (which pursued the She pheardesse, to haue rauished her perforce) hee not thin∣king any thing thereof, (and being ignorant of this strange Metamorphosis) brake a little bough from one of them. When no sooner had hee done so, but (behold) the Tree be∣gan to swell, to writhe, and bend, and to gush out with bleeding, from that braunch that was so broken, casting forth great store of blood, which fell vpon the ground. At which sight, Philistell was almost senselesse with the wonder thereof. (For who would not be a∣mazed at such a fearefull accident?) Nor did hee well know if he dreamed or waked, but much more was he astonisht, when hee saw all his hand bloodie, and the broken arme of the Tree dropping downe blood apace. This made him to stand stone still, to chaunge his colour and countenance, and to looke as one that were readie to fall into an Extasie or sownde.A Similie. No otherwise, then the young Scholler that is halfe dead with feare, seeing his maister behinde him, and ta∣king him (vpon the suddaine) as he hath done some gricuous fault. Scarce would he be∣leeue his own eies, to thinke he saw so strange an euent, as a Tree to distill both blood and teares. But this was nothing, to that he was frighted, when he heard the Tree to speake in this manner vnto him. Stay (courteous Shepheard) and hold thy hands, I beseech thee, contenting thy selfe with my most miserable Fortune, without increasing my mischiefe anie more, in heaping Ossa vpon Pelion, and one disaster vpon another, it being a great shame, & no small disparagement vnto mightie men, to afflict such as be plagued alrea∣die, and who in kindnesse demaund succour from them. Besides, thou shalt vnderstand, I am a man most vnfortunately turned into this in∣sensible Tree, by a Magician abiding in these Woods, sore doubting that I shall still con∣tinue so, vnles some good bodie or other, maketh intercession vnto him in our behalfe, (for more companions haue I in this my miserie, and as hardly destined as my selfe) that it would please him to restore vs vnto our former shapes and likenes againe. Now, if euery offence that is offered, demandeth satisfaction, and if this, which thou hast done vnto me, (drawing most violently from me great store of blood) doth merite any fauour at thy hands at all; Then I beseech thee, for amends of the same, to take the paines to seeke out this cunning man, & to beg of him so much grace for vs, as to turne vs againe into our pristinate estate, and former manner of liuing, vowing (in requitall of the same) neuer to commit any wicked outragious behauiour so long as we shall liue. Neuer was Iuno more confounded, when she saw the periurde Aeneas (quite contrary vnto the promise that was giuen her) to saile in the maine Seas, then was Philistell, when he heard this Tree to make this pittifull supplication, he being halfe perswaded, that that time was newely come againe, into which Niobe was changed into a Rocke; Myrrha, into myrrhe; Daphne into laurell; & the companions of Vlisses into Swine. Notwithstanding, in the end, after he had pluckt vp his hart againe, & called all his spirits togither, finding himselfe to haue done a fault vnto the Tree (& therefore bound, as it were in conscience, to make him amends) he promised to worke what means he could vnto the old man, not only for his owne, but also for the rest of his fellowes deliuerance, & with this resolution, comforting the poore dismembred plant as well as he could, he left him, to seeke out the old man, who onely and none else, could helpe these poore wretches thus transformed: whilst walking alone, & musing much of this matter, he began to discourse with himselfe
in this wise. O what a wonderfull thing is this blacke Art, and what great force hath it to bring to passe admirable matters? Admirable is Magicke, and a thing supernaturall; and incredible the effects of such as exercise the same. No longer will I (now) wonder at the sorceries of bloodie Medea, nor at the Inchantments, of wilie Circes, nor at the chaunting witchcrafts and Spells, of subtill Zoraastes, since I haue seene with mine owne eyes, such strange and miraculous deuises of Magicke. Neither will I maruile more, if these three wise men, which came to worship our Sauiour, came to the knowledge of his diuine natiuitie, by reason of their profound learning and skill: when I perceiue and see, that a sillie poore old Magitian, is able to turne mens bodies into insensible Trees, this being the cause, that all such (as practise this kind of Art) are highly honoured and much esteemed, and especially amongst such as are infidels, and put small confidence and trust in the true God. So that, if these wicked Ministers of damned diuels, make themselues to be admi∣red of all men, then how much more ought the true Pastors & Seruitors of the almigh∣tie, be respected and regarded? For according vnto the bountie, goodnes, and greatnes of the Maister, is the seruant honoured: and according vnto the basenes and vilenes of him that he followeth, is he respected: which if it be so, then of how much esteeme and account ought the good and faithfull Pastors of God to be, who walke in his waies, and follow his holie lawes and commandements; seeing, that such great honour is attributed vnto the officers of diuels. And if such bad Seruitors, haue so great power through the fauour that their Maister doth bestow vpon them, that they are able to change, trans∣forme, and make a tree, a rocke or a brute beast of a reasonable iran; how farre more ex∣cellent power and authoritie then shall those haue, that are followers of the euerliuing God indeed. And certainely their puissance and might is great and large, for they not alone com∣mand ouer malignant spirits, but are (after some sort) more then the Angels themselues. They haue authoritie ouer Infernall Ghosts, whom they chase away, and make them tremble at their diuine words, in such sort, as they can doe nothing, where they be in place. A witnesse is Simon Magus, who in the absence of S. Peter, wrought strange myra∣cles by reason of his Art, but in his presence, and at his praier, was seene to fall downe from the aire, and to breake his owne necke, as he tooke vpon him to flie with wings before a number of people. For our Sauiour Christ, hauing vanquished the enemie of mankinde, hath of his owne goodnes, left (as an inheritance) the same power vnto man himselfe, through which he is able to breake Sathans necke, bringing him vnder sub∣iection, and vanquished, who before did vanquish, so as now, by this meanes men com∣mand ouer diuels, who before did dominier ouer them. And that this is true, you may know by many religious Diuines of the word of God, who are of force sufficient, to driue away wicked spirits by their speeches, and in the name of the holy one of Israell. Now, he that draweth and chaseth away is farre more stronger and of greater might, then he that is chased, as the enemie, that is vanquisht for want of courage turneth his backe, and by flying away confesseth his want of valour, yeelding himselfe as prisoner vnto his foe. Then if it be so, and that men can make the blacke angels of Lucifer to giue place, and retire, they are farre more strange and migh∣tie then the other be. Besides, hath not man aduantage aboue the Angels themselues? in that he recei∣ueth the sacred and holie communion of our Sauiour, which he hath giuen vnto vs, as a testimonie of his diuine loue, and for a perfect pledge, and assurance of his grace to∣wards vs. Againe, haue not some men that vertue, that they can heale diseases and sicknesses, (without the helpe of medicines, or pretious potions (onely with their words) yea, and haue there not bene othersome, that haue had the gift to haue raised dead bodies vnto life againe, and yet neuerthelesse, notwithstanding that all these wonderfull powers are found to be in many of the Ministers of God: how many wicked persons are there to be found at this day in the world, who more esteeme of these vile Magitians (atten∣dants vpon the diuell) then of these holie and sacred Preachers, worshipping that most wicked & infamous creature, to leaue the thrice blessed and heauenly Creator himselfe?
by reason of which, they must needs leaue, denie, and hate the Church, of which men are appoynted Ministers, and hating her (without acknowledging her to be their mother) they neuer can obtaine to haue God for their Father. For if the good and faithfull hus∣band, cannot abide to loue, neither can (willingly) suffer any such to liue, as be mortall enemies vnto his kind and lawfull wife, because they seeke the meanes to oppresse her, and to worke her ouerthrow; No more (then) will God permit and beare with any such, who goe about to ha∣uocke and spoyle the Church, which is the sacred and legitimate Spouse. For what vices soeuer be found in the Pastors of the same, yet is she still holie, and propitious vnto our welfare alwaies, euen as (although a Iudge chance to be wicked and bad, Iustice it selfe neuerthelesse, is right and iust, the Ministers not being able to defame, nor disgrace the vertue of that Ministrie which they exercise. And therefore it is but a foolish argument, for one to withdraw himselfe from the Church, and to giue ouer to come to Gods Temple, to make Intercessions and Prayers vnto him, for despite that the Ministers liue ill, and are occasions of many scandalls and much reproch vnto the diuine word: not a little degenerating from their former aunci∣ent predecessors, God hauing (alone) reserued vnto himselfe the separation, and the diuision of the good and bad, which he will diuide, at the time of his latter iudgement: and therefore, as his garment was not diuided nor parted at all, but kept and conserued whole, so the Church (being a figure of the same) cannot be parted, and such as tho∣rough their fond errour withdraw themselues from thence, resemble the Rauen, which lighted vpon the carrion, without returning againe into the Arke, as the faithfull Doue did, all which shall perish in the end, because there is no hope of saluation, but from the Church, I meane our Sauiour Iesus Christ: and therefore is she compared vnto the Arke of Noah, that saued mankind from drowning, during that great and terrible deluge of waters. And although that within the same ship, there were found all kind of liuing crea∣tures, to doe their filthines therein (for the time) that they remained therein enclosed, yet for all that, Noah neuer came forth, but endured all those vnwhole some and loath∣some sauours, for otherwise if he had not kept him so immured, he had bene drowned. Thus we see the Arke that saueth men, is the Church, from forth of which, no per∣son can come, vnlesse he meane to be browned, and lost in hell fire; in as much as with∣in the same, the health of man is encluded and inclosed. Cursed then be he that loueth not the Church, or shall thinke, that she is stained, polluted, or in any thing at all, les∣ned of her dignitie, through the faults of her Pastors, who are (be they neuer so leaude) to be accounted of, because of their profession, especially as long as they shall deliuer the verie truth it selfe vnto vs, forced thereunto, by the holy orders into which they are inducted: as bad Casphas, had the gift of Prophesie (although he will be wicked and ill giuen) by vertue of the pontificall dignitie, through which he had that speciall grace bestowed vpon him from aboue. And therefore, we may compare our mother Church, vnto a goodly auncient pallace, which thorough continuance of time, and by reason of many hard stormes and bitter tempests (that it hath endured) is much decaied in euery part, the Galleries, chambers, & other chiefe Roomes, being ruinated and fallen flat vn∣to the ground, but yet the foundation thereof, standeth strong and sound, and is not rotten nor perished at all. Now the walkes, the lodgings, the hangings and the chiefe beautie of our Church, were the good workes; the charitable deeds, and the wonderfull miracles done by the Apostles thereof, in the old world: most of which, the corruption of this age, and the vitious liuing of these degenerate successors, hath spoyled, defaced, and trod vnder their feete: and yet notwithstanding all this, the foundation vpon which she is setled and placed, remaineth still vnshaken, and vndecaied, being strongly built vpon the word of God, who is the chiefe builder and pillar of the same. Now that the Ministers of Gods word, haue bene heretofore much reuerēced, we may finde by the auncient Heathen people, who made more account of them, then many doe (at this daie) who intelleth themselues with that faire name of Christians. Abraham loden with spoyles, and returning home victorious ouer Kings (who had taken his brother priso∣ner) offered the tenth part of all his rich booties, vnto the high Priest Melchisedecke, Alexander, being an Infidell, after the taking of Tire, marching towards Ierusalem, as a
victorious Conquerour, with intention to ruinate and take it vnto the ground, was him∣dered and let by the high Priest, who (very couragiouslie) came against him, meeting him by the way, receiuing manie high fauours and honors done vnto him, by that vn∣beleeuing Monarch, who then missed of his purpose. Antiochus hauing besieged the selfe same Citie, not onely gaue seuen dayes of Truce vnto the Priests thereof, to celebrate the solemne Feast, but besides that, sent them fatte Bullocks, with garlands and guilded horns, to goe through with their Sacrifices the bet∣ter. O graue and religious Monasteries, how much more reuerence haue you receiued in times past, of those Infidels and vnbeleeuers,A Commenda∣tion of all true Minister of the sacred word of Gods then you doe now (at this day) of a num∣ber of bad Christians? But you neede not to wonder thereat at all, for the seruant shall neuer be made much of, nor be accounted of by the enemies of his Maister, whome he pursueth euen vnto the death. Such as hate God, haue no regard to fauour his Vassals and Creatures, and the ill willers of the Chuch doe maligne the Prelates thereof. It is not for eueic priuate man (but onely for Magistrates, and such as are in authoritie) to iudge of the fault of the Minister, his dutie is, onely to beleeue that hee doth not erre, as long as he laboureth in his reuerend vocation and calling, orderly and well. For the Iewes, although they were vngodly, yet had they the power to chase away wicked spirits, by Exoreismes and Spells and the Sacrifice that is offered of a bad Mun∣ster, is as profitable vnto such as be there in place, as if it had bene done by the iustest Priest in the world. Do that which the Scribes and Pharisies command you (saith our Sauiour Christ) be∣cause they are placed in the Chayte of Moses: and be Ministers of the Lawe, although otherwise, they are froward, ill giuen, and malitious, and therefore vnwerthie to be fol∣lowed. For although you owe no honor vnto their owne persons, yet are you indebted, and are bound vnto their vocation and calling, as long since, the people kneeled downe, not vnto the Asse, before whome they sell but vnto the Image which the beast bare vp∣on his backe. Say a Prince should sends Lieutenant into some of his Prouinces, that should be a bad man and wickedly giuen, to gouernt the same, yet (for all his faults) would the peo∣ple beare respect vnto him; were it bus ouely because their Prince sent him vnto them, and for that they would not thshonor hice state and dignitie Royall. For sometimes the dignitie of the Office is honoured, by reason of him that exerciseth that place, and so likewise, the Minister is often reuerence for his function and charge, which hee execu∣teth and putteth in practise. The auncient Romanes were more carefull then any other Nation,A History. to attribute and yeelde honor vnto the Officers of their Common-wealth: whereof wee haue a notable proofe, of that gallant young Fabius, the sonne, who being a Consuil, and seeing his Fa∣ther (a farre off) to come ding towards him in the streete, beeing then but Dictator; sent before one of his Sargimts, to desire him to light from off his horse, and to remem∣ber to doe (not vnto him who was his Sonne, and whom he might commaund) but vn∣to his place of Consulship, such honour and reuerence as did there vnto belong. And Alexander the great, gaue so great credit and respect vnto the answere which the great Priest of Iupiter mmon gaue him, calling him his sonne: that he verilie perswaded him∣selfe, he should conquere all the world. And vpon this resolute beliefe of his, he fought many bloodie Buttells, of which hee (alwayes) proued Conquerour. Had wee that are Christians, accounted (as much) of our Preachers; as the Inside is did of the Ministers of their Gods, there had not (then) sprung vp so many Errors amongst Christian religion, as there hath done. The onely cause, that so manie excellent wittes haue bene ouer∣throwne, and that the pease & quietnes of the faithfull, hath bene much broken & trou∣bled. For if euery man had honoured true Preachers in their places, without rising vp against them, and not seeking to suppresse and keepe downe their authority and power as they haue done, neuer any contentious heresie had sprung vp amongst vs, because he can neuer be heritike, nor aduersary vnto the Church, who doth the commaundements of true Ministers thereof, they being not able to commaund any thing that is contrary vnto the expresse word and will of God. Our Sauiour himselfe, vouchsafed to acknowledge the priests of the Iewes, for chiefe
Heads and Soueraignes, when he willed these Leapers that were healed and clensed by him, to goe and present themselues before them, as they that had all the power giuen vnto them (as indeed they haue by the ernall word of God himselfe) who saith thus vnto his Prophet Ieremie, he speaking vnto the Ministers of the Church. Behold I haue put my word in thy mouth, and haue appointed thee, ouer all Kings, peoples, & Realmes, to the end thou maist plant, or pull vp; build, or plucke downe; doe or vndone, whatsoeuer thou pleasest. And I will haue thee to haue authoritie ouer all the Monarks and Princesse of the earth. And this was confirmed and ratified by our Sauiour himselfe, who gaue the selfesame power vnto S. Peter his successour, & so (by cōsequēce) to all the succeeders of Peter, to bind and lofe; and to open and shut, promising to ratifie in heauen, whatsoeuer he should doe here vpon earth. In times past, the Ministers of the Church, were holden for such, they were honoured as Vicars of Christ; respected as the successors of S. Peter; beloued as the fathers of soules; sought vnto, as Phisitions for afflic∣ted cōsciēces, feared, as the punishers of enormities & abuses; saluted as the Superiours or Elders of the Church; redoubted as the I rophets of the sacred Scripture; & proclaimed as Herolds of the pure and sincere veritie and truth it selfe. The auncient Emperours dis∣dained not to be chosen by them in their Empire, and Gregorie surnamed the Great, na∣med and appointed the seuen Romane Electors; the seuen Romane Electors (I say a∣gaine) who oftentimes deposeth such Emperours as before they had chosen, when they were found guiltie of some notorious and detestable crime. But now alas, what shall I say vnto you poore miserable, contemptible, and despised Ecclesiasticall Pastors? In steed of honouring you, you are now iniured: in steed of lo∣uing you, you are hated and loathed: in steed of saluting you, you are abused: in steed of respecting you, you are disdained and contemned: in steed of giuing vnto you, most that you haue, is taken from you: miserable are you your selues, and most wretched your cal∣ling, since you are abused through so many grose indignities: and yet (for all this) the euerlasting sonne of the heauenly Father, found not a dignitie more godly, and more worthie, then that of Priest-hood, according vnto the order of Melchicedecke, he was the first High Priest, whose successours, were the Apostles, of whom at this day are the reue∣rend Pastors and Preachers of the word, the true and lawfull followers. But (comfort your selues Religious and godly Diuines) for thrise blessed are all those that suffer trouble and persecution in their bodies, for the name of Iesus Christ-Glorie is the daughter of trauaile and paine, as enuie is the infant of glorie: and onely by trouble and paine, haue the Saints beaten the way for vs to mount to heauen. But as such as thinke so meanely of Religion, and of the Prelates thereof, are them∣selues to be as meanely accounted of: euen so (highly) are such to be esteemed, that haue giuen them there due, and rightly honoured them. And such a one, was Theodosius, that famous Emperour (sarnamed the Great) who sought (all the meanes he could) to haue the fauour & good will of S. Ambrose, when he had excōminicated him, yeelding vnto his will, and fearing greatly his displeasures: and not long after he being threatned by a certaine Hermit with the like punishmēt, he sent for all the Bishops (there-abouts, to know of them, whether he might be interdicted the Church and all godly compa∣nie, by so poore a creature as he was, standing mightily in awe of the same. And therefore ye worthie (learned and religious) Diuines, whatsoeuer disgraces are offered vnto you, and howsoeuer you are most iniuriously handled, or most contemptu∣ously made account of, yet be not you troubled thereat, but follow your graue and ver∣tuous calling, you being appointed and chosen by God himselfe, to be the dispensers, & the celebraters of his blessed Sacraments, and the blasoning Herolds of his eternall and euerlaistng word; lawfull Successours in his diuine function, and great and mightie, by reason of your more then worthie dignitie. But behold where the old man commeth, vnto whom I must make intercession, in the behalfe of these wretched Pirates, so strangely metamorphosed by him. To him will I pleade, with all humble modestie, lest growing in chollor with me, he vse me as hardly as he hath done them, and the rather (because not long since) I somewhat an∣gred him. Herewithall, the Knight comming vnto him, saluted him with great curtesie, in this
manner. Learned and respectiue Father, God prosper thy yeares, prolong thy life, mul∣tiplie thy daies, & conserue and keepe thee still in health. Let me intreate thee a while to stay, and a little to rest thy selfe in this place, whilest I shall be bolde to deliuer a fewe words vnto thee. The Gods sometimes lend their cares vnto mortall men, neither doe they dis∣daine to heare them, as thou makest shew (me thinkes) as if thou art loth to listen vnto mine. Stay then (reuerend old man) and giue not iust cause vnto me, that I may conceiue any vnkindnes, through this thy harsh and hard deniall. Nothing is of smaller account then the speech of man, who so yeeldeth not vnto that, will yeeld vnto nothing. The old man, seeing himselfe to be held by the hand, and vrged so hardly (as it were somewhat in choller replied thus) Palmer, thou art too troublesome and importu∣nate, let me goe I would wish thee, & hinder me no longer from the seruice of the Gods, about which I am now going, lest thou force me to doe that which I would not be wil∣ling: for what thou wouldest haue, I know alreadie before thou speakest. Thy request is not lawfull, inasmuch as Iustice should be wronged, and rightly might she complaine of me, if I should yeeld vnto thy demand: giue ouer then thy vaine sute, for no bodie is bound to doe what is ill and vniust, at the request of another, be∣cause we ought to make more account of Iustice, then of all the world besides: and for that no amitie or affection is to be preferred before a reasonable and righfull matter: Heare me therefore, and disquiet not my minde, which is now busied about heauenly things, and thinke I loue thee well, to let thee goe seotfree, when thou shalt vrge me, with such an vnreasonable motion as this: for Iustice punisheth as well those that seeme to allow of euill, as those that doe commit euill themselues. Pardon me (graue sir) (answe∣red the knight) there is no man liuing that lesse alloweth of euill then I doe, which I hate, loath and despise: but I cannot chuse but I must needs loue pittie and mercie, for as we are all men, so are we bound, one to helpe another, the bruite beastes themselues doing the like through the verie instinct of Nature. Compassion ought to be prefer∣red before all other respects, because a fault that is done, may be amended and become a vertue, but a man once dead for want of pittie, neuer riseth againe, and his losse is vn∣recouerable, and can neuer be repaired againe. Mercie hath alwaies gotten the vpper hand of rigour and fiercenes, and the pittifull man doth deserue more then the iust, whereof Cosar shall serue me for a witnesse, who affirmed, that the fruites of his victories, was the pardon, he (daily) gaue vnto thousands of his enemies, assoone as they sought his fauour. What nourisheth the societie and companie of men? What maintaineth their liues, and what increaseth their health and quietnes, but milde pittie? If there were none but hungrie wolfes, or greedie Lyons, how (then) should the world endure? and how could men be sure to enioy their liues in safe∣tie? Ah if our most louing God (should be found (as thou art) without mercie, what hope should we haue to enioy eternall glorie? but rather looke (euerie houre) when we should be swallowed vp into the bottomlesse gulfe of hell. Change then this thy too too obdurate resolution. The exceeding great curtesies that Alexander vsed vnto the Persian Kings daugh∣ters and wife, was the cause that Darius prayed the Gods, that if he needs must be dri∣uen out of the throne of Cyrus, he might haue no other successour to follow him, then the same Alexander his chiefe enemie. Great account doe we make, and much doe we esteeme of great and noble personages, that haue liued long before our daies, yet not so much for the many victories they obtained, as for the kind gentlenes, and milde cur∣tesies they vsed vnto their foes, when they had ouercome their owne passions. For to conquer an enemie is the benefit of Fortune, whereas that which we win and carrie away from our owne selues, cannot be attributed vnto any thing but vnto our selues, and that is the victorie which consisteth in pardoning of our enemies. Then follow this direct course, and thy memorie shall flourish for euer. O how ignorant doest thou shew thy selfe to be (replied the old man) by this thy discourse. Who knoweth not that euerie one of vs is bound for our owne credits, to bri∣dle our affections, and to shew grace vnto our aduersarie, vnto whom Fortune hath left no meanes to defend himselfe, when he is once vanquisht.
But the same law that commandeth vs to be pittifull vnto our enemies, teacheth vs, to be iust and seuere vnto the aduersaries of Iustice. For what sufficient reproach and shame, can a Maister doe vnto such a seruant of his, who shall stand by, and see his Lord beaten, abused and defamed, and yet (neuer as much (as once) stirreth his foote to take his quarrell in hand, nor once to defend him, he hauing bene able to haue done the same if he would? We are all the seruants of Iustice, by whom, since we are all nourished, protected, and defended in this world, is it reasonable, that we should endure to see he spoyled, abused and trod vnder seere, and yet neuer reuenge her wrongs? The same eternall God, whom thou tearmest mercifull, hath not himselfe contemned Iustice, but rather hath yeelded vnto the satisfaction of the same, choosing rather to become man, and to die as man, then to falific or offer iniurie vnto Iustice. So likewise the selfe-same Alexander, whom thou paintest forth to be so kind, defer∣red not to punish in most cruell sort, the murtherers of Darius, causing them to be peece∣meale torne with wilde horses in sunder. No reason is it, that, that man, should be suffe∣red to liue, who is not moued to reuenge Iustice when she is profaned and wronged, she being that vertue, that containeth within her all the other, and they are all (as it were) tied about her necke, inasmuch as it were to no purpose for one to be sober, and conti∣nent, if he should proue to be an vniust man, and an vsurper ouer other men. And were Iustice honoured of euery one (as she ought to be in right) we then should haue but small neede, either of force, valour, or prowes at all. For should euerie man liue orderly and well, giuing vnto his neighbour that which is his due, there should be no occasion, to vse force to compell him to deale iustly and true: stand not then, to im∣portune me thus, to shew compassion vpon the foes of Iustice, & hinder not the diuine vengeance of the same, lest thou be punished for taking their parts so much. For cursed is he that beareth with vice, and winketh with his eies, because he will not see that fault, which he is loth to punish. Learned Father (answered the knight) how much more easier is it for a man to pardon, then to reuenge? A small labour were it, and little or no time would it aske, to speake this one onely word (I pardon them) but not so qucikly, is found the meanes to reuenge. Happie may he account himselfe, that hath not a cruell minde, nor bloodie hand, the Lord himselfe reiecting the sacrifices of such as haue rough and bloodie hands. Besides, the same Iustice in whose behalfe thou alleagest so much, is content that that sinner be receiued into grace, that craueth pardon for his fault, he promising to make hartle satisfaction for the same. For what more can one demand of the offender, but amends for the offence he hath committed. Iustice misliketh not, to see her deare sister Mercie, to be respected and sued vnto, because that without yeelding satisfaction for the crime, and not paying what is due vnto Iustice, she neuer receiueth the misliuer into her fauour. That good Father, did not he take againe into his former grace, his prodigall child, after he had so vainely and prodigally spent all his wealth and patrimonie? And that wilde King Loies, surnamed the Debonaire, did not he forgiue all his children, who had chased him out of his kingdome, depriued him of his Crowne, and had forcibly made him a Monke? If so, then let him be mercifull that looketh for mercie: for as we sowe, so shall we reape. And if we doe otherwise, we shall prooue our selues but liars before God, and cruell of our speech before the face of the world. Let vs pittie one another as we would be pittied againe of God himselfe: for if he should but once looke into our faults, who then dare appeare before his presence? This is the reason I am so earnest with thee, to the end I might obtaine so much fa∣uour at thy hands, as to restore those poore distressed soules, vnto their pristinate and former shapes againe, that they may be continually obliged vnto thee, for so great a bountie towards them. Thou knowest not (answered the old man) what thou demandest. For, if the lawe giuen by Princesse, doth not exempt themselues from the rigour thereof, and if God himselfe will haue euill punished (as he pardoneth the faithfull) hauing slaine the infa∣mous inhabitants with fire and brimstone, and swallowed downe aliue into hell, that re∣bellious
crue, of Dathan, Coran, and Abiron. Why then contrarie to his ordinance, wilt thou solicite in the behalfe of the wicked, when the sinne is so hainous, as it can neuer enough be plagued? Call to minde the saying of that great Emperour, who putting into a certaine Iud∣ges hand, the sword of Iustice, saide thus vnto him. Holde heere, and take this wea∣pon against mine owne selfe, if thou shalt finde mee culpable: And if I shall doe anie thing against Iustice. Agesilaus, King of the Spratanes, did not thinke the King of Persia to deserue that name of GREAT more then hee:A Sentence. but onely for that he was more vpright and vn∣partiall in all his actions: making account by this meanes, that all the glorie and ho∣nour of great Monarkes, consisted in the beautie of this IVSTICE. And to say the truth, she is a most beautifull and diuine Ladie, seeing she rendreth vnto euery man what is his in right, not taking away from anie man by violence, the least thing that is, but rather maketh such ill-gotten goods to be restored vnto the true owners thereof againe. Worthy then are such to be seuerely punished, that violate and defile her so much. Cursed be you (saith the great GOD, by the mouth of his Prophet Esay) that publish wicked Lawes, and do commit Iniustice,A Sentence. to the ende you may oppresse the poore in Iudgement: doe wrong vnto the widowe, and that the goods of the poore Orphanes and Fatherlesse children, may serue as a prey vnto your vnsatiable couetous∣nes, and that you may ruinate and ouerthrow the weake and feeble estate of the poo∣rer sort. IVSTICE being the daughter of the Almightie, cannot be sold by men, because shee belongeth not vnto them, but vnto GOD,In praise of Iustice. they being but meere executioners of the same. No more then a Farmer may sell the Farme of his Land-lord: which if he do, he is seuerely to be punished. For an Aduocate that pleadeth, may sell his Plea, and a Counseller his Counsell, which he giueth vnto his Clyent, because they be things of their owne, and appartai∣ning vnto them. But the Iudge can in no wise sell Iustice, by reason she is not his owne, (hee being but one that is put in trust, faithfully to deliuer the same) and that hee hath the charge thereof from God: Now he may be properly said to sell her, who doth not punish such as abuse her. Then talke no more of this matter, which I may neuer graunt, nor thou art like euer to obtaine. Sage and prudent olde man (replyed the Knight) although Lawes are appointed to punish offences, yet neuerthelesse, they are alwayes construed vnto the best, and inter∣preted with most fauour that may be. For it is not necessary (alwaies, and at all times) but vpon great necessitie and constraint, that the rigour thereof should be put in prac∣tise: No more then the skilfull and cunning Chyrurgian vseth neither fire nor sawe, but when there is no other remedie. And that this is wisedome so to doe, we finde it in great personages, who haue soo∣ner yeeded by milde intreatie, and faire meanes, then by all the violence in the worlde.An example. Which Coriolanus can well testifie, who could neuer be vanquished by all the Romans Forces, and yet was soone ouercome by the sweete intreaties of his deare wife and mo∣ther. A right generous spirit, and one that is noblie borne, will neuer yeeld by constraint, but being kindly vsed, condescendeth vnto any thing. As we haue Cato for a witnesse, who neuer could be brought to giue place vnto the good Fortune of his enemie. So likewise honorable mindes vse to dominier and rule, managing their affaires and busines, not with controlling cheek, but with a sweet and milde kinde of intreatie. For so did prudent Demetrius, pardoning (oftentimes) the Athenians, and setting them at liber∣tie, when they (notwithstanding all this) requited his great good turnes towards them∣with monstrous ingratitude, and thousands of outragious misdemeanours. Better were it for vs to imitate the good and kinde Dion, who being driuen out of his Countrey, by his owne Citizens, (whome hee diuers times had deliuered from bondage) and gentlie pardoned them all, sussering himselfe to be put to death for their safetie.
their Sauiour and Redeemer, and yet neuertheles, that milde and immaculate Lambe, the euerliuing Sonne of God, forgaue them, prayed for them, and not so much as once remembred their wicdnes: They being afterwards plagued (not so much for that they had orucified the Iust) as, for that they still persisted in their wilfull iniquities. We see then, wee are commaunded to pardon our enemies, by the example of our Sauiour hmfelfe. Then what should hinder thee, but that thou shouldest for giue these poore miserable wretched creatures? For thrice blessed is hee, that shall (worthily) imi∣tate the Almightie, in as much, as hee that hath such a guide, can neuer walke out of his right way. I see now (answered the olde man) that from Caribdis thou fallest into Silla, and from one bad mattes, enterest into a worse. For both the Iewes were punished, and God himselfe (although at the prayer of Moses) would not forgiue the Children of Israel. For if that he hath not spared Iustice vpon himselfe, in (the going before vs, and learning vs a way that wee should follow) are wee so foolish to imagine, that he will not permit the same to be executed vpon men? He hath punished the Israelites many times, not sparing them at all, when there was a sault, and hath seuerely chastised such as haue not plagued his enemies, according vn∣to his will, as we finde by Saul and Ahab. Besides, hee thus spake vnto the Iudges. Behold, you doe not execute the iudge∣ment of man, but of God: and whatsoeuer you shall wrongfully giue iudgement of, the the same shall light vpon your owne heads: therfore let the feare of the Lord be alwaies before your eyes, doing euery thing orderly and vprightly, for God will not accept of a∣ny iniustice, nor hath respect of persons, of Presents, or Riches. Shepheard, Shepheard, the greatest glorie that our Auncients thought they could merit, was in studying how they might liue, to be counted iust, they vsing to punish vice, in such sort, that this word (IVST) carryed with it selfe, an entire and full perfection of an accomplishment euery way. Traian is not a little commended, for staying his whole Armie (marching in battell aray, against the Parsians) to the end he might doe Iustice vpon one of his Soldiers, who had rauished a poore widowes daughter. An act so meritorious, as no doubt it wan him the fielde, by reason of the prayer of that good olde woman, who made earnest prayer vnto the Gods for him, in his behalfe, that he might returne home againe victorious. To be briefe, there was no wickednes, but was sharply punished by our olde forefa∣thers; amongst whom, Iustice was much reuerenced, and respected chiefly of all. The Spartanes honoured her so much, that for seare to offend her, they banished all vse of gold and siluer out of their Citie, taking away by that deuise, all vnlawfull meanes of corrupting of Consciences: And all the while they kept this kinde of strict life, they were the first, and chiefe of all Greece. And no sooner gaue they ouer this kinde of go∣uernment, but they became the most wretchedst, and most miserable people of all o∣thers. Let vs then leaue this wanton pardoning, and iniustice, it being a sinne, for which God altereth and chaungeth the state of many Kingdomes and Monarchies. As the Knight was readie to make answere vnto the obiections of the olde Nigro∣mancer, they might heare notfarre from them, a most lamentable voyce, which was the occasion they then gaue ouer, looking about them to see if they could spie the wight that so lamented: whom they presently saw to be a Shepheard, that came towards them, singing this Song following vnto himselfe. My soule, say to me (now) where art? Where liuest thou (speake my poore hart?) The Louer that doth liue apart, Without his Mistris faire: Is like a shadowe substancelesse, Where nought but griefe the life doth presse, As pisture of sad heauinesse. And connterfeit of care.
Say Phoebus, what good ist to me, Though Skies I view guilded to be? If my ador de Sunne I not see To please my pittious eyne? Can Ceres (of me) praise deserue, Though all the ground with Corne doth swarue, When I through hunger pure doe starue, And readie am to pine? My broken ioyes, repaire who may, Who can my weeping Conduits stay, Since who of sorrow is the pray Belongeth vnto griefe? Mine eyes which death orechargeth sore, (As now) can waile, and weepe no more: Since shee is gone whom I adore, And who brought them reliefe. My hart through sorrow's waxen cold, Loosing what hee most deare did hold, Blessed, if that in graue enrold He were, his hopes being past. No comfort to my soule's arriude, He seekes the meanes to be disliude. So Piramus of Loue depriude, Gane vp his latest gaspe. Now I, my cruell Faire haue lost, Of what sweet comfort may I boast? Yet for ones Mistris to be lost, The paines of death or pleasure. He is not bound in world to liue, Who (alwayes languishing) doth grieue, When hee, (by dying) may it relieue, Which to him is a Treasure. The Sunne, though hidden be his beames, Extinguisht yet are not his gleames, So Lady mine, her sight forth streames, Though she is farre from me. More cruell did I feele the paine, When her faire glannce burnt euery vains, Respecting what I now doe gaine, Although shee absent be. When shee was tooke from me away, Why then did not my heartsome slay? For who with Conquerour his, is pray, Cannot be said to die, Ah cruell day, and lucklesse time, When as I lost those lookes dinine, My soule (consumde) away did pine, Wanting that Deitie. Then seeing that deprinde I am Of her, no longer liue I can, My Fortunes hard, Ile curse and ban, Expecting still for death. Withouten soule, no bodie liues, His Mistris losse, a Loner grienes: Whilst he such wofull torments prieues, As none feele like on earth.
The olde Magician, and the Knight, hearing so dolefull a Dittie sung by the Shep∣heard Arcas, (who did nothing but lament, for the absence of his Diana) could not choose but weepe, when after hee had made an end of his Song, they might heare him vse these speeches vnto himselfe. O troublesome and vnquiet Sunne, who hath caused thee (so soone to leaue thy bed, before thy wonted time? And what need had anie Creature of thine, so quick to returne, as long as they ouer-wearied and tyred with trauatle, slept sweetly vnder the protection of the secret and still Night?A Similie. And how happie was I, before thy brightsome comming? For then, (at my pleasure) I did contemplate and behold the face of Diana, shining in the heauens, which nourished in my soule, the remembraunce of my beau∣tious Goddesse. And what can delight me more, then to thinke on her, who resembleth her much, and who it honoured with her name? Nothing pleaseth the sicke man so much as his health, which he desireth aboue all things, (although many times) in vaine. And so, nothing is so much agreeable to me, as my faire Mistris, whome I doe often wish for, al∣though to no ende. For the pale and breathlesse coarse, layde vpon the colde ground, is not more depriued of life,A Sentence. then I am voyd of all hope, to see my cruell Faire againe. Miserable is hee that languisheth without all hope: for nothing sweeteth the sharp∣nes of his wound, when as a little hope alone, is of force to nourish the poorest wretches in the world. Easie are the trauailes, and gentle the paines, that one suffereth, whilst he hopeth; For the conceit of the delight of the thing he hopeth for, maketh them plea∣sant, changing them into contentment and ioy: whereas the labour and paine of him that is in dispaire of all hope, is most dangerous, insupportable, and intollerable. Tell me mine eyes, to what end doe you see and giue light, if you can no more be∣hold her, who was your chiefest delight? O faire and louely Diana, in what place soe∣ner it is thy Fortune (as now) to bee, making the same blessed with thy beautious pre∣sence; Heauens graunt that thou mayest liue happilie, and that the remnant of all my good Fortunes (if at least I haue any reserued for me) be heaped & bestowed vpon thee, whilst I in the meane space, will liue (here) alone, in this solitary Wood, to bewaile my dis∣asters, and languish daily, as one in a consumption, that piecemeale pineth away, and can neuer be cured. For to what end doth he make intercession, or praiers vnto the Heauens, whom the Heauens themselues doe holde for their enemie? That man that is difaster∣ly destined, hath no reason to expect any good fortune: which if he doth, he but moc∣keth himselfe, and in the end doth finde he is deceiued. So I looke for nothing that is comfortable or pleasing to come from aboue, be∣cause I know my selfe to be in the number of those miserable Caitifs,A Sentence. who (neuer haue felt any thing here) in this world, but woe and distresse, vntill they haue bene layed and lodged within their graues. O too too partiall Fates of men, that some should be still happy, luckie, and blessed in euery thing, and others so vnfortunate, that they should (neuer) taste of aught but of sorrow, care, and anguish! And of this last accursed crue I am the chiefe. But perhaps some will say: Eucry one feeleth his owne griefe and misfortune, but not that which another is tormented withall. Yet let such iudge (but indifferently of my case) and then I know they cannot chuse but pittie me; For is it not an euill to be endu∣red, for one to loose the cheerfull light of his owne sweete life, his much desired health and well-fare, his owne louing natiue Countrey, his deare Parents, and his affectionate friends and acquaintance, without finding any succour or reliefe at all, but of his proper enemies. For vaine is the helpe of them, from whom I hoped, and as bootlesse is the reward of my trauaile, that I am like to receiue of such as I serued. O miserie worse then dispaire it selfe, for one to be beholding for his good Fortune vnto his mortallfoe, and not finde recompence, of those of whome he hath so well de∣serued. O Themistocles, it was thou that didst passe through this narrow straight, being wel∣commed, caressed, and honorablie entertained of thy cruell aduersarie, when thou wert banished by thy ingratefull Countreymen, whom thou hadst most faithfully serued, and oftentimes most valiantly fought for, to saue their es and Countrey.
And thou Coriolanus didst finde the like fauour and grace amongst thine enemies, after thy owne Citizens had vnkindly driuen thee out of their Citie, whom thou before hadst serued loyallre, with many testimonies of rare and wonderfull fidelitie. And such was thy Fortune braue Alcibiades, exiled by thine owne people, and en∣tertained most louingly by the Spartanes, thy hatefull deadly foes. In your Ship doe I saile, in your boate doe I rowe, and the selfe-same mishap you had, doe I participate of; but sore (full sore) against my minde: for in an ill houre was he borne, that is driuen vnto such a narrow estate, as he is forced to haue recourse vnto his il-willers: in as much as his obligation is like to be forfaited, (the summe neuer likely to be paide) when hee shall receiue so great a benefite of his enemie, who is least bound to doe the same good vnto him of all others. Thus saide the sorrowfull Arcas, who (hauing ended his discourse) was chosen as ludge betweene the old man and the Knight, about their first Argument. But when he vnderstood how these Pirats of the Seas (changed so lately into Trees, and bruit beasts) and would haue offered violence vnto the faire Shepheardesse, hee then gaue his Cen∣sure, that they were worthily punished: confirming this his Decree, to stand (as authen∣ticall) in the presence of the Shepheardesse her selfe, whom hee presently knewe to be loucly Delia: who was not a little comforted and reuiued, when shee so happily found Arcas, and other her olde acquaintance in this place: Euen as banished persons cheare themselues in their exile, beeing maruellouslie ioyfull (when in a straunge land) they met one with another. Wherevppon, the Shepheard demaunded of her the cause of her comming into this vncoth Desart, and by what chaunce shee came thither: As also the reason why these cruell lawlesse persons did pursue her with their naked swordes, in such a straunge manner. And therewithall, they sat downe vpon a greene banke, placing the Nymphe in the middest of them, who began to tell this sad Tale following. Not long since, there was a certaine Noble man of an Island,Delia the Shepherdesse, reporteth a strange history who became amorous of a goodly Maid, she being the onely child he had. This Damosell had vowed her selfe vnto the seruice of the Goodesse Iuno; Which her Father not knowing of, pursued her the more eagerly, she still denying, and flying from him, as much as she could, calling vpon her Mistris to assist and helpe her. One day amongst others, hee found her at such an aduantage, as he attempted by force to rauish her: which shamefull deed, was repugnant against all reason, honor, and honestie. The Virgin not knowing what to doe, resisted and cried out, imploring for the aide of Iuno, who seeing such vnnaturall vsage of a Father vnto his owne Child, delayed no longer to helpe her: For as the lustfull Lord, thought to haue embraced his daughter, and to haue had his pleasure of her, in steed of holding a liuing bodie in his armes, he found a cold and senslesse image of white Marble. The Goddesse Iuno, hauing chaun∣ged her faithfull seruant into this liuelesseforme to preserue her chastitie vndefiled. The Father wonderfully amazed at this matter, but more sadde and heauie was he, (as well for the losse of his onely childe, whom he loued as his owne soule, as also to see that he was depriued from enioying of that contentment which hee hoped of) was rea∣die in a manner to kill himselfe for verie meere griefe and vexation: when vppon the suddaine, he found out, that the Maid had vowed herselfe vnto Iuno, and that, that God∣desse, to the ende to frustrate him of his will, had turned her into this colde forme of Marble. Which when he knew, madde for rage and griefe against Iuno, (it being not the du∣tie of any creature to murmure or bandie against the Celestiall powers) he runneth vnto the Altar, plucking downe her Image, and breaking it in a thousand pieces. The Goddesse being iustly moued with this outrage, prouoked her husband Iupiter likewise against him, who tooke this iniurie done vnto his wife, in as hainous a manner, as if it had bene done vnto himselfe: and therefore (to reuenge the same, he sent an infec∣tious pestilence into this Iland, of which, all the land (in a manner died.) The cruell Lord, being the first man that was punished with the same, whilst those fewe that remai∣ned
aliue, fledde (presently) out of that Countrey, shifting as well as they could to saue themselues, and came to inhabit in a certaine barren and fruitlesse foyle, not farre off from their owne. But after they had some fewe yeares bene tired with their banishment, and (as wearie of this hungrie and vnpleasant place where they did bide, desiring and longing to see the smoake of their olde Chimneys) they ventured to returne back againe into their owne Countrey: where no sooner were they setled, but the same pestilent disease beganne (a∣fresh) to seaze vpon them, taking them away as fast as euer it had done before. Wherevpon they sent vnto the Oracle of Apollo, to know how they might be freed of this plague: who returned them answer, that to appease the wrath of Iuno, they must sacrifice a young Virgin vnto her, shee being euery way as faire in beautie, as that Virgin was, which Iuno had chaunged into a picture of Marble. They heating this, began to bethinke themselues what they should doe in this case, for their Iland brought forth no such comely creatures, and therefore they determined to scoure all the Coasts neere about, to see if they could finde anie such. Now after the damnable Fiend Discord, with her breath, like brimstone, her wings, like a Dragon, and her pawes, all of fire: had driuen that gratious and goodly companie out of the sweet Groues of Arcadia: euery one (highing him vnto his owne home, after the death of that valiant Lord Phillis) so much bewailed and lamented of euery one. I alone, amongst the rest, resolued with my selfe, not to stirre one foote from thence, but to take my Fortune patiently (as it should happen) not vnlike vnto a Lamb that is reser∣ued for Sacrifice. In the meane time, Report had blasted abroad the beautious faces of all our Shep∣heardesses, (which sometime were biding in this happie Desart) carrying the same tyed vnto his wings, brought it vnto the eares of the men of this cruell Hand: who no soo∣ner heard it, but that they took shippe, minding to take one of the fairest Maidens there, and to sacrifice her vnto the Goddesse of Riches. Comming (then) a shore vpon our Iland, and not finding any more to please their fancie, then my poore selfe, they tooke me perforce, and brought me prisoner into their ship, hoping that I should be a remedie to mittigate the anger of the Goddesse; and not because I was saire enough for their purpose. But such as desire any thing, are con∣tented with little. Like vnto right Gamesters, who rather then they will be excluded from play, will play at small stakes, and holde the candle vnto the rest: So they ima∣gined any beautie, were it neuer so simple, would serue well enough for their turne and purpose. I seeing my selfe (thus) taken, like vnto a sillie Partridge, seazed vpon by the gry∣ping Faulconer, (and sore doubting what the other Virgin feared) lifting vp my deawy eyes vnto the heauens, I made mine humble and hartie prayer vnto the Almightie, to assist me in this extremitie, and to deliuer me out of the hands of these monsters, whom I doubted sore, because of mine honor. And no sooner had I made intercession vnto him, but hee, as a most mercifull Father, heard my prayers, gaue eare vnto my cries, and pittied my wofull teares. For within a while after, he caused a blutering storme and Tempest to rise in the Seas, that draue them farre away from their owne Coast, forcing them in the ende, to cast Anker vppon these parts. Which being done, I did coniure and intreat them so much, that they permitted mee to come a shore to take the ayre, somewhat to refresh and recouer my crazed health, which the rage of the Tempest, and the swelling billowes of the Ocean, had much impaired and made worse. But no sooner was I vpon the land, and had set foote on the ground, then I began (suddainly) to take my heeles, and runne from them, chusing rather to be killed by them as I fled, then they should take from me mine honour violently. And being in this minde, I thought to venter my fortune, as that young Romane Virgin did, which brauely swum ouer the Riuer of Tiber, thinking there was no other way with mee, but that either death, or flying away, could saue my chastitic vntainted, and preserue me vnhart. They seeing this, followed after mee as fast as they could runne, threatning me with many outragious and iniurious tearmes, to cut my throate if I stayed not: And this had they done, had not you (deare Father) come to rescue me,
by your learned and miraculous aide: for which I most humblie thanke you, acknow∣ledging my selfe, by your onely meanes and fauour, to hold both mine honour, and my life, (for both which) I am obliged vnto you. This pittifull discourse moued all the assembly to compassion, and especially the old man, who gaue her many kinde speeches, comforting her in the best manner he could, and so left her to repose her selfe, because she was wonderfull wearie. And in the meane time, he singled out Arcas, whom he led vnto the old solitarie Dungion or Caue, sommoning him to goe forward in the Historie of his misfor∣tunes. The Shepheard hearing this, began to chafe in his minde, as a little boy doth fret, when he is forced to repeate his lesson twise. But it is to no end to be angrie, for he durst not displease him any way, because he sore doubted his diuellish cunning, vnto whom not for loue, but rather for feare, he willingly seemed to condiscend, beginning where he left, in this wise. Diana (as I told you before) tooke great pleasure in my verses, yea, and did me grace (sometimes) to sing some of them her owne selfe. But as the raine transformeth and chaungeth it selfe into colde sharpe snow, so this pleasure turned into griefe and dis∣paire, by the answere I receiued of the cruell Ecco. Yet neuerthelesse, I thought to follow my game, hauing alreadie roused the dame. He that will be a souldiour in Loues campe, must neuer be faint-harted, nor giue ouer with a repulse, or some small losse, for continuance of time, and milde patience, are the sacred Ttees, from which loyall Louers, gather the fruits of their constant perseuerance, and long looked for Amitie. This was the cause I put forth my selfe to serue my Diana, more then euer I had done before, although she accounted nothing at all thereof, by reason she was addicted wholie vnto the seruice of her Goddesse. Neuerthelesse, I alwaies hoped the best, ruminating in my selfe, that Rome was not built in one day, and, that that was rare and daintie, could not be gotten easilie, but at a high price and dearely. I remembred, that small drops of water, with oftē falling, maketh (in the end) a hole in the flintie stone, be it neuer so hard, and I relied verie much vpon the promise of time, who vanteth to ripen euerie thing, so they stay his leisure. A small hope encoura∣geth such as be Louers, and hindereth them from giuing ouer their suite begun already. Wherein, they resemble such souldiours as are besieging some Cittie or other, in which they hope in the end to enter, although they haue the worst at the first. And so Louers, neuer dispaire, for all their crosses, and ouerthwartings, but still hope the best, as the Sunne, which waxeth the clearer, the more the clouds seeke to shadow him. This made me still to follow my footing, as the good Blood-hound doth the trace of the Deare. When the day of the solemne feast of Diana drew neare, which was the day of ioy, and yeare of Iubile to all, but vnto me (alone) heauie and sad, I then (againe) began to weepe & waile afresh: for no remedie was there, but my Mistris must needs goe thither, with the other Nymphs her companions, whilst I (in the meane while) should want her pleasing companie. For to follow her it was not lawfull, which both her honour forbad me, and also the sacrifices and misteries were such, and so seruile, as none might see them but women. Besides, I remembred the fault which Clodius committed in Rome, prophaning & defaming, the ceremonies of the Goddesse Bona: to the intent he might enioy the car∣nall companie of Caesars wife, which offence brought forth manie other. The Iudges being (through the same) corrupted, and the Iniustice which they did (in absoluing the guiltie) without punishment. I calling all these things to minde, suffered my Ladie to goe vnto these sacrifices, which continued diuers daies, whilest I (in the meane while) was left alone, at what time, I began to find, how heauie and greuous the absence of this Ladie is vnto the Louer, whilest I tried the same all that space within my selfe. Yet, although she was absent, I was not altogether idle, for I composed these Heroicall verses following.
Now doe I meane, in this my verse, to tell that thy beautie Hath by thy glaunces sweet, of freeman made me a Bond-slaue? When mine cies surprisde with a feare more terrible then death, Gan ouer-bold to cast lookes on thy heauenly feature. So will I tell how since that time, I neuer had one day, But that my thought, and my minde haue runne of Loue still rouings Nor haue I dreamd of aught, but of that blind little Elfe, Loue, Who hath my heart kept captiue, and my soule as a prisoner. Yet is he happie, that can serue a dame so tryumphant. Happie is he, that is bound in a chaine so sweet and so louely, That all carking care driues from me, lest I be grieued, In that I am thy seruant true, I blest doe account me. Who like the sacred Sunne, doest glad the world and his of spring. For so diuine a soule as thou, who would not endanger Life, and himselfe, and what he hath that is aught worth? No aisgrace tis, of braue Captaine, for to be vanquisht. Loue ne're soiournes in the hearts of cowardly Milkesops, But in the thoughts of Noble men, most fierce doth he combat: And great Ladies mindes he seekes to keepe in his owne puet. Wofull witnesse hereof is Dido, cruelly destned. And those kindsisters that Thesius sau'de from his ending, Hercules that Demigod, that Monsters conquered and Fiends: Had for his foes, theeues and Loue that warre made against him, Die did be, for pure loue, who the pride of the world did encounter: And wicked Tyrants did send to hell with a mischiefe. So did Achilles loue in his prime, and he but a youngling, Was by the craftie meanes of his foe, most cruelly murdred: Greatest states haue lou'd, why then for loue should I blam'd be? If that I seeke (as they) to loue thee my Goddesse aboue all, Not any things here in this earth, compared to thy beautie. Not any things here in this earth, that like to thy sweet selfe May vaunt to giue lawes, as Gods that dwell in the cleere skie. For Loue, falling in loue, with thy faue face, and with thy rose checke, Plase like awanton in thine eies, and like to a Babie. Nor doth he liue but in thee, who art his Court and his Heauen. Happie thou, that canst command so loftie a God-head. Such and so rare thy fauour is, thy grace so beseeming, As their Palas most denine, doth seeke to repose her On thy cherrie lippes, hunnie sucking, Mercurie seazeth. Aud thy sacred Angels voice, is the voice of Apollo. And to be briefe, th'art so diuine, as fewe thee resemble: Fowe or none that liues in this world so beautifull as thou. Then will I loue thee; what doe I say? too little a thing tis, Lesse that I worship, doe to thee as vnto a Goddesse. Then to thee as immortall might, my life I doe offer, And my loy all heart doe I sacrifice to thy beautie. Whilst I hung on thine Altar, this my verse, which hath chaunted With thousand close sighes, the praises of many others, But yet neuer honoured any, like to thy rare selfe: Wondred at of men, of Gods most worthily worshipt. Then this my chast voice receiue, as heauenly powers doe. And vouchsafe for this song, a corner of thy sweet Altar, Vnto the end I deeply may engraue in the same place, How in coarse, and in minde, thou fram'd art daintily perfect, And that nothing equall can thy feature immortall, Who art honours lonely Nurse, and Eternities owne childe.
Hauing made these verses, I plaide as the countrie Farmeth doth, who hauing gathered some daintie, or new kind of fruite, keepeth the same verie charily, to make a present thereof, vnto his Land-lord, vpon the first occasion he shall haue to see him: and so I resolued to keepe these my verses, and to present them vnto my Diana, assoone as she should returne from the ceremonies of her Goddesse, and long was it (as me thought) that she staied. For to one that expecteth & looketh for any thnig, euery houre seemeth a yeare at the least. Willingly could I haue murmured against the Goddesse Diana. If I durst, and more willingly haue curtold of, and shortned her Sacrifices, if I had bene (as I was not) the great Priest of the Gods. But in the end, the best thing that I could finde to helpe me, was patience perforce, whilest I attended with good deuotion, the will of the heauens, which at the last brin∣geth euery thing to his perfection. Yet when these Sacrifices were at an end, they were no more fortunate vnto me, then was their beginning. For my Diana being elected and chosen Queene of these Mysteries, by the other Nymphs was conducted (not farre from thence) by the whole troupe of them to be enstalled, & to receiue the Robes of her Roy∣rall Soueraigntie, much did it please me, that my Ladie was so highly honoured, but as much (againe) did it displease me, that I should lose her presence longer, for the same; which was the cause, it drowned and choaked all the contentment and pleasure, which I conceiued of her prehemmence, and to know her, to be preferred before all the rest of the Goddesse traine. For the good seruant is not a little glad and proud, in that he serueth a braue and vertuous Maister, who surpasseth all others in vertue, and in chiualrie. And so the Louer is fullie contented, and not a little doth glorie, when he is the seruant of such a Ladie, as not Loue (alone) maketh her seeme beautifull in his owne sight, but when she is so reputed and accounted of by the voice of all men. Nothing delighteth our mindes more, then when we see euery mans conceit to iumpe with our owne, in the thing that we loue most of all. Now the honour that was attributed vnto my Mistris was great, for she was brought from the temple, arrayed with a fine and daintie robe, of white lawne; vnder which was a garment of cloth of golde, rich, & of great valew, her head was adorned, & embollished with a Royall golden Crowne, and the louely traces of her flaxen haire, were tied with small and delicate colours of the purest silke, set out with many prettie knots, ànd won∣derfull rare deuises. Her countenance was such, and so Maiesticall, as if she had bene the Goddesse Diana indeed: for apparell setteth out the bodie verie much, being one of the goodhest and chiefest ornaments to encrease beautie: especially if there be good store of change of the sacred and costly, with ill, and that it be fit and well made for the person that shall weare it. Her Chariot was of Iuorie, wherein she sat inthronized, drawne with foure huge Li∣ons, which shaked their yellow rough skinnes, to make such stubborne harts to feare and quake, that were loth to bow, and doe reuerence vnto their beautious and Prince∣ly Princesse. Before her, and by her side, the other Nymphs marched orderly, and in a row, euery one of them, carrying a braunch of Oliue, wreathed and intermixed with a bowe of greene Laurell, and a writing vpon the same, which bare euerie ones owne Quatrin in praise of this royall Nymph, whereof some of them were these here vnder inserted. The Muses (Goddesse faire) this chast verse offer thee, And to thy peerlesse Coarse, and Beauties excellence: To praise the good, to blame such wights as wicked be, Is honors double gaine, and double recompence. Another Quatersan. If thou Dianaes name, her beautie, and her wit doest beare, Who is adornd in heauens, whilst thou below dost soiourne here? What reason is it then, but that we worship thee likewise, As wee the mighty Gods doe, and like honors, thee deuise? Another.
Too small a toy this Lawrell is, to make for thee a Crowne, Thy temples to embellish faire, thou art of such renowne. Tis mortals gaine this honour, yet as we present to thee, Immortall verses so with such, the Gods presented bee. Another. Rare vertue neuer honoured is enough, at any time, Nor can we too much make to smoake, her Altars ore diuine. Then if thy workes (as hers) immortall right doe show, Wonder thou not, though beauties thine be worshipt so. Another. Queene of our workes, and Princesse of our hart, Of our chaste minds we offer thee best part. Our verse, it is, through which the Conquerour liues, Which to his deeds, most heauenly brightnes giues. Another. Blest be our Queene, immortall she alwaies, In words and deeds we'ele honour her with praise. Whose bodie beautious, and whose soule is faire, And who for gifts with Pallas may compare? Another. The Oxe, to Iupiter we vse to sacrifice, To Baccus, Wine, the Goate to Pan, we giue likewise. Corne vnto Ceres, and sweet Myrre we Cupid offer, But vnto thee (who vice dost hate) our verse we proffer. Another. Thy Feature faire, nor stately Gate, hath vs orecome, Tis none of these, thy vertue tis that this hath done. He is not vanquished, that hath endurde the sight Of one that is farre more in power, then mortall might. Another. Mongst thousand honours due vnto thy glorious Deitie, Receiue our verses, and these Flowers, as offerings to thy beautie. Small tryumph for the Captaine tis, to foyle his enemie, Vnlesse Apollos sisters ring out his victorie. These Quatraines were fairely written, in great Letters of Gold, all in my Mistris honour, which (how much it pleased me to see commended by so many sweet voyces) you your selfe may soone imagine. This done, after they had carried her vp & downe for a certaine space, and that the Lions (being wearied) had reposed themselues, all the Nymphs gathered themselues together in a round, and holding hands one with another, they began to sing sweetly againe in the praise of their Queene; ringing out this peale with their notes, sounding (like sweet Bells) as followeth. Another. Now must the Gods aboue, And all the heauens that moue, Of Diana praises sing, That may hereafter ring. Now must me with knot fine, The Lawrell greene combine: With th'oliue, that his haire, May be adornd were faire. O Cibile, whom the skies Doth worship reuerently:
Giue vs of Flowers gay, That Garlands make we may: Yee Muses that doe chaunt, And of worlds honour vaunt: Giue vs Inuention still, From forth your sacred hill. O Maias learned Sonne, Giue vs a hunnie tongue: And with thy rods vs touch, That we may pleasure much, Yee Gods and Goddesse. Beston your worthines: That we may celebrate, Our noble Princesse state. Who with renowe doth liue. Whose deeds forth honour giue: A thing most worthie tis, To praise what worthie is. Then each where we will tell, Her glorie doth excell: (Faire) we of thee will sing, And make our song to ring, Of thee and of thy acts, Of thy victorious facts. Thy beautie wee le not hide, Which in thy lookes doth bide; Being full of Maiestie, Whilst thou most worthily, For chastitie doest gaine, What Hippolit did (staine) Liue then, and die thou namer, But be thou crownd for euer, With Coronet diuine, Becomming wearing thine. And neuer may thy hart, Feele sorrow, teene or smart. Still may thy vertue yeeld, Flowers fit, for such a field. And ore Loue dominere, And with thy lookes him feare. Daunt such as ouer-bold, Thy honour dare behold. Let vs right glorie finde, Within thy peerlesse minde. Celestiall things still loue, What mort all is nere proue. This only of thy beautie, We sing as is our dutie. And though thou in thy heart, More firme and loyall art Then loyatie it selfe, (wealth) (Since Loue, takes place fore May we of thee alone, Ay thinke, or else of none. So death it selfe may haue, No power thee for to brant.
So maist thou alwaies flourish, Although we die and perish. Like Phoebus Lawrall greene, That fresh is alwaies seene. So will we wish, that care Thy Feature nere impaire. And that what thou dost craue, Thou euer maist it haue. That blacke dispaire, thy soule, With thoughts may nere controule. And that no griefe may cease On thee, to wound thy peace. That Ioue may ding the downe Who on thy good doe frowne. And enuious are through spite, To see how thou shinst bright. Since all the Gods doe shew, Their power here below. (A signe thale thee defend,) Vnto the world his end. Then feare not, for they will Protect, and shield thee still. Whilst thy  shall shine, Encreasing time from time. Enfranchising with ioy, Thy selfe free from annoy. To th'end thou helpe vs may, Whom (onely) we obay. Faire) then these verses take, Which we pene for thy sake. Our selues, nor life, our soule, Doe as thou please controule. By all thy deeds of honour, Which thou hidst in a manner. DEARE, grat this Boone, past bee, Tis (all) we bog of thee. How pleasing this song was vnto mine eares, you may (kinde Father) easilie sup∣pose, seeing it was so much in the commendation of my Ladie: for the faithfull Louer indeed, maketh more account of the honour and credit of his Mistris, then of his owne, and whoso doth otherwise, is not a true seruant, but a despitefull enemie. This feast continued a long time, being both grieuous, and gladsome vnto me; first grieuous, because I could not haue thee companie of my deare Diana, and then ioy∣full, to see how much it did redowne vnto her honour. For the desire of glorie is so sweet, that as sugar sweetneth such things as are most bitter, so it maketh all paines and troubles seeme light and pleasant: I wishing in my minde, that my FAITH might growe to be famous, rather then mine owne selfe, which was the reason, I did the better endure to be absent from her, because I perceiue that it was for her renowne. This made me haue patience perforce, which I easilie broo∣ked, by reason I sawe that in my minde during all these Solemnities pleased me, as much as that thing did, for which I so eagerly and earnestlie attended and lookt for. Willingly would I haue thrust my selfe amongst them to daunce, to haue assisted therest, according vnto my slender power, and to haue (the more) praised my Ladie, but I durst not, neither would they haue receiued me into their companie, I knowing, that mortall things ought not to be mingled with diuine, and that nothing could vnite and ioyne together the high Empire of Inpirer, with the base ruling of Caesar. Yet in the
meane time, I was so foolish in my conceits, that (I thought) it grieued my Deare, be∣cause she could not haue leisure to speake vnto me: but I was farre wide from the mat∣ter, for the pleasure and glorie which inuironed her round about, drowned all other ima∣ginations, excepting onely that, wherewith she was so highly honored. And had not this carryed her minde away, and busied it about the same, yet had she neuer (so much) as once thought vpon mee, because shee did not affect me at all: nei∣ther bare me any good will, but as she did ordinarily vnto others. Such is the humour of Louers, that judge euery one by their owne selues, as if it were necessarie and expedient that euery one should be as fond, as they themselues are foolish. What should I say more, but that as one rauished through too much ioy, I be∣held my Goddesse so earnestly, and with such zeale, as I perswaded my selfe, she was the true Goddesse indeed: and therevpon I imagined, that she being raised to so high a dig∣nitie, would (no more account of me, then she had done heretofore) of my verses: for (commonly) prosperitie maketh men insolent and proude. And yet againe, I was not a little glad of her good Fortunes, because I gessed that by that meanes, none could rightly blame me, for being an Attendant vpon so excellent a Virgin as shee was: who was so respectiuely vsed of all sorts. Passing well did I like of their Deuises and Sonnets, but onely for one thing, which was, that in one place, they prayed and wished her, that shee should not make account of Loue: and this one word was it, that made mee thinke the worse of all the rest of the Song: as one limbe of a man cut off from his bodie, deformeth all the rest of his per∣sonage. But you need not to wonder, that I tooke this matter so hainously, for I (forsooth) thought I had some interest in her, when indeed there was no such thing. I afterwards bethinking my selfe, that if she would haue disposed of her selfe to loue, she then would haue chosen some one farre more worthie then I was, on whome to cast her good li∣king. Neuerthelesse, I excused the Nymphes, for that which they had saide, knowing that it pleased their Princesse well, to make such a motion vnto her: and the rather, be∣cause I thought I was not likely (in hast) to be the man whome shee meant to affect. What will you more? The feast (was now) at an ende, my Ladie tooke againe her owne former apparell, returned vnto her olde place and meadow, and there liued as shee was wont to doe. No sooner did I see her, but that I played the humble Publican, looking vpon her a sarre off, and not once daring to approach nigh vnto her: doubting least I should find her more hautie and furlie then before-times, by reason of her great aduancement, and good fortunes bestowed on her. And yet I hoped my verses would be an occasion that I should haue accesse vnto her, although (to say the truth) I feared greatly that she would not much care, neither for them, nor for me: Holding them (thus) in my hand, and not daring to present them vnto her. One while I tooke them out of my pocket, thinking to offer them vnto her, and so stood doubtfull betweene both what to doe: Not vnlike vnto a young scholler, who (whilst hee is going vnto his maister, to craue licence to goe play) hath many conceits running in his head, not daring (when hee commeth before him) to begge leaue, for feare least he should be denyed. Oftentimes I repented me that euer I had deuised them, seeing I had lost so much time and leisure to write them outo faire, and now was readie to teare them in pieces. In the ende, I tooke courage, knowing the worst was but a deny all: hoping well of her, because I was well assured that the frutes of the Muses were honoured and estee∣med, euen of their owne enemies, yea and of the most worst and leaudest people in the world. Drawing nigh then, I (presently) perceiued the excellencie of my Mistris spirit, for I found her more affable then shee was, before she had bene so much aduaunced in houor. I saw her to be one of those wise Sages, who are neither puffed vp with aduance∣ment of good Fortune, nor taken downe, through too extreame miseries of the same. I perceiued that firme constancie lodged in her soule, and that she caried the same coun∣tenance in prosperitie, as she would haue done, if she had bene in aduersitie.
Marius the noble Romane, deseruing no more to be drawen with one and the selfe∣same countenance alwayes, then shee was, when neither ioy nor sorrow could chaunge her. After I had with a solemne Congé, and lowe cursie, deliuered my verses vnto her, shee with a milde looke accepted them, and as mee thought, liked indifferently well of them: For neuer did she giue ouer, vntill she had throughly red them. Whilst I (In the meane time) fearing like the criminell, who doubtfully attendeth the award, either of life or death) beganne to consider within my selfe, of her vertue, mine eyes beholding her beautie, my heart contemplating vpon her glorie, and all my sences trembling for feare, least I should haue offended her: Iudge then, in what an extremitie I was, when being as it were in an extasie, I could not so much as once moue my hands, not stirre my foote, from off the place where I stood, resembling that senslesse Statue of the Sunne, which the Rhodians made so much account of. No sooner had shee red them, but that shee beganne thus curteously to speake vnto mee. Employ not anie more (good Shepheard) thy time thus, who am not worthie thereof. For if thou takest this small and homely beautie of mine to be the subiect of thy Muse, assure thy selfe, that then thou soone wilt want matter. To things perfect, are praises due, and not vnto vnperfect, and to such sillie Crea∣tures as I am. Robbe not so manie Heroicall spirits, and exquisite wittes, of thy verse, when they deserue it so rightly. Nor doe not bestowe the same on mee, who knoweth not what it is to doe well, whereby I may merit praise. Ill doth hee imploy his Muse, or rather prophane it, who bestoweth it about the commendations of imperfect things, because the nature thereof being diuine, it ought not to discourse, but of diuine and celestiall subiects. Homer neuer sung of Thersistes, nor of thousands more of Greekes, vnworthie to be named: but onely of stout Achil∣les, of valiant Hector, of prudent Vlisses, and of venturous Aiax, with such others. Chaunge then thy Theame, and make the world see by some rare worke of thine, how much thou art able to doe through the power of the Muses: and that thou art fit and worthie to describe the valiant and Martiall exployts of peerlesse and Princely Po∣tentates, in a proud and loftie flile. Wee ought not to weare our wedding garment vpon working dayes. That which iustly appertaineth vnto God, ought to be rendred vnto him: and after him, that which is due vnto Princes, and so then vnto meaner persons, euery one their owne, according vnto their estate and degree. More delight shall I take to read thy verses, when they shall be filled with a stately vaine, and when they shall sound forth the Martiall praises of such great States, as shall euerie way deserue the same: and yet I will not refuse these thou hast bestowed on me, but will keepe them, because they are excellent pleasing: Marie (heereafter) I would aduise thee to spend thy time better, and to write of some grauer matter, and of more importance then heretofore thou hast done: that neither Time, not Death, may be able to destroy the same. I being emboldened with this her speech, stayed not long to an∣swere her, replied thus. Fairest, amongst the most faire, and worthie to be accounted wise, amongst the wi∣sest; Although I cannot chuse but confesse, that vertue is of so great puissance and force, as shee is able to commaund out soules, to dispose of our hearts, as shee shall thinke best her selfe. Yet cannot shee let and hinder Honor, to pra and commend what is most wor∣thie. The more wise folkes refuse glorie, the more will glorie follow them, and honor them: And the more folkes pursue the same, the more it flieth away from them, and disdaineth them. The bodie cannot mooue, nor liue without soule: No more can vertue be with∣out glorie. If the Gods themselues holde thee for faire, for vertuous, and for wise, and if the immortall Nymphes make account of thee for such a one, and respect thee for the same; Why then wilt thou refuse this small praise my mournefull Muse giueth thee? If I am deceiued, so are the Gods deceiued: If I erre, the Nymphs haue erred. And if I haue done amisse, so haue all the Demy-gods of the Forrest likewise. But gratious
Diana, no man can doe amisse, in imitating the Gods, in as much as they are not subiect vnto vice, and for that they vse not to sinne. Why then doest thou blame mee, in that I follow them? Penelope, so renowmed for chastitie, hath neuer bene of that worth that thou art of: nor Cassandra more learned. Helene was neuer more beautious, nor Enone more wise: whilst in the meane time, euery one of these (for one only rare gift that was within them) haue caused thousands of Poets to sweat in their praises: why then shouldest thou who art possessed of all these goodly vertues alone, refuse that honor which is so rightly due vnto thee? But alas, what say I? Great reason hast thou to refuse such a poore praise, as com∣meth from one so simple and weake a Poet as my selfe. For the glory which the igno∣rant giue vnto the wise, may rather be tearmed a discredit, then ame honor vnto them. Yet such as I am, I beseech you accept of me: imitating Alexander the great, who cheri∣shed & gratiously entertained, as well bad, as good writers, as did blazon forth his praise. For although (through want of skill) the ignorant man faileth very much of this marke, by reason he cannot explaine and shewe forth the effects of his good will as he desireth; yet cannot it let him from manifesting the good will it selfe: which alwayes is accoun∣ted for the first part of the worke. Permit then, my poore Muse, to celebrate thy re∣nowme: thou being farre more fairer then the Cassandra of great Ronsard, more chaste then the Oliua of Hunny, mother Bellay, and more perfect, then the Diana of courteous De Reports. For a more diuine subiect, my Muse could neuer chuse; my pen could neuer write of a daintier matter; my wit could neuer finde a fairer fielde to walke in; nor my tongue, a sweeter Theame whereon to discourse. And shouldest thou denie me, yet would I not giue ouer to praise thee: for not onely do I hold thee worthy to be worthie thereof, but also account thee the onely shee, that heercafter I will celebrate and make famous, as mine onely Ladie and Mistris. (Shepheard answered shee) affection oftentimes blindeth the eyes of the wise, and good will is euer partiall in the praises of his friends. What soeuer a man loueth, that (ne∣uer) seemeth soule nor deformed: because Desire is the childe of faire, pleasa and a∣greeable things, and for that none will couet that which hee thinketh or, imagineth to be loathsome or deformed. And this is the reason that many haue praised vice, and discommended Vertue: wri∣ting most foolishly, as their passions haue led them, without respecting, or once hauing any regard vnto the Truth it selfe. Dido was reported by Virgil to be amorous and wanton: yet was she chaste. Vlisses by Homer, to be more valiant then Alax, whom he durst not look in the face. And Aeneas o be pittifull, and godly vnto his Countrey, and yet it was he, that (most vngodlily) be∣trayed the same vnto his enemie. Poets write according vnto their owne humors, when they please, but not accor∣ding as the Truth it selfe is indeed. And so thy forward affection onely, and not the night, thrusteth thee forward, to take pen in hand in my behalfe. But what mayst thou expect to follow vpon the same (hereafter) but onely that men will say of thee, as I haue saide of Homer and Virgil, that thy fancie hath made thee to affect and commend, that which was not any way praise-worthie of it selfe. Thou wilt stand me in no other steed, then to reuiue the memoriall of mine imperfections after my death, which were farre better to be buried with me in my graue, then to be bruited abroad. Content thee, therefore I pray thee, and let it be sufficient that I am knowne to be full of defects now I am aliue, without making me to be remembred for such (hereafter) when I shall be dead. If thou louest me (as thou makest a showe thou doest) then loue my memorie also: for wee ought not so much to respect things present, which wee see whilest we liue, as we should doe those that are to come hereafter. The reason is for that we may finde some one remedie. For the first, whilst wee remaine (here) in this world. But for the latter wee cannot: because we are not (heere) to make meanes for the same. Be not then the occasion that my name shall be called in question, when (for that I am then dead) I cannot come to excuse my selfe as I would.
For happie are such worthie persons, as leaue no remembrance of their Imperfec∣tions, after they are gone out of this world, least the people should call againe vnto minde their faults, and so condemne them for the same: And also thy verses (testifying the great affection and good will thou bearest me) will also show apparantly my defects, and what was amisse in me. For who doubteth but that Louers (in respect of the great loue they beare vnto their Ladies) hide vnder the colours of their smoothe and dainty kinde of Enditings, all the faults and defects they haue, be they neuer so foule? There is none so vehement a passion as Loue, neither is there any thing that doth so much wrong to Truth as that doeth: in such wise, as women should rather take these praises, for a discredit, then for a credit vnto them, which they receiue of their Louers. And this is mine opinion, which all the perswasions in the world shall neuer make me chaunge. Faire Nymphes (replyed I then) because Loue is mightie and celestiall, therefore doth hee neuer intermeddle amongst the basest and meanest creatures, especially with such as are deformed. For neuer is there anie hard fauoured face beloued. Who (then) will belieue otherwise, but that Ladie that shall be found to be honoured by  graue Poet, is otherwise then a most perfect and accomplisht Creature euery way, seeing perfection (onely) hath authoritie ouer our soules, which hateth as much the thing that is deformed, as it adoreth that which is faire. How exquisite and excellent a Virgin was the faire Laura of renowned Petrar and how much haue his workes brought liuely credit vnto her praises? The Muses ne∣uer sung of vnworthy subiects  And although some may thinke, that a Poet can make huge Elephant of a little Flie, yet cannot he commend an vnhonest matter, and worthy of reproach (although he faine would.) Because the Muses (who are the sounding Tru pets of Heroicall mindes) would oppose themselues against him. No, no, faire (Dame) chast and modest writings neuer alter the honor of any Gen∣tlewoman. Many haue written of Lucretia, and their discourses haue made her the more famous, throughout the whole world. For as the remembraunce of infamous person is much detested and hated by the Muses: So is the glorie and renowne of the ven∣ous installed by them in eternall memorie for euer. What are men but dust, if the Muses should not make them suruiue after they are dead, and liue in the world againe? Hee neuer leaueth this world, whom the Muses doe grace so much, as to paint his egregious Acts in the Temple of memorie, when his suc∣cessors and succeeders beholde him continuallie, with great admiration and wonder, by which meanes hee dieth no more, then such sacred and noble minds, doe, who are obliged and bound vnto the Muses, as Achilles and Hector were, with diuers other. Refuse not (then, gratious Nymph) the commendations of my Muse, although too base for thee, which shall neuer cease, nor giue ouer, to sing of thy vertues, according vnto thine owne minde and pleasure. For the Muses are the waiting Gentlewomen of Vertue, and are bound to reserue the memories of all such as haue liued , and with honor: So that if Vertue force her owne enemies, to reuerence her? much more can shee compell the Muses to doe the like, they being obliged by dutie to be alwayes at her call, and to attend vpon her. Scipis the great, after he had giuen ouer Rome, was daily visited by the Pyrates of the Sea: which men (although in their owne proper nature) they were cruell and wic∣ked, yet neuertheles were they forced by reason of his vertue, to honor him, comming so farre out of their way, onely to see so famous a Captaine, and kissing his victorious hands, as if he had bene some great God. So Casar likewise, after hee was taken prisoner by certaine Rouers of the Seas, was much respected of the same Theeues for his vertue, although hee threatned them, to hang them, when hee should come on land. Denie not then (diuine Dazell) the frutes of my Muse, but giue her leaue to doe her good will, who hash vowed to praise thee, although thou forbid the same. I will not then hinder thee (answered the Nymphe,) because I see thou art resolute Yet this I will tell thee, that as it is a pleasant pastime to labour and sowe, where a man
may reape the fruit thereof againe, with increase: So is it most grieuous and intollera∣ble, when one shall toyle and sweate, night and day, and yet obtaine no recompence for the same. When thy Muse shall haue composed thousands of verses in mine honour, and when thou hast made whole volumes, perined and endited at large, written whole∣lie for my credit, yet what profite doest thou hope for at my handes: Or what shalt thou get thereby? They say, that Baccus and Cupid, as they were one day going a hunting, caught Mi∣nerua in their Nettes: If so it were, (no doubt) it was with her owne consent. For I doe not thinke, that anie can force one to loue or affect him, whether the partie will or no. Neither shall thy writings, nor thy perswasions, euer take mee in their Trappes; For where the Iudge is iust and vncorrupt, there is no altering, nor wresting of Iustice, nor can his vertue be dimmed or abused with presents or gifts. So likewise, neuer looke for anie commoditie by thy studie, at my hands: For so should I buy them too too deare; Inasmuch, as nothing is to be rated at so high a price, as our good Name or Fame is. For euery thing that is lost, may be recouered else a∣gaine, but the losse of this, is deplorable, and altogether impossible to be obtained, when it is once gone. But say I should beleeue thee, and yeeld vnto thee in this point, that thy loue to∣wards mee is sacred and iust, yet art thou so simple, to thinke that those that shall come hereafter, will imagine the same? and that they will iudge (thy flowring youth) and the spring-tide of thy life, hauing bene spent in my behalfe, and for mine occasion, thou hast found no recompence nor guerdon of me, for so great paines? So that if whilst I liue, I can hardly keepe mine honour from blame, yet when I am dead, I cannot preserue it from the suspition thereof, it being become a prey vnto most venemous and slaunde∣rous tongues; For this I will tell thee (Shepheard) the presence of a man (oftentimes.) withholdeth manie things from being spoken against his credit and good name, which when hee is absent, the mischieuous and malignant sort will not sticke to report and blaze abrode. And although I know that euery kinde of friendship is not dishonest, but that ma∣nie haue loued for pure vertue onely: yet can wee not let euery one from speaking as they shall please, and it is left vnto the conceits of those, as shall be then liuing, to thinke according vnto their owne humours and will, and to belieue as they list, because there is none to forbid them the contrarie. But in the meane space, how many is there in the world, that will rather speake ill then well, and giue forth bad speeches, then once thinke good thoughts, especially such kinde of people as speake of spite, who because they are bad themselues, therefore they will report malitiously of others, that are better then themselues, onely of ill will, and for nothing else. These reasons make mee take small taste in thy writings, when they shall prooue more damageable then profitable vnto mee, and chiefly, if by their meanes, I chaunce to be defamed any way; For, for glorie onely (it being accompanied with vertue) may mortall men account themselues worthie, both of the name of men, and of immorrall renowne, and not for any thing else. Gratious Ladie and Mistris (replied Arcas) is it possible that the Sunne should shine at mid-day, and yet not be seene with our eyes? And can anie be so blinde, as to take that glorious Lampe for night, seeing so many bright and glittering beames to issue from the same? And so likewise, do you thinke it is likely, that anie one dare be so shamelesse and impudent, to slaunder the spotlesse vertue of an immaculate Virgin, whome euery one knoweth to be both prudent and chaste? Those that are replenished with vertue, can neuer blame such a one, because shee is as they are, and resembleth her: And if the vitious and foolish seeke to backbite her, then doth her glorie increase the more. For that they see (by daily experience) that shee is nothing vnto them, in as much as in malitious sort, they seeke to oppugne and rise vp against her.
And if this (which you say) should be true, then should the world thinke ill of so ma∣nie worthie and vertuous women, who are commended in the workes of diuers Poets. Then should Cassandra the Troyan, Penelope, Pelixena, Portia, Lucretia, Alcesta, and diuers others, be but hardly thought of which neuertheles, we see commended throughout the world: there not being found any of so foule a tougue, that dare to speak against them. No, no, it is not so easie a matter to burie and interre the glorie of the vertuous, for vertue shineth still, in despite of all her enemies, although they seeke (but yet in vaine) by many strong and subtill deuises to eclipse and ouerthrow the same. And though Virgill haue written against modest Dido, yet is shee made famous for her honestie, and so accounted of (despite) of such as thought to darken and smother such rare and admirable vertues, as were within her. Vpon diuers considerations, and with diuers kinde of conceits, haue the learned written of women: And an easie matter is it, to iudge by the stile, by the phrase, and by the affection of the writer, if they were chaste and vertuous or no: For it is not possible that he that describeth an vnhonest woman (and of whom he hath had his plea∣sure) can carrie that awfull respect, that temperate moderation, and that dutifull feare in his stile towards her; as well, and in as good order, as that man that doth blazon forth (although he loueth her well) the admirable vertues of a chaste and modest Ladie, be∣cause one cannot (although he would) respect or feare, that which is his owne, or rather is in Common, as well vnto others, as vnto himselfe. But of her that is chast, sober, and well qualified, a man cannot speak, but with great aduise, and mature deliberation, as when wee speake of the Gods, because we haue no in∣terest in her. Then is it but a hard interpretation, to thinke that the modest and regardfull wri∣tings, of a loyall Louer, bring any disparagement vnto the faire vertues of his louely Mistris: when she shall so highly be praised, in that she hath with stood so many strong assaults of such as haue laide batterie against the inuincible Fort of her admirable chasti∣tie, and when euerie one shall see, and reade, of her more then rare qualities, drawne and painted forth in their liuely and right colours, with the cunning pensill of the loftie verse of her most faithfull seruant. And after this manner (O diuine Diana) doe I pretend to write of thee, and make thee famous, and when thou findest that I meane otherwise, then let most shamefull death befall mee; defacing and ouerthrowing mee, and my writings, as most vnwor∣thie to be seene, or looked vppon, or (once to be remembred) within the memories of man. But yet (answered the Nymph) I would faine know what you shall get by louing me? For neuer shall you find (as long as I liue) that I will be Scholler vnto Loue, so cruell and vniust a Maister hee is. And to prooue that this is true by example, seeing no reason will satisfie you, I will not stick to take the paines to tell you a strange historie. Herevpon, faire Diana placing her selfe in the middest of the other Nymphes (who as I) were rauished at her great wisedome, beganne to recount her Tragedie, with a most pleasing grace, in this sort following. About what time the earth (withouten sowing) plentiously, Brought vnto men their Haruest rich, (and that continually) When as the wisht for bearded Corne, which Ceres forth doth bring, Waxt ripe, without all cockle bad, in fields faire glistering. When bended Trees, in Autums raine, with burdens there did grone, So full of fruit they hung, without deceiuing any one. When euery hedge a vineyard was, and that in goodly show, Thousand, and thousand bunches thicke, of grapes each where did grow. When as the harmelesse flocks of beasts, and thick-woolld bleating sheepe, Did rou themselues abroad alone, and on the mountaines keepe. When all the long day, Heads of Cattell grazde euery where, Withouten doubt of Wolfe, or Foxe, of Tyger or of Beare.
When Elmes and Reech, with stately Okes, drop honie downe amaine, Which on the plants and tender hearbes, in deawie wise did raine. Before that any thunder cracke, and lightnings flashie blast, On flintie marble Rocks did seaze, and them in middest brast. When all was quiet, full of peace, and when this selfe same place, Blessed Astrea with her gifts most happilie did grace. When fire and sword, hard Iron and steele, were banished away, Which (at the first) the causers were, of worlds and mans decay. When that in steed of blood and warre, was nothing but milde peace, Which made the earth, with thousand ioyes, to flourish and encrease. In that blest time and happie age, a Shephear desse did liue, To whom (all) for her beautie rare, the palme and prize did giue. Thrise happie Stella was she clapt, and well she might be so, For neuer starre in firmament, more faire and bright did show. As Luna when in midst of pride she sheweth, in frostie night, With sparkling lights, attended on; so shon her beautie bright. But yet (alas) the mortall woes, and hard end she did passe, Did testifie but too too well, that sh not happie was. The names of things to the natures oft; accord and well agree, And yet to the names, the natures (oft) discordant shew to bee. Malitious LOVE, as subtill spie, abounding in all malice, Amongst sweet pleasures, seekes to sowe errors and shamefull vice. He likes (alife) sorrow and griefe, to chop our ioyes among, And pleasure ours, to turne to paine, the more to doe vs wrong. Iealous he is of mortalls good, of their sweet ease and rest, And in their actions (them to crosse) he makes an vsualliest. This made him cast himselfe into the eies of this maide faire, Which as a torch scru de for to set a fire most deadly care. Of her bright glaunces (diammds right) he forged all his darts, With which he (as mercifull) did pierce the loyalst harts. Her flaxen haires were bands, wherewith (as Conquor) he controld, And bound most fast, the soules that were most wariest and most bold. Of her sweet smiles and pleasing speech, he made a luring baite, Through which, to rauish minde and sense he (couert) lay in waite. As with the sound of his rare. Harpe, when Orpheus vsde to sing, Hard stubborne Rocks and liuelesse woods, he forst to follow him. As beasts and Birds did tend on him, as gastly spirit of hell: To list to Musicke his, of their owne mindes did them compell. And as the fowler slie, by note of his deceitfull pipe, The simple Bird (vnwittingly) arawes in his net to light. And as the adamant, that nere by lightning taketh flawe, The Iron by a secret power vnto him close doth drawe. So by the louely smiles, and by the sugred speech and grace, Of this rare Damozell, Loue did charme the minds of men apace. By th'unnie of her daintie tongue, they too too credulous, Themselues did offer for to fall in daunger perilous. Now in this place liu'd Shepheards twaine, the proprests of all others, Instuture tall, and vpright height, there were not two such Louers. Nor were they onely goodly wights, but strong withall and stout, Oft they the Beare and Lion chaste the Forrest all about. For hunting (at that time) was al their sport and their delight, This pleasing trauaile being the life, that pleased them aright. Nor was (as then) knowne vnto them, Bellonas bloodie rage, Nor did vaine Loue seeke them to vex, in prime of their greene age. No brawles, nor loud debates mongst them, was there, them for to grieue, Old Saturne in the golden world, more happier did not line.
(Withouten tilling,) store of corne came forth of fruitfull field, Withouten dressing viniards aught, the Viniards, grapes did yeeld. Their beasts increast, Sanus taking paine, their Muttons brought forth wooll; Their bleating Ewes with skipping Lambs were alwaies big & full. But now (behold) in Ambuscade, how Loue doth lie alwaies, Meaning with vncoth cruelties, his honour more to raise. Sezing vpon them (through his might) and on their liberties, The better for to make them tast of his disloyalties. For one day as those harmelesse Swaines did homewards come amaine, Halfe windelesse, and halfe wearied in pursuing of their game, Each of them, a huge wilde Boores head, holding within their hand, Tirde with their sport they had abroad, drie, as they could scarce stand To drinke, and rest themselues awhile, they to a spring did come, Whose water was as colde as Ice, and cleare as any Sunne. A stately Rocke from forth the foote, did issue of this spring, Bout which, a thousand Cipresse Trees stood thicke innironing. Into this Fountaine (as they say) a Nymph was chaungde sometimes, (And it might well be) for most bright and glorious like it shines. Round all about the same, of Turfs most greene was there a seate, By artificiall Nature framde, most pleasnt and most neate. Here meant they to repose themselues, and here they meant to lie, Whilst with this water coole, they sought to quench their thirst ore drie. But as they thought to lay them downe vpon this bankeside cold, They might a wonderous beautie rich, soundly to sleepe behold. And Stella faire it was, for then, Shepheards might at that time, A middest Shephear desses sleepe, without suspect of crime. (As then) their modest chastitie to staine, each one did feare. For, as they in their mindes were chast, so they in bodie were. Amazde they stood at this sweet face, their drought they had forget, For now another thirst then that, did drie them farre more hot. Nor cared they (now) for to sleepe, all sleepe they banisht quite, Whilst they as dreaming stood, to view such an vnlookt for sight. They play the wanton Louers (now) whilst with their rolling eie, They nothing doe but onely marke how sweetely she doth lie. As senslesse Rocke, Sanus power they seeme, nor can they stir or rise, Nor other pleasure take they, but to marke her with their eies. Meane time, this beautious face, which them doth gently to her traine, Smiles, as she sleepes, to see how they doe blush (orecome with shame. So is he daunted, who orebold with ouer-daring winke, Thats able for to looke against the Sunnie beames doth thinke. So such as are presumptuous, did too too fondly stare Vpon Medusa, into stones, and flints, soone changed were. Our Shepheards (so being rauished) would neuer lin nor rest, To view one while her louely face, and then, her milke-white brest. Another while they marke her long and yellow flaxen haire, Which gentle windes (as waues of Seas) did mone, now here, now there. Not halfe so faire the golden locks of stubborne Absolon Shewed, as were hers, nor did they seeme so trimme, to looke vpon. Her forhead large, they then did view, as smooth as any Iet, Where (oft) the Graces, in their pride (to make them merrie) met. Nor they forgot her Eielids small, which Loue with his pure fire, Had somewhat blackish made to seeme, the more to breed desire. Rare Eielids, which through her two spheres, euen mongst the very Gods, (Through kind of shadowing sweet) did make them more admirde by ods. Her eies as then they could not view, her eies with Diamonds right, Which, when they opte, the heauen, did shew, discouering true delight.
Then to her matchlesse mouth they come, most daintie, Sanus compare, How often wisht they it to kisse, but that they durst not dare. A iust report did them debarre, so much for to forget Themselues, as that to doe which might be vnto them a let. Whereby their Ladies afterward they might offend and grieue, Which (fore a loyall Louer so would doe) he would not iue. Vpon her cherrie lippe, where die of Gillsflowers did flowe, The damaske Rose along the same, ranne spredding too and fro. Her beautious cheeke, most freshly shewde, like the Vermillion flower, Cheekes, which (harts made of flintie Rocke) for to controde, had power. Her dimpled chinne, and snowy necke, the Tower of statelines, Not Iunos necke so seemely shewd, and Vents, farre was lesse. So were her brests imbellished with riches manifold, Ah who so faire a sight could see, and not be ouerbold? There was the bosome which did part the milkie way aright, That leades into the golden field, the center of delight. There were those sacred mountaines twaine, where perfect ioy doth rest. None mount those hallowed hills, but such as borne were to be blest. O pleasure vnconceiu'd, to haue the grace them for to touch, But to haue licence them to kisse, to die it were not much. Her supple hand in seemely sort did lie, and comely wise, Her fingers such, as fault to find in them none could denise. And last of all (though couered) stretcht out her round clne fs, Supporter of that building braue, of beautions forme the roote. The rest (and better part) lay hid, yet what was to be seene, (To make one lose his libertie) enough and more had bene. Had Ioue seene one but halfe so faire, he had of her esteed, Mars would haue yeelden, Phoebus sde, and well of her . Thus at one time, these Shepheards twain, are faine to be in loue, Whilst one and selfesame griefe, they both st at one time . Their soules are touched to the quicke, with this one , Of thousand amorous wishes sweet, they . LOVE, hath two arrowes, one of gold , The others lead, and that doth quench by . Th'one on the sodaine pierceth, but the other doth no harme, Th'one doth encrease the fire, the other gainst it is at harme. These two strange darts of Cupid proud, Stella felt in her , Th'one forc't her loue, but the other did all one with checke contr. One of these Shepheards she did like, the other she Did hate, against the sillie wretch a monstrous spight she . Th'one Coridon was cald, whom she in hart The other, Aridon, into a hard Rocke attered. But now (to come where as we left) our Shepheardesse doth . And lifting vp her head, she leaue (as then), of sleepe did take. For she was frighted with a dreame, that did not please her well, A dreame (that as an Oracle) did her . But when she sawe these Shepheards twaine, she , To see them lie so night to her, she wonder did the more. Yet this her wondring, her became the better, cause she blusht, Whilst she more faire did shew, when through her face the colour flasht. Her eies she cast on the ground, and at  so looke, By them (vpon the soden) she durst not vpon them to looke. That done, with sad and heedfull eare, she doth about her prit, Lest, what not comely had bene, they about her In th'end, she findes all well, not much Who doubts some theenes, but hauing found , their doth not fee.
Mean time, poore Cloridou, who is perplext most dangerus, Takes heart at grasse, whilst boldly he, gins to accost her thus, Faire light of my best life, why art thou thus possest with care, When heauent themselues, they vertuous life, hurt cannot, nor once dare? Chaste is thy soule, vertuous thy minde, most beautifull thy face, No Tyger fierce, or Lion fell, thy beautie dare disgrace. The diuels themselues cannot thee hurt, why doubts thou? things diuine, Are not (as mortall be) to shame subiect at any time. The Gods, haue made thee goodly, that the heauens might honour thee, Our spirits, are bodies framde, that thou by vs mighst worshipt bee. Thee will we serue in humble wise, with dutifull respect, Nor whilst we liue (as vs becomes) our duties weele neglect. Then sacred Saint, thy selfe assure, my soule thus languishing, No bad conceit through carriage mine, to thee shall euer bring. No rash attempt (vndecently) shall make me ouerbold With her  home Mistris of my hart, and my chiefe good I hold. Then doe all dread abandon quite, looke merrie, and be blithe, For we both honour thee, and for thy Loue contend and strine. So said the Shepheard, whilst that Loue did shoote in cunning wise, Fancies swift darts into his hart, which came from Stellas eies, From Stellas eies, who now begins to felle an vncoth flame, And who doth finde (as Cloridan) to bide the selfesame paine. She findes she forced is to loue, although against her will, And more she seekes him to expell, the more be enreth still. The Shepheards words are wounds to her, and pierce her like a dart, His speeches breaches be, which soone make entrance in her hart. And now (on soden) Cloridon she liketh (and sowell,) As (in her sight) for beautie he doth onely heare the bell. And so likewise doth Cloridan thinke of his daintie Loue, Vowing within his soule, that death shall not her thence . So in the Phrigian forrest thicke, when Paris liu de . In Enons Loue (he was intrapt) and (for the same) did , Of whose deare loue, that loyall Nymph so highly did esteeme, As after he was slaine, to mourne for him she (ai) was seene. But Stella somewhat fearfull now, and blushing in this case, Vnto her Shepheard thus replide, with comely bashfull grace. A worthie Shepheard (like thy selfe) I neuer doubted yet, That (for to offer wrong to me) his honour would forget. The minde that generous is indeed, and doth for glris made. Is nere so base, as to abuse a sillie harmelesse maide. His honour he doth holy wracke vpon discredits shelfe. That hauing others conquered braue, cannot orecome himselfe. It better him becomes to bunt, the Lion or the Bare. The greedie Wolfe, wilde Boore and fierce, then sillie Daze fe. No glorie tis, much for to force, or proudly to command, As haue no might, nor any power, such furie to withstand. But I assure me of thy selfe, and that I trust thee th, Thou seest, I doe not flie from thee, as one ore time . Besides (with blushing) I confesse, thou art the first of all, That hast against my will, enforct me follow Cupid call. A soule thou hast (that Loue as now) compelleth to be thine, Loue that doth both our harts in one, in loyall bands combine. That Loue which makes me yeeld to thee for to be ouerthrowne, That Loue, which Tyrant-like denies, that I shall be mine owne. Then looke that in this loue, thou doe mine  still preserue, It being all, that for our paines, me righly shall deserue.
For thou shalt sooner Stella see in graue for to remaine, Before that any vitious soule, her vertuous life shall staine. Shee'le rather die a thousand times, for constant amitie, The treasure is, which I doe rate at endlesse price so hie. Chastely to loue in vertuous sort, is sure a worthie thing, And heauens themselues to modest Loue, a ioyfull end will bring. Remember then what I doe say, or trouble me no more, Faire words without performance true, I loathe and doe abore. So Stella said, and Cloridan to heare these words of ioy, So rauisht was, as now he quite forgot all former noy. Nor could he speake for gladnes, while his hart did leape within, He knew not how to frame his tale, or which way to begin. As dead men we, through ouermuch displeasing griefe, become, So sudden pleasure ouermuch, stops passage of our tongue. Both th'one and th'other, oftentimes, vs too too much doth moue, Extremities of both (without a meane) we often proue. Many through pleasure die, their daies many doe end through woe. Griefe kills our sences sodenly, and ioy likewise doth so. And after winter, many stormes and rainie shewers apace, The Sunne begins (by little) for to shew to vs his face. The plants and Trees reuiue againe, looking both fresh and greene, Which in the frostie season cold, through snow did lie vnseene. So at the last, the Shepheard got his wonted speech againe, And pleasure former dread and feare, did chase away Which being gone, as soone as time did breath to him affoord, In humbl wise, he once more thus began her for to boord. (Sweet Ladie) since the law diuine of Cupid heauenly king, Such fauours great doth shew to me, (not of my meriting) And that I blest am so, that to your hart mine tied is, (A cause our chast desires are like for to obtaine rare blisse.) And since our mindes are so vnite, and knit in bonds so strong, As death it selfe with all his force, shall neuer doe vs wrong. I vow for to be yours alone, hap ill to me or well, Despite of destinie, despite of Fortune, spite of hell. For to be loued of thy selfe, it passeth, and is such, As like no glorie is on earth for to be found by much. When Adon Venus did enioy, so blessed was not he, Nor Pirams loue to Thisbe could, so hot and ardent be. The Gods themselues in glorie theirs, who are redoubtable, In pleasure with me to compare cannot, nor are not able. More fortunate am I then they, my hart is more content, Then when Ioue with Europa liu'd, and time away so spent. A thousand Almours in my minde I feele for to be hid, More sweet, then when Leander kind, embrace his Hero did. With Paris vaine, is Hellens ioy compared vnto mine, My fancies are so sweet, they seeme as if they were diuine. None is so happie as my selfe; th' Ambrosia of the Gods, Not so much liketh them, as doth my life like me, by ods. Ah then amongst contentments such, doe not me so much grieue, As for to thinke to offer thee dishonour I would liue. No, no, I held thee too too deare, and at too high a rate, And more of thee, I doe esteeme, then of mine owne estate. Wrong me not so, for from the heauens, the Sunne shall swiftly fall, And I my life will sacrifice, before that happen shall. A great offence with punishment, most grieuous plagued is, Then thinke not ile forget my selfe, to doe (so much) amisse.
And that I will performe my word my promise thou shalt haue, So that (with leaue) my mouth of thee this tinie Boone may craue. Onely to kisse thy sacred hand, is that which I request, That hand of thine, which being toucht, shall make me (liuing) blest. No other good (for all my paines) then this I will require, For all my loue, and my good will, I will no way desire. Graunt me my suit, that as my soule is rauisht with thine eies, So by the same, may rauisht be, my life, in selfesame wise. Which if I shall obtaine, ile iudge, my ioyes for to abound, And that (so happie as my selfe) no Louer liues on ground. So said, his Mistris kind, to yeeld this fauour is content, Giuing her hand to him, which he doth kisse incontinent. Thrise blessed hand, which through thy power, doth quench so hot a flame, And through thy gentle touch, the rage asswagest of the same. She powers the drops of pittie, on his more than burning fire, And from his hart plucks forth those darts, there fixed through desire. And now is Cloridan content, and cased of his smart, He goeth no farther, nor makes shew from promise his to part. Yet in his hope is comfort hid, he hopes well in his minde, And in assurance he doth liue, some better good to finde. Meane space, Dan Phoebus leaues his worke, his take he hauing done, His place resigning, Sisters his, that she her course may runne. When being wearied of his toyle, he gets him to highed, Whilst Luna pale, amongst the clouds appeares, with horned hed. This is the cause that Cloridan, halfe angrie takes his leaue, Whilst homeward for to goe, his hart with thousand thoughts doth heaue. The day he doth accuse, as one, vnconstant wauering, That dai'es nere long enough, when one hopes, that good twill him bring. But he must packe from thence, and men the Gods ought to obay, Who haue as well the night ordained, as they did make the day. His leaue of Stella he doth take, and praieth her be so kind, That he next morning in that place, her louely selfe may find. Which she doth promise (halfe compeld) for Loue doth force her please Her amorous Swaine, and meanes to seeke his torments for to ease. And (now) both part, and goe their waies, whilst vndershadowing tree, They leaue their bleating flocks to rest, which (there) in safetie bee. For Woolues, no enemies (as then) were vnto any beast, The Tiger nor the Lion then, vpon them neuerceast. But Phoebus now was scarsely rose, his wonted course to make, Nor to his brightsome Chariot had, his firie horse betake; Nor was Aurora stollen yet, from aged Tithon side, To get vnto Eudimion leu'd, and there with hi to bide. When Cloridan (whose minde did run vpon his Mistris beautie, (To whom he had deuoted all his seruice and his dutie) Leapes from his couch, for he that hopes vpon some good lucke sweet, To (come next day) hath small desire to slumber or to sleepe. He to the old place maketh hast, to wait on those faire eies, Which spoyle his rest, yet to his hart, are kind in gratious wife. Meane time the Shepheard Aridon, that wretch most, miserable, To find such like (as Cloridan had found) he was not able. Most pitiously he languisheth, whilst Loue and ll his law, He curseth more then thousand times, of all his woes, the cause. Faine would he leaue to loue, since he seeth he can gaine no grace, And that the fruits of Loue, he nere is like for to embrace. But all in vaine, his destinie he can no waies prenens. Nor can he aught of ill resist, what powers diuine haue ent.
What he is able that he doth, but what doth it auaile, For man, LOVE to withstand, when Gods he forceth for to quaile? But as the Hart being sore hurt, the more that he doth seeke To ease him of his hurts, the more he worser is and weeke, So Aridon, in thinking how to rid him of his griefe, The worser waxeth still, and in the end, dieth sans reliefe. Nothing on earth the power of LOVE is able to controle: Like whirling Tempests, what denies, before him it doth role. So Aridon is not of strength, his feete for to retire, From forth that place that burneth him, with vnextinguisht Fire. Whilst Cloridon within himselfe, doth thinke how he is blest, Poore Aridon, his Fortunes bannes, from pleasures dispossest. Both equall in affection, but in comfort differing, Th'one sighes for his woes, the other stands his ioyes oft reckoning. Both like in passions, but in lucke, both too too contrarie, In pleasure th'one consumes his life, th'other for paine doth die. Vntill this time, the one vnto the other was a friend, Nor did the one against the other, mischieuous hate pretend. Before (as brethren sworne) they were, and so together liu'd, What th'one did like, the other lou'd, nor th'one the other grieu'd. But at the the last, faire Stellas loue, (alas that should be so) Causae this their amitie to end, and lesse and lesse to grow. The blinded Sonne of Mars, (who doth his Fathers heire right prooue) Strife and discention takes from Sire (and from his Mother) LOVE. For more he sets at variance, and whips with Discords roddes, Then be the harts he subingates, and brings to Loue by oddes. But now is Cloridan againe vnto that Spring returnd, Which quenched had the flame, in which before he wofull burnd. The comming of his Dame he stayes with great deuotion. For now to hunt the Sauadge Bore, he thinkes not once vpon. His minde on Stella, onely runnes, (such is this sodaine change) As after Wolfe, or Lyon fierce, he careth not to range. To her his heart he doth deuote, and vnto her prefer His vitall Powers (as pawnes of Loue) engag'de be vnto her. The place he kisseth often, which with Flowers was strewde all ore, Whereas his Mistris hee had found to lye the day before. Happie he calld and counted them, more then a thousand times, Them honoring, as if they had bene some power of God diuine. He blest their beautie, and did pray, that storme nor soking raine, That Sythe, nor Plowe-share there might come, their beautie for to staine. That neither Winters colde, nor Sommers great heate, might there be seene, But that they alwayes fresh might showe, with cooly shadow greene. Thus stayeth the Shepheard, wishing still, and still expecteth sore Her comming, who (vntill she comes) each houre imagining foure. He thinks that for her he stayeth long, but when her companie He hath, he then saith Time runnes fast, and too too soone doth hie. Louers esteeme not any time, excepting such a Day, When they are sure their Mistresses, that they enioyen may. Their beautious presence is their Sunne, it is their brightest Sunne, Their absence is their darkest Night, through which they are vndone. The earthly glorie of the bodie, is the Sunne and Light, But (of our mindes) the cleare day is, faire beautie shining bright, And this they reuerently adore; The Essence of the soule, Is farre more excellent then that of bodie (sans controle.) Beautie attendeth on the soule; the Sunne on bodie waites, The Sunne (for worth) to beautie then must yeeld in all conceit.
This makes the Swaine most earnestly to listen with his eare, If he, the rising of his Starre, can see for to oppeare. The smallest blast of winde, or leafe, that bloweth in any wise, The Shepheard hearts, and at the noyse thereof strait vp doth rise. He look th wist I round about, and thinkes her for to see, Her, that doth force him vnto Loue, a seruite slaue to bee. Now doth he thinke, that forth her house, she is comming vnto him, And (now) he iudgeth in his minde, she is hard at hand agin. He counteth how sarre off she is, then vp he starts on feete, And forward runnes, to see if he, her, on the way can meete. But now, lest by some odde by-way she comes, he feares againe, And then he pensiue sit him downe, recounting of his paine. At last, though (long it be) she comes more louely then the Morne, When rising an her glorious pride, shee Thetis couch doth scorne. Softly she comes, with Snaile-like pace, and to her selfe doth speake, Whilst feare (for losse of her good name) makes her looke pale and bleake. And as she is comming in her walke, in midst of thickest wood, She more then (often) stayeth her steppes, and doubting so, she stood. Halfe ready to turne backe, to breake her promise that was past, (For honor, which full deare she held, such doubts did make her cast.) But Loue, then on the other side, and beautie of the Swaine, A thousand new desires afresh, did breathe in her againe. He tlleth her, she is bound to keepe the Oathe she made of yore, (Although that no account is made, what eger Louers swore) For LOVE himselfe doth mocke and iest, to see how Louers sweare, Louers, (but none else) doe dispence, with Oaths withouten feare. In th'end, the Nymph arriueth at th'appointed Christall spring, Where pensiue Cloridan doth walke, his thoughts still cannesing. Sometimes he lay vpon the ground, with Flowers bedyapred, Where Stella (but the day before) herselfe with sleepe had fd. One while he rose, and then to lay him downe you might him finde, Now this he did, now that, for Louers troubled are in minde, Thus (being out of hope) he spies, the sight that likes him most, Which make new ioy in euery part, throughout his Coarse to cost. Quickly he runnes to her, her hands to kisse, he soone is prest, Whilst with a thousand sorts of Flowers he beautifieth her brest. She seeing these two forward prancks, her face with blushing did, Whilst in her selfe (for this) she heares; how honor doth her chide. Aduising her to reprehend him and his leande demeanor, And that before she yeeld, she should resigne her liues sweete Tenor. But Cupid makes her change her minde: The Shepheards beautie faire, Mikes her ore-bold and from her minde, abandoneth all care. She is resolude to vse him kinde, nor with him to finde fault, But him embraceth in sweete wise, who her in acmes had caught. Now all respect of honor, and all feare of future shame, By power of Loue were banished, who her had ouercome. Loue onely is her chiefest choyse, her honor, and her pleasure, The Shepheards will, her readie wish, her ioy, and her chiefe treasure. But (in the end) to couer this, their ouer-amorous rage, Betweene themselues, they plight their faith, and promise Mariage. The witnesses were Loue, the Spring, and many colloured Flower, And thousand pretie chirping Birds, there present at that hower, All which, with cheerfull warbling Note, Hymen, Hymen, sing, And with the ECCHO of the same, the woods made for to ring. Whilst in meane time, our Louers twaine, within a bottome low, (Of a close valley) where no light scarce in the day did showe.
Did reape the long de for fruits of Loue, both equall in desire, Which readie was to burne their harts, with more then vncoth fire. That done, on many Beechen Trees, and Rocks, and many a Caue, They enter last their names together, and finely them did graue. Loue knots they make on euery twig, and Garlands passing gay They hang thereon, whilst pleasantly they passe the time away. Thus (for a while) their hap was blest, and sweet their destinie, Their mariage sweeter, and this held a tweluemonth (very nigh.) Nor at this space, they thought as much (as once) of time to come, The present time was onely that, which in their minds did runne. Poore soules they iudge the heauens had not power to doe them ill, Thinking this hunnie Moone with them (thus) would continue still. But all things that are mortall here, doe change as doth the time, Pleasure none sooner's come, then gone, scarce leauing any signe. Loue (as a Feather's) quickly lost, are wauering and light, As sodenly as in our brest conceiu'd tis through delight. A small thing spoyles and hinders it; The twinkling of an eie, The ioyes of any Louer soone can make to vade and die. Witnesse these twaine; whom Cupid thought liu'd pleasantly ore long, Gainst whom th'enuious heauens sore conspirde to doe them wrong. Through which, the partiall Planets wrought their ouerthrow to bee, And with a generall consent, did of their death decree. For (still) the far all destinies by Gods aye ordered, Whilst by their sharpe Edicts gainst men, they cut their liues, not thred. Like Potters they doe play with men, who if they please, their Pot They breake which they doe make; and if they list, they breake it not. But now to let this passe; one day faire Stella did arriue, Burning with amorous paine vnto the wonted fountaine blithe. And there (expecting Cloridan) her friend she doth repose, Who was as yet (for early t'was) from out his bed (scarce) rose. Looking for him who did not come, she watcht and staid so long, That at the last, on greeuish turffe she fell in slumber strong. Meane time the lucklesse Aridon, in extreame Loue that fride, (Who so much more) the flame for to encrease within him tride By how much Cloridan he saw expelling care and Dole, To haue the hap to quench his fire, in pleasures fountaine coole. Dogs her as she doth goe from home, resoluing in his hart To die, or (else by violence) to ease him of his smart. The friendship of his friend which he did hold most deare of late, Regard to offend the honour of his dame, who him did hate. Faire honestie, nor conscience, all these his hot desire, Bridle could not, but (furious he) would to his will aspire. Whilst thus he thinkes, behold he comes whereas most pleasingly, (Yeelding as twere her selfe) he finds his cruell enemie. Which when he saw, Reason and Faith as (franticke) he neglects, And as one void of sense, from him each good thought he reiects. As on the fearefull Hunts-man pale, the wounded Lionesse, (Bleeding apace) with egerforce, for to reuenge doth presse. So this same Sauadge Louer hot, this Ladie rauisheth, Whilst she vnhappie lieth a sleepe, as one withouten breath. He doth abuse her, whilst to wake she doth (as twere) begin, Yet she in such dead slumber was, as ope her eies not bin. With sleepe as (then) she was opprest with sleepe most miserable, That euer after made her life, and fortune lamentable. Still Aridon she kisseth, and most kindly doth embrace, For she (God wot) dreamd Cloridan had bene there in that place.
Whilst in meane time (but in ill houre) doth Cloridon arriue, And viewes that sight, which for to see, his soule doth him distiue. He seeth how Aridon (in spite of him) doth him misvse, Who is his Spouse betroth't, and whom none but himselfe should vse. He seeth how Stella (being deceiu'd) his face doth sweetly kisse, Whilst (through her eyes as yet not ope) mistooke she fowly is. Like as the Traueller, in strait and narrow way doth spie A hissing Serpent for to come, towards him, on him to flie. Or as with crie most horrible, his passage to defend, A hideous Dragon makes to him, and rollings forth doth send. Whilst trembling through pale chilly feare, ready to giue vp Ghost, He backward turnes, nor dares he passe, whereas he wisheth most. So Cloridon with wofull griefe, with frantike Iealousie, With rage, mixt with despitefulnes, and burning frenesie. Is vexed so in inward soule, that he in desperate wise, (With sorrow madde) now here, now there, rowles vp and downe his eyes. Shame and sadde griefe so seaze on him, as he flings thence away, Nor can he bide in that bad place, there longer for to stay. Stamping and cursing vp and downe, he runnes about the ground, Seeking himselfe, through vncoth meanes, of life for to confound. Resolude he is to die, sith that his Dame he held so chaste, Another loues (not him) whereby her selfe she hath defaste. But now when gracelesse Aridon, the Nymph had thus deceiu'de, He flieth away so fast, as he of her is not prceiu'de. Which made her soone to ope her eyes, when by her, seeing none, (Frighted) she leapeth vp, and stands as still as any stone. In pittious wise shee lookes about, her selfe so for to ease, Yet nothing could she see, but what her sight did more displease. Her dearely loued Cloridon, (on whom she oft doth call) She cannot spie for to appeare, or answere her at all. One while she thinkes he hides himselfe, that for him she should seeke, Another while, that he is gone, to hunt where he doth leeke. And then againe, poore soule she thinks, that she hath bene deceiu'de, And that the same she could not see, through sleepe of sight bereu'de. She thinks, if he (who was with her) had bene her Cloridon, He would not her haue left so soone, nor so soone from her gone. Thus troubled in her minde, with feare, she sits her downe alone, Whilst of her louely Shepheard she, doth stay the comming home. Each houre, a yeare seemes to her, and his staying ouer-long, Makes her to doubt all is not well, and that somewhat is wrong. She weepes, and wailes, she taketh on, and screecheth out full sore, But had she knowne his hard estate, she would hane wailed more. This gaules her still, yet Cloridon, comes not all that same day, The cause that thousand torments doe her tender hart assay. Wofull, she sits like Niobe, teares streaming from her runne, Whilst of her vtter ouerthrow, she doth presage to come. The euening come, she home retires, yet all the night no winke She sleepeth, onely of her Swaine, of him she still doth thinke. That which had past the day before, encreaseth more her woes, This runnes still in her minde, nor what to say thereof she knowes. Feare so doth trouble her, as scarce the day appeard in sight, And that Aurora had expeld the darknesse of the night, But vp she gets, and euery where, seeketh her Swaine to finde, As is the youthfull Hart sought out, by his beloued Hinde. Her husband Cloridon she seekes, and searcheth all about, She looketh for him in the woods, and thickets all throughout.
A thousand times she too and fro, vnto the Spring doth runne, To see if he by chaunce (as was his wont) were thither come. But when she doth not finde him there, she then misdoubts the worst, Of some mischaunce that hapned is, and counts her selfe accurst. Yet for all this, she giues not ore, although shee's in dispaire, She trotttëth still, she searcheth still, and prieth here and there. The name of Cloridan, she oft repeateth, and doth call, Yet none except the ECCO shrill, doth answere her at all. Ah, what sharp griefs and passions sad, to vexe her did she proone? Before that she her Cloridan, found well-nigh dead, through loue, Who (wearie for to languish, as sorrowes seruile slaue, With his owne sword, a mortall wound, within his body gaue. After he had a thousand times blamde his disloyall Dame, Accursed Loue, (as most vniust) hating his amorous flame. Within the bottome of a Rocke, beset with gloomy wood, Sprawling he lay along, in midst of his warme purple blood. And yet his breath was not quite gone, though frō his deadly word, Through floods of goare, that streamde from thence, his scalding sighes were drownd. Death him consumde, griefe for loue him kilde, thus twise he dide, His paines aboue all possions were, that did such pangs abide From his sadeyes, the limbecks wet, of sorrow did distill, Such store of teares, as all the place, with water they did fill. His heauie grones, his endlesse sighes, that came his teares betwixt, His luke-warme blood, that with the moysture of his eyes was mixt. Of his laments most dolorous, the onely witnesse were, And those hard Rocks, which curteous then; retolde what they did heare. Bus now that haplesse Stella, many times prooued had, And that she Gloridan did finde, in this estate so bad. She straight-waies (sownding) falls on him, and liuelesse so was seene, As the poore Shepheard thought forthwith, that (quite) dead she had bene. Which when he saw (although nigh dead as then) was his faire Corse, And that in him, through want of blood, remaind small strength or force. Though death had (now) within his power, his sense already brought, And that he iustly angrie was, gainst Stella, as he thought. Thinking (but wrongfully alas) that she had done him wrong, And though he felt his weakenesse such, as liue he could not long. Yet at the lst Loue vanquisht him, and pittie him ore-came, Now gins he loue that beautie which, before he did disdaine. Remorse of Conscience toucheth him, and tells him in his minde, (Which he repents) that he hath vsde his Ladie too vnkinde. Although his thought (that she herselfe abusde hath) doth him tell, Yet neuerthelesse, he honoreth her, and now he loues her well. Which is the cause, with armes, though weake, he seckes to make a shift, And trieth if her (sore languishing) he from the ground can lift. He openeth her faire eyes, and forc't through Cupids proud command, He kisseth them ten thousand times, whilst senslesse she doth stand. O God, how rich and puissant is Loue, and of what great power? All former iniuries, to make him cancell, at this hower? Desire for to reuenge his wrongs, (as Louers wont to vse, He now abhors, with such bad meanes, himselfe (hee'le) not abuse. Hee'le rather die, then offer wrong to his disloy all Dame, Minding in death to honon her, and to conceale the same. Softly he rubs her liuelesse face, oft kissing her faire lippes, And (being deadly sicke, from them dead almost) life he sippes. Her fore-head he doth water, with his brinish teares that flowe, Her fore-head, father of his griefe, and motlue of his woe.
Thus whilst he ouer her doth mourne, Stella gins to reuiue, Wondring that Cloridon she sees, againe to be aliue. Who feeling now his senses faile, and life to fleete full fast, With hallow poyce, and throtling throate, he spake these speeches last. Ah Stella, Ist thou whom I haue lou'de, then mine eyes more deare? Ist thou, that dost before me in this pittions plight appeare? Ist thou ingratefull cruell wench, whom I doe see here lye Hard by my side, whilst for thy sake, I doe vniustly die? Ist that bright Diamond eye of thine, that wounded hath my hart That eye that gainst all reason, makes me renerence my smart? Ist that faire Forehead (yet forswore) and those gold haires of thine. That haue bene enemies to me, and to all good of mine? Ah Stella, what hast done, thy faith (alas) why didst thou breake? So dearely prised on my side, through yeelding ouer-weake? Why hast shou falsly lefs thy Spouse, thy loyall Cloridon? And entertained in his stead (on suddaine) Aridon? Since at the first, thou (willing) me, and vnconsty giued tooke. No reason t'is that now sans cause, I should be (thus) forseeke. Thou hauing then abused me (to tell) how, I abhorre, Hast thou the face, and darest thou, to come my face before? Alas, should I permit thee? Or, should I now banish the? As periurde wretch, whom I doe finde, mine ouerthrow to bee? LOVE and the Heauens, for witnesses, against thee do I craue If whilst I liu'd, I any way, myselfe abused haue? My faith and vowe, plighted to thee, I alwayes haue conserde, My loyaltie thou proued hast, of thee it well desornde. Not any, but thine onely selfe alone, I loued still, And now I die, (O spite) to hate thee, I haue not the will. Yet hast thou falsified thy Faith, and gone from thy first word. Whilst (for true loue) false fained loue to me thou dost afford. But, haue I so ill merited, and Aridon so well? That thou shouldst entertaine him, and me thou shouldst expell? Ah, I haue seene, that with mine eyes, in such vndcent sort, As cause that they haue seene too much; they now are All-amort, I haue thee seene kisse Aridon, false Aridon vniust, Whilst to caresse him (as thou didst) my hart in twaine did burst. Disloyally through periurie, thy Faith thou broken hast, Thine Honor lyeth in the dust, and thy good Name is past. Thy glorie through inconstancie, hath caught her deadly wound, Thy credit stained is, nor more it can be healed sound. Who euer would imagine once, or euer would haue thought, That one so faire a beautie would, so fowle a deed haue wrought? Who euer would haue had suspect, an eye so full of loue, full of infidelitie, vnconstantly would proue? Ah say (discurteous too vnkinde) why hast thou me deceiu'd? This thy false show of Amitie, hath me of life bereau'd. For not my death t'is I lament, nor much of that I waide, If thou hadst not my meaning chast, and honest minde betraide. Had I not found thee mutable, vnconstant, wauering bad, Not lingered nor languished in life, I so much had. This mischiefe, that thou false art found, and double in thy hart, Doth gaull my soule, worse thousand times, then deaths most keenest dart. But yet although thou hast to me, this iniurie procur'de, Although thy loue to me is found, immodest and periur'd. Yet now I die, I loue thee still, though I t'is am abusde, My death yet shall disponce with thee, and thou shalt be excusde.
Loue that at first me vnto thee in bands most strict did binde, Commands me (on alleageance mine) with thee no fault to finde. hen iudge of I did honour thee, whilst I did liue on earth, Sence (dying now) I doe the same, and will doe after death. And since it is thy will sweet soule, that I shall leaue this place, Why doth such outrage offer now, vnto thy beautious face? If the thy will, that I shall die, and that to haue me dead, Me and thy selfe in subtill wise thou hast dishonoured. Why sobst and sighest, why with fist doest beate thy tender brest, To see (as thou desir'st) that I be freed from this vnrest. Ah leaue to shed teares thus for me, (now good) thy selfe appease. To see this sight torments me more, and more doth me disease. Weepe not for me, vnworthie I, that thou for me shouldst waile, Since those thine eies, once my chiefe blisse, are now become my baile, Nor seeme thou thus to grieue for him, or aught for him to . Who (not thy loue deseruing) dieth, because he was forlorne. No, no (dissembling wretch) thou doest not weepe for death of mine. et fore I part let me once kisse those daintie lips of thine. Let me (dying) but kisse those eies, although I not deserue. Which for to light me to my Tombe, in steed of tch shall erne. What wilt thou not grace me so much, this fauour wilt not gra? To haue obtaind so much at my last gaspe, shall I not vaunt? Dost thou denie to suffer me to tast of that sweet good, Which heretofore I oft haue had within this darkesome word? When our sacred mariage rights, consummated with oth, Vowing one to the other faith, and to be constant both. Why doest refuse me (cruell) since I die through heauie griefe, Whilst dying, thou'lt not to my paine ad debut some small reliefe? Stella, this hearing next in soule, perplexed with strange paine. Once more vpon her faithfull Swaine, doth fall on sound againe. She falleth downe vpon his brest, her bodie senselesse is, When fainting Cloridan begins afresh her for to kisse. And now what's true he doubts, and thinkes he was deeined right, Cursing his follie ouerbold, and hating his best sighs. He cannot thinke that Stella was with any one vntrue, When he doth see how pitiously (he taketh on anewe. So oft to fall in Traunse, so oft such Corsiues to endure, Which makes him curse his tongue, such woes that to her did prs. But in the end she to her selfe againe comes, when with cries And pittious plaints she breaketh forth thus, in lamenting wise. O death, sweet death, why vnto me doest not such fauour shew. As for to end my course my soule and time, all with one blow. Alas, why so long doest permit her for to breath and line, Who liueth not, whilst languishing she more and more doth grieue. O death, why thus to nourish life in me, doest me despite, Who am of all that line on earth the most accursedst wight, This bodie which polluted is, with worse then worse may be, This bodie which vnworthie is, the heauens, or man to see. This bodie spoild of honour rich, and cloathed now with shame. (Although my minde did neuer yet consent vnto the same) This bodie which deserues from graue and buriall to be ard, The mocke of Fortune, and the tipe of punishment most hard. This bodie which with mine owne hand, in peeces I should e. This bodie which for to be burnt to ashes  orthie were. Ah cursed bodie, hast thou staind thy soule without reure. And (guiltlesse of this ill) must thou eternall paines
Hast thou thy credit lost, thy honour hast thou blemished? Defamde thy Spouse, and Traitor bene vnto thy Lord and head? Thou shalt be plagued for the same, of death thou shalt not misse, Yet death's too good for such a sinne, too milde a paine it is. Ah then (sweet friend) why doest it touch, why to it comes thou night? Alacke forbeare, infectious tis, it is thine enemie. Vnworthie of thine eies it is, vnworthie of thy face, Nor doth it merit for to haue, the least drop of thy grace. Vouchsafe not for to touch the same, but rather let it perish, Tis it hath sind and murthered thee, the same then doe not cherish. But yet before into the hands of wish for death I fall, The Gods to witnesse of my truth, as records I do call. I call the heauens aboue, the earth, the Seas that stowing shew, The spirits of the firmament, and them of hell below. The Tritons, Siluans, Satire swift, the Nymphs in Groues that walke. And damned hags, whose gastly shapes strike terror as they talke. In briefe, whatso hath life or mines, all Trees, all Rocks, and Caues, All Fountaines, Groues, and shadowing Vales, from parching heat that same. All these as witnesses I call, that I am culpable, But yet deceiu'd most traiterously and so made miserable. All these I call, and doe coniure, that know the innocent, Vnwittingly I faulted haue, yet neuer did consent. My faith I neuer brake to thee (my Spouse) I here a vow, This (heauens yee know for truth) for I did thinke that it was thou. I thought twas thou (as thou wert wont) that thou hast hid my face, (My face that is the cause that thou art in this wofull case) Vnwilling though my bodie is tainted, yet pure's my minde, My bodie, which against his will, thy shadow false did finde. But yet tis faultie and deserues (and righly too) reward, Since it thine ouerthrow hath wrought, through Fortune ouer hard. Twise (then) it thee offended hath and double wrought thy wee. Alas, that double for to die, I cannot force it the. The greatest sorrow I sustaine, of these my sorrowes all, Is, that I double cannot die, nor twise by dying fall. Then why shouldst thou desire (sweet hart) new friendship to begin, With such a bodie, as but late doth come from doing sinne? Vnworthie tis for thee, the earth, grosse earth, let that it couer, A fitting spoyle tis for the same, and not for any other. Or rather let this carkasse vile, be purged pure with fire, And th'a shes be disperst abroad, through windes as I desire. Woe is me borne was I to be thy death, and through hard hap, By my bad meanes, the Parce three haue caught thee in their Tis I, and none but I, that kild thee haue (my dearest Spouse) Tis I that death haue brought to thee, and that most dangerous. Thou diest for my fault, O cruell Lawe, and most vnciuill, He that is guiltlesse, bides the paines of her that hath done euill. Tis I that blood haue drawne from thee, tis I thy hart haue split, Tis I that haue thy louing name, amongst the dead soules writ. It is not death (as thou dost thinke) thy life that shortned hath, But tis thy Stella, haplesse borne to doe thee ill and skath. Then to thy selfe I doe appdle, if death I not deserue, And how much fortune mine accurst, from other Fortunes swernt When as (in steed of honouring thee) dishonoured thee I haue, And when I life to thee should giue, I bring thee to thy graue. When as our sacred Hymen, I should reuerence and adore, I haue abusde, disparaged, and scandalisde it fore.
And lastly, when with ioy thou shouldest thy youth with pleasure passe. I doe vntimely our thee off, and make thee vade like grasse. I being then, the cause of all this mischiefe, and this ill, Doest seeme to wonder though I weepe, and beauens with sorrow for? Haue I not reason to lament, to sigh, to waile, and grone, Like vnto Niobe, till like to her I turne to stone? Since first the skies were fram'd, and Sunne to shine, at first, was seene, More wretched woman than my selfe, nere was, nor ere hath beene. O wofull Stella, Cloridan, O Cloridan, my life, My life shall expiat my fault, to end these sorrowes rife. That selfe same sword that wounded thee, shall through my bodie ranse, Whilst dying both together, we will laid be in one Tombe. Then pardon me sweet Cloridan, for pittie pardon mee, Since that through others treacherie, I haue offended thee. Adien my Lord, I loath to liue, and not thy selfe enioy, And saying so, her selfe, she (strait) doth with his sword destroy. O brane Virago, glorie and renowme of women kinde, Fewe like thy selfe, thy selfe like fewe, didst shew a worthie minde. O vertuous Ladie, O faire spirit, of thy selfe, conquerour, Ore whose rare constancie, nor sword, nor death it selfe had power. So Lucres dide, the Romanes Pearle, when by base treacheris, She vndefilde, defiled was, through Tarquin, forceablie. So Hero dide, so Thisbe with the selfesame sword did slay Her selfe, when Piramus to seeke, she went the haplesse way. And now her breathlesse coarse did fall vpon the pouer Swaine, Who with that burthen g to breath, and seeke some life againe. As when the night approacheth, we behold and view the Su, By little and by little steale from hence, his race being done. His colour lesneth, and lookes pale, disdaining that still tide, Whilst in some corner of the skie, his faire face he doth hide. So that vermillion colour sweet of Stella (but of yore,) That beautie boue suparlatine (as sacred to adore.) That passing snow white Iuorie, that did all thoughts controule, By little and by little, forth from out her bodie stole. Ore that  louely coarse of hers, death sits predomina, Who (for that he came there) for Rose, and Lillie fresh did wt. Pale looked now those cherrie lips, like ashes they appeare, Whilst with aniron sleepe shut vp, her eies fast closed were. Her armes hung downe (Sans motion) and like a picture faire, Which (linelesse) is in colours wrought tresemblance, so she bare. The wofull Shepheard when this sight most dolorous he spide, Afresh his plaints he doth renew, and out aloud he cride. Kissing this linelesse coarse, and dying, he seekes himselfe to ease, Whilst (her embracing) he doth thinke, her griefes somewhat t'appease, His sight he wistly sixeth on her face, and on her eies, And like amad man he takes on, in most outragious wise, Yet he to Stella listueth still, who still doth him require, And pray to pardon her foule fault, this oneli's her desire. And as she giueth vp the ghost, she forth these words doth grone, Ah pardon me, sweet pardon me, the most distressed one. Sweet Gloridan forget, for giue poore Stella for her ill, She did offend, but knew it not, it was against her will. Oh, in one Tombe let me with thee (sweet friend) be buried, Gods lawes command to pardon such as doe offend (being dead.) Farewell deare Spouse, and graunt to me, but this my last request, Farewell, for death to seaze on me, I feele alreadie prest.
Ile meete thee in the Lizian fields, and then I will thee knowe, Once more farewell my Cloridan, for now from thee I goe. So saying, she doth breath her last, as any stone she is cold, Yet closely in his feeble armes, the Shepheard doth her hold. But when that he had bleeding left, which like a spring did come From forth his brest, and mongst the blood of his faire Stella runne. He laieth her softly downe by him, her eies he then doth close. And by her side placing himselfe, vnto his end he growes. And hauing cried out full oft, as one accursed most, That he was author of her death, he giueth vp his ghost. Whilst by his warme blood, and salt teares, he seeketh to appease. His Ladies spirit late gone from thence, to liue with greater ease. A thousand times he saith farewell, sweet Stella, still he cride, And in the end, in selfe same sort (as Stella did) he dide. Their bodies twaine, which whilst they liude, had but one soule alone, Were buried both together, shut within one Tombe and stone. And Aridon that Traitor curst, who these two Louers paind, By iustest punishment of Gods, into a Rocke was changd. Which Iupiter doth oftentimes scourge for his former sin, With thunder-bolts, breaking his top, and all to battering him Then let no Louer once presume vnlawfull meanes to seeke, But be resolued to be content, as shall their Ladies leeke. For forced Loue or treacherie will nere proue well at all, Which if they vse, worse plagues shall them, then Aridon befall. After the faire Nymph had made an end of her dismall historie, she spake thus vnto me. Now (Shepheard) confesse, confesse (I say) by this example, the vniust crueltie of Loue. He that will not yeeld neither vnto presidents, nor vnto reasons, ought to be ac∣counted as a most obstinate and ignorant person; for it is more follie, not to submit vn∣to reason, then to be altogether vnacqainted with the same. It is an old said sawe, that he is happie, whom other mens harmes can make to be∣ware. For to growe wise, at the charges of another, and not at his owne cost, is a greater treasure then the golden sands of the riuer Pactotus. As for mine owne part, this exam∣ample (with diuers others) which I can report, and all vnto this purpose, wherein Loue hath shewed thousand proofes of his bloodie rage) shall make me wise, and warne me to looke vnto my selfe well enough. They say that a man should take heed of a mad dog, of a franticke bedlem, and of a notable Drunkard, because by nature they are apt to doe shrowd turnes. And euen so, we should looke vnto our selues, lest we should fall into the laps of Loue, seeing we know him to be so peruerse, so wicked, and vniust: for he shall neuer be moned, who most sondly flingeth himselfe into the pit, that hath bene shewed vnto him before. Then (Shepheard) shalt thou be wise if (betimes) thou withdrawest thy selfe from such a Tyrant: & foolish, will I account thee, if thou imaginest that I will euer follow so bad a maister as he is, his schoole resembling an intricate labyrinth, into which it is easy to enter, but impossible (or verie hard) to get out of it againe. He that will doe well, must neuer doe any thing whereof he may repent him afterward; for a man neuer drou∣peth, but when he languisheth through feare, still looking for that mischiefe to happen, which will at the last make him to repent. If I know (alreadie) that repentance would not be faire off from me, if I should loue, by reason of the dammages that proceed through the same, were not I (then) verie simple to goe about to loue? Then talke no more vnto me of such vanities, but rather discourse with me of such Ceremonies, Fraiers, vowes and Sacrifices belonging vnto Diana, which are mine ordinarie exer∣cises. For euerie workeman delighteth to here talke of his owne Science or Misterie. I hearing her say so, replied thus. O fairer creature then Venus; more chaste then Polixena, and more learned then Cassandra; The braue Captaine that continually followeth the warres, knoweth well,
that his function or calling, is full of dangerand trouble, and yet (in the meane while) he repenteth not, to follow the same, because of the hope he hath to reape renowme and credit, which is encountred and wonne, euen in the middest and the thickest of Cannon shot, of the battaile. And so, although the Louer doubteth not, but that he is like to endure great troubles and turmoiles in his amorous pursuit, yet doth not he giue ouer the following thereof, without repenting himselfe at all, because the hope to please that which he so much liketh, bringeth the thoughts of all his troubles and la∣bours to be very weake, and of no force or violence at all. The sicke patient, which taketh a potion, knoweth that it is bitter, and yet for all that, he sticketh not to swallow it downe most willingly, by reason of the firme confi∣dence he hath to be healed of his griefe. That the paines of loue are bitter and cruell, I cannot but confesse; yet then (againe) we must remember, how sweet and luscious is that ioy, that the Louer participateth of, when he seeth himselfe beloued of his Mistris. An inestimable lewell is not gotten, nor giuen for nothing, neither such and so rare a good thing as this is, can be obtained without great labour and trauaile. And for mine owne part, will alwaies account those sorrowes and troubles most easie and sweet, be they neuer so sower and vnsufferable, to loue a thing, so absolute and perfect, as your sweet selfe is. For that Generall of an armie, shall neuer be taxed with cowardise, who hath done his end uour, and (what he can) to cause the enemie to come into the field, but he shall soone be condemned for a dastard, that shall flie from his foe, through very seare. The honour that one findeth in louing a diuine beautie, easilie recompenceth the paines thereof: for that man shall be more accounted of, who hath combatted with some famous Conquerour, although he be ouercome by him, then he, that shall remaine Maister of the field, ouer a weake and feeble enemie. Thinke not much then (faire and glorious Nymph) if I dare venter to serue you, when the meanest followers of mightie kings, are more respected and regarded, then those that are the greatest, of other great Lords and Nobles. The faire Nymph would haue replied, but that by chance a certaine Virgin came before her, presenting her with a Sonnet, composed in the name of all the whole com∣panie, which hindered her from answering me. But this was the Sonnet following. The glorious heauens we praise in goodly wise, Because the Gods doe lodge within that place: So you that hold sweet beautie in your eies, And honour in your soule, haue fairer grace. Then who to glorie yours, can silence giue, When (than the heauens) it is farre more diuine: Heauens perish, but vertuous spirits alwaies liue; Glorie shall flourish still, and so shall thine. Then at your feet, we hang this verse of ours, Whilst, vnder shade of thousand Lawrells greene, We of your virtues will discourse, whose powers No Tempests rage (to feare) shall ere be seene. Since Pans faire Sisters, to you honour yeeld, Since this our Song your vertues doe sigh forth: And since all Lawrells doe your for head shield, Vouchsafe thereof, though tis of little worth. Diana (hauing read this Sonnet) liked it passing well: which I perceiuing, and that she delighted in Poetrie, made bold to request my Muse, that she should daine to inspire some daintie veine or conceit in me, to be able to endite the like. Whereupon she
pittying me, gaue care vnto my praier, which was the occasion that (at that verie in∣stant) and vpon the sodaine, I wrote these verses following. If nothing faire I see, but whats thy face, If brightnes thine, the day is, of mine eies, If vertue thine, I doe (as Gods) embrace, Haue I not reason (then) in dutious wise, Thy gratious selfe for to implore, Since thee (as Goddesse) I adore? Who finds a salue to cure him of his griefe, By friendly hand, of that shall he not make Account? when he thereby may get reliefe, Whereby his sicknesse from him he may shake? The wounded Deare, to the hearbe Which can him helpe as be doth know. So then, in this my worse then Captines state, These lines I offer to thy Deitie, Not doubting, but (though haplesse be my fall) I, from thy selfe, shall find some remedie, Of thee I beg some grace to haue, In thee of health, to spill or saue. Who dieth for want of succour or remorse, Doth not deserue or merrit any blame: But such as by their owne power and their force, May wretches helpe, yet let them take their bane, Such doe deserue punisht to bee, Of Gods and men, in highest degree. Another. (Dian) thou shin'st in heauens with Maiestie, In hell below, likewise thou doest command: And in the earth, thou raignest gloriously. Ah then (if I am thine) let me so stand. Slaues to immortall Essence are we all, And them we honour must, though gainst our will: Doest aske (Diuine) then how this doth befall, How I dare loue thee? I must loue thee still. The sacred skies are made for to adore, What that resembleth, we must worship too: For mortall men haue life from them therefore. And vnto them we reuerence ought to doe. Then if thy power, breath to my soule doth giue, Ah then conserue the same; for I am bound Most strictly thee to honour, whilst I liue, And whilst I tred vpon this earthly ground. (Deare) a presumption let not this be thought In me, to serue thee (though a thing of nought.) I hauing finished these two Sonnets, presented them vnto her, who shewed them vnto all her companions, they marking and looking vpon me verie wissly, I thinking
that by that meanes, I might obtaine some of them to be my good friends, and to speake a good word for me, vnto my Mistris, who now was (once more) conducted by the sweet voice of the other Nymph vnto the temple of Diana, where she (for a while) staied. And so (deare Father) let me intreate you, that I may make a stay here (at this time) for my minde is troubled within me, my tongue faileth, and my voice beginneth to be hoarse, we wil deferre the rest til vnto morrow, for what liketh not one day, may chance to please at an other. Content (quoth the old Magitian) and let vs away. The bowe must not (alwaies) be bent, lest it weaken too much, and so must thou take some rest, or else thou wilt be ouer wearie, and soone tired. Therefore am I the more willing to yeeld vnto thy request, to the end, thy discourse may be as agreeable vnto thee in reporting, as it is pleasant vnto me in hearing the same. Whereupon they left the place, where, as they were walking homewards, they might perceiue a Shepheard talking with a Shephear∣desse vnder the shade of an old Oake, which was the occasion they drew nigh, to heare what they said, the Shepheard viging her, in this sort. Fond is that man that thinketh to remoue a huge Rocke, from one place into another, and as fond is he that goeth about to turne, or stay the course of the salt waters of the Sea: Fuen so (O cruell Delia) is he a foole that will take vpon him to resist the will of the Gods, and oppose himselfe against the power of the heauens. Those huge Giants the Titans, went about such a bold piece of worke, but being ouerthrowne with lightning, they serue as witnesses, that the hand of the holy one of Israel, doth not strike in vaine. If so, why then wilt thou so wilfully stand against the decree of the Gods? Which if thou doest, thinke not but they will quickly abate thy boldnes, and punish thy ouer presumptuous pride. That Maister doth punish his seruant worthily, who scoffeth at his commaunde∣ments, and maketh no account to be obedient vnto him. And thinkest thou, that the Gods will not plague thee, seeing thee so stubborne against their wills, so peruerse against their minds, and so vnwilling to performe their desire? They haue saued thee, from the rauenous tallents of the murthering Pitate, and as it were (by miracle) brought thee hither, and wherefore doest thou thinke they did so, but onely because thou shouldest be milde vnto my prayers, and yeeld gently to graunt me some fa∣uour? But it seemeth by thy carriage hitherto, that thou wilt as it were (of meere obsti∣nacie) bandie against them, in this thine error, but take heede thou be not plagued, and (then too lately, thou wilt wish that thou haddest changed thy minde, for the Gods vse alwaies to afflict selfewild people, because it is not fit, nor the part of any man, to rise vp, and to rebell against them. Then seeing the most maruellous and diuine prouidence, hath brought vs here both together, that they haue assisted thee in this Desart, and most happily haue caused thee to meete him (who hath endured so much for thy sake, without any re∣compence as yet at all) ah chaunge thy humour sweet Delia, alter thy opinion, and shew thy selfe, to be of another minde, to the end thy sweetlenitie, and gratious boun∣tie, may bring the Gods to be as pleasing and willing in all thy desires; as thy vnkind rigor, and harsh disdaine, haue (heretofore) made them to be austere, and angrie towards thee: for miserable is that wight, and worthie to suffer trouble, who being admonished, will not amend, and therefore is out of all hope to finde any succour at all. Loue then (froward Delia) him who (to obtaine thy grace) hath dispended so many teares, consumed so many whole daies, sent abroad so many scalding sighes, and left so many daintie pleasures, onely to follow thee: and who, if he might but in some sort be assured of thy friendship, would thinke himselfe the most happiest and the best contented man in the world. But miserable is he, who still laboureth, and yet findeth himselfe frustrate of the fruits of his labour: yet farre more accursed is he, who consumeth his yeares, and his life in the seruice of such a proud dame, as yeeldeth no recompence vnto him at all, for that he looseth his labour and paine, and because he is forced to sigh and bewaile his foolish and vnkind choyse alone vnto himselfe, ne∣uer expecting any remedie.
Thus pleaded the Shepheard for himselfe, when the hard-arted Shepheardesss made him this sower and vnwelcome answere. I can neuer belcoue (fond Shepheard) that the Gods, who are the authors of goodnes, and most curtenu, Earhers vnto mor∣tall men, can be the cause that they should commit any fault, much esse, to eggs and incite them forward vnto the same, but (rather) that men themselurs are the occasi∣ons thereof, and therefore when any one hath done any such offence, he must turne it from bad to good, and seeke to couer the visage of his ill fortune, with the colour and shew of good chaunce and hap. If the Gods (as thou affirmest) had brought me hither, to yeeld vnto thy wanton desires, and to be an attendant vpon this Tyrant Loue, then should they be the authors of my ruine, and the occasions of my sinne, but I will neuer thinke so vnreuerently or wickedly of their prupent prouidence, and sacred bountie, and if my good fortune hath made me to escape so great a daunger (as I confesse I haue done) I most hum∣ble thanke the Gods therefore, of which sithence I now finde my selfe free, I thinke it no wife dome, to tumble into Caribdis, because I haue auoided Silla, and hauing got∣ten out of one mischiefe, to fall into another: for I hold my hap more cruell, to be sub∣iect vnder the bloodie tyrannie of Loue, than if I had bene laid vpon the cruell Altar of Iuno (as a Sacrifice) to haue appeased her furie. Thinke not, that the Gods, take any care of such as they suffer to fall into the hands of Loue, but rather, that they account them, for lost creatures, and such as be most mise∣rable, as the Phisition giueth ouer a patient, whose disease is desperate and recurelesse, when he seeth there is hope of his recouerie. No man will bring his friend whom he affecteth, vnder the yoke of a Tyrannicall maister, who will make his life ouer miserable, and whose crueltie he himselfe hath felt: now the Gods haue (oftentimes) had experience of this bloodie Loue, and felt his ouer∣much rage, furie, and anger, and therefore it is not likely that they will deliuer into such a Butchers hands, that creature which they (most of all) desire to protect, and defend in safetie. The accident of Loue then, doth not come by the meanes of the Gods; neither are they occasions of such idlenes in our braines, such Louers being but foolish so to thinke, who being afflicted with his passions, lay all the fault vpon the Gods. Who then (answered the Shepheard) is the author thereof, and who is it that bree∣deth it in cur soules? & if Loue is seared of the Gods thēse lues, how is it possiblie but mē should be troubled therewithall? and what daintie spirit hath there cuer bene, but hath loued? what braue generous minde, or what heroicall and magnanimous heart hath bene without it? As the winde serueth for a guide vnto the Sailer in the Sea, guiding his ship rightly: Euen so, Loue doth serue as a Pilot vnto the Sonnes of the Gods, to effect and bring to passe braue expoites, which can neuer be perfected as they should be, vn∣lesse that Loue, set foote into the fame. What rare deeds of chiularie did Hercules a at∣chieue for faire Andromacha, whom he loued? How brauely did Achilles carrie himselfe for Bxiseis sake, Iason for Medea, Theseus for Ariadne, and Orlando for his Angelica? The Oxe pricked with the gode, beginneth to mend his pace, and draweth more lustily then at the first: and so Loue is a kind of pricke, and prouokement, which eggeth forward valiant mindes, forcing them to bring to passe, farre more worthie and illustri∣ous enterprises, then they would haue done, if they had liued quietly at home, without knowing what Loue meant. And therefore, I am of opinion, that not onely men, but the Gods also, ought to account themselues happie, that Loue flourisheth in them, for it is the bright tosch of their nights, and the splendant Sunne of their daies. Shepheard, Shepheard (replied the Nymphs) thy owne speech hath confounded thy selfe, for if Loue be so violentas thou describest him, he then cannot last, nor make himselfe knowne to be iust. Things violent are alwaies hurtfull vnto some one or other, and being so full of misfortunes and miseries, they can neuer abide them, because they passe with as great heate and furie as a flaming fire, which consumeth all that is before it.
Therefore Loue, being neuer in the meane, but alwayes in the extremitie, cannot chuse but be very vniust, in as much as Iustice expelleth all force, without hurting a∣nie bodie. So likewise, are there verie fewe, that willingly entertaine it, but as the Tyrant by maine force, and rigorous compulsion, compelleth his subiects to do him seruice. Euen so Loue, through meere violence, maketh men to submit themselues vnder his yoake, and therefore he cannot be both iust and violent all at one time: which two qualities can neuer be at one instant, and in one and the selfe same subiect. By thine owne confession, he is violent, and therefore he cannot be iust, but ought (as one vnworthie) to be reiected and shaken off. Nay, I will say more, there is no∣thing that maketh a man oftner to offend, and to commit sinnes, then this Loue doeth, for it picketh out the eyes of Reason: In such sort, as the Louer respecteth neither Law, Kinred, Vertue, Grace, nor any Courtesies receiued, so he may obtaine his vnrulie desire, the enioying of which, he respecteth more then he doth any Reason, Iustice, or Honor, whatsoeuer. For what respect I pray you, had Paris of his Host Menelaus? Clytemnestra, of A∣gamemnon her husband? and Tarquine, of the good name and fame of Lucretia? To be short, it is an accursed kinde of Rage, that breaketh all Alliance and kinred, all Amitie and good friendship, Faith, and hospitalitie, ouerthrowing topsituruie, all the buildings of Reason. Talke not then vnto mee of this pernitious LOVE; The burnt childe, dreads the fire, and I haue somewhat felt the flame thereof: and therefore I will resolue ra∣ther to die, then to be ouertaken by so furious an Enemie. Ah (faire Shepheardesse, replyed the Shepheard) how much art thou deceiued herein? when amongst all mortall respects whatsoeuer, LOVE is esteemed the chiefe, and carryeth away the prize before them all. For what is he that is more warie and cir∣cumspect, then the constant Louer it towards his Dame? Whom feareth he so much to offend, as her? and how willingly would he offer his life to besacrificed, rather then he would so much as once moue or displease her? The same LOVE, being the reason, that shee alone is not respected, but as well all such (of her well-willers) as goe about to aduance and honour her. There is nothing that teacheth men better, the Adoration of the Gods, then Loue, for that seruice which Louers yeeld vnto their Ladles, hath a kinde of resemblance vn∣to the reuerent worshipping of the Gods: who are not displeased that wee should attri∣bute such respect vnto such a beautifull thing which they haue made, to the intent it should be honoured. For were it not for LOVE, what account or difference can there be made betweene an excellent and exquisite kinde of beautie, and that which is but meane? But that God, that hath taught vs, to discerne the faire from the foule, and (esteeming of the one) to Loue, and refuse the other: maketh vs to loue and couet faire faces, setting on fire thousands of Inuentions in our soules, which reuiueth vs with liuely effects, to the end wee may satisfie and content our desire. But (answered the Shepheardesse) these effects are for the most part wicked and bad, as are the Childern of a leaude and ill-giuen Father, resembling the off-spring of such as be crooked, who are borne with crooked backes, as their Parents had before them. Now, if such effects are contrarie to Lawe and Reason, it were farre better they should be stifled as dead, then being suffered to liue, they should growe to be mischie∣uous and vnfortunate. But, if it be necessarie, that to driue away all smne, wee con∣demne the sinner, to the ende, that afterwards it may finde no fit instrument to put in practise. so vngodly a force. So, if wee will take away all the bad effects of LOVE, wee must despoyle and ba∣nish himselfe and his enticing allurements also. For in vaine doth the Gardener goe about to kill or destroy any bad and noysome weede or plant, if without pulling vp the roote, hee doth but onely breake the tender leaues thereof.
Let vs men (Shepheard) nue away this pestisent Loue from vs. As for mine owne part, I ve we, neuer (willingly) to follow the same: For marching but a while vnder his Ensigne, I haue (alreadie) suffered more then thousands of hard misfortunes, and ter∣rible crosses. So saide the Shepheardesse, (when as the Shepheard was answering her) they might vnderstand the voyce of another Shepheard, speaking as followeth. ECCO. O that the Gods of these huge Woods, would shew me fauour such, But for to heare my Fortunes hard, ore Fortunate by much. O that they would but marke, how I doe nought but waile and crie, I doubt not then, but they their eares, would lend mee by and by. Might I but them so courteons finde, to listen to my mone, I would adore and honor still, their Maiesties each one. Then with a voyce like Lightning flash, I soone would thunder forth, And shewe with sighing in my verse, their bountie and their worth. Of them alone; then would I fing, and of their great renowne, Whist that my tongue should neuer linne, but still their praises sonne. Their kindnesse, my soule vnto them should binde in, to be so fast, As nere I would forget the same, as long as life should last. Ah then shall I obtaine of Mistris mine this happie Bonne, To yeeld me liking? when will shee? will it be long, or soone? Soone. What may I hope for, when I thus fight vnder Cupids Banner? Whilst I consume my selfe thereby, and worke mine owne dishoner? Honer. What may I of my FAIRE expect? when as the Gods I finde, To crosse me in my amorous sute, vnlesse she will be kinde? She will be kinds. Who is of power this gloomy Cloud from off mine eyes to moue? nd to repaire my late fallen helpe, quite ruined by Loue? Lous. Then, ist not hee that courtcously after our grieuous woe, Our Fancie brings to happie Port, I now perceine t' is so. T' is so. But are the gentle Heauens content, importunde without cries To yeeld to vs poore worldly wights, our wish in courteous wise? In conrteous wise. If so, what shall become of that quicke Fire, which burnes so bright, Within my bowels languishing, shal't be extinguisht quite? Extinguisht quite. What shall become of this mine ill? (which in my Coarse doth stay, Shall it increase my farther care, or shall it soone away? Soone away. Shall I, for any good (ere) hope, to come from her (my griefe,) Who holds my heart fast tide, and plagues my soule without reliefe? Reefe. Say then, hath Lone acquainted yet, my Mistris cruell Hart, With this my woes, hath she as yet, felt (of my paines) some part? Some part. Then (sacred Gods) Ile hope the best, and as an Oratle, Ile looke one day, that this to mee, may fall out veritable. Not doubting but that fore I die, I may that sweete fruit reape, In Ioy, which I haue sowne long since, in anguish and in sweate.
Meane time, with these your answeres kinde, Ile satis fide returne, Assuring me, through fauours yours, I shall giue ore to mourne. For whilst your comfortable beames shall shine vpon me bright, My hart shall liue (sreed from all feare) enfrancht from danger quite. Then (heauenly Powers) remember what your promise is to me, Who trust repose in you, that I deceiued may not be. of men are taxt, for Farth not kept, you menit farre more blame, Ste you our deeds brightly adorne, as glistering Sunny flame. Vpon this, the Shepheard being maruellously well satisfied in his minde, beganue to speake thus vnto himselfe. If wee haue any reason to giue credit vnto the Oracles of the Gods, then out of doubt, I hue no other cause but to hope well. For manie times, through thousands of such answeres, haue they assured mee, that I shall enioy that which I most desire and couet. And yet alas (alas) this is a great and grosse error in me, to belieue them; For God onely, who alone is without beginning and ending, knoweth what is to come: where∣as these Diueis iudge but by coniectures, and by auncient experience of things that haue hapd before, they being the fathers of lies. And therefore wonderfully glad to de and decerne munkinde, because they haue sworne their vtter ouerthrow & ruine. And yet a braue and resolute spirit, ought rather to hope well, then to feare ill: For hope no wisheth & comforteth, whereas feare afflicteth and tormenteth, both soule and bodie. Of one thing I may count my selfe happie, which is, that it seemeth the Gods of these woods, haue a care of my Fortunes, & that they will assist me in what they may. We ought not to refuse the aide of anie person, be hee neuer so feeble and weake: be∣causone may dot some one good or other vnto vs; As we may finde vertue in the least Planenr Hear be that groweth. But alack, what hope may I lodge in my soule? and how is it possible, that the Prophesies of the Gods of these woods should prooue to be true? If my peerlesse Iulietta, (who is farre off from mee) neuer feeleth the piercing dartes of outagous Loue? LOVE (scarce setled in any) is easily quenched againe, especially when the meanes that should nourish his heate faileth, and waxeth very colde, for millions of contrarie conceits and imaginations is intermixed in the same, which doth quickly drowne and quench it. My Ladie is sarre remote from mee, and therefore remembreth not me: For (as yet) was I neuer registred in the role of her memorie. And (say) there should be some small draught of mee therein, yet would this cruell absence quickly deface it. For the bare shadowe of a Counterfeit, which the Painter leaueth (without his right colours) vnperfect, can neither be faire, or esteemed of any price. Clytemnestra forgot her husband when he was absent: Hellena her Spouse, with di∣uers other women, all which, through the separation of place, and absence of their friends, forgot themselues so much, as they (not once) thought of their ancient Louers; For one Hyperestra, that remembred her husband, fortie nine of her Sisters, cut their husbands throats. And amongst ten thousand women, scarce you shall finde one that preserueth the memorie and fauour of her loyall friend ingrauen in her soule. Heauens graunt I may not haue iust cause to complaine of this Accident, but that, returning back vnto my diuine Iulietta. I may finde her hart, to be gentle and tender to∣wards me, her rigour to be abated, and her selfe more milde and affable vnto mee, then she was wont to be: Otherwise, I shall thinke my selfe most vnhappie, that the flowing waues of the surging Seas, had not (with my insupportable flames) quenched, and drowned, both my loue, and my life together. For more fearefull is the frowning coun∣tenance of a Ladie vnto her sworne Seruant, then the horrible face of the three fatall Sisters vnto a sicke man: for the one maketh him languish, burning in a lingring fire, of thousand deaths, whereas the other, in a small space, doth ridde him, both of life and paine.
Thus saide the Knight, not a little ioyfull of the answere which the late ECCO gaue vnto him. But fond is that man that beleeueth in things that are to come, seeing they are in the hands of the Almightie, who can change them, making them to take a quite contrie course, as shall best please him. And yet may man (onely) bring his Estate, to be eyther Fortunate or misetable. Fortunate, in being penitent for his defaults, appeasing the wrath of God, through his true repentance: who being mercifull vnto him, sendeth him Celestiall Manda downe from heauen. And miserable, in prouoking his heanie anger against him, whereby hee withdraweth his grace, without giuing him that good which hee promised him, and which he hoped for, because heirs vnworthy of the same. For the Children of Israel were depriued of the Holy Land, (although God had pre∣mised it vnto them before) by reason of their sinnes: their wickednesse opposing it selfe against his diuine force and helpe, and his heauenlie bountie beeing turned from them, in that they did so grieuously offend him. Let no person therefore assure himselfe (through others reports) to taste of hap∣pinesse, or to feele of vnhappinesse heereaster to comes but rather dispose himselfe to liue well and godlie, to the end hee may enioy a blessed life, without feeling anie form of cuill. But leauing this discourse, wee will come to Philistell, who went away much con∣ceneed, beeing guided by a good Hope, which because it had wings, fled quicklie from him. So manie are the humours, that Hope is bound to content, as it is impossible for her to stay long in anie one place, they thinking to haue a great pleasure, by enioying of her, when indeed it is the greatest plague that can be. For hee that is possessed with her but one noure, is punished (at the least) ten dayes after for the same. By reason the apprehension of anie bad newes is so cruell, as it drowneth and killeth all hope of contentment to come hereafter: Enery one feeling the chaunces of griefe, sarre more sharpe and bitter, then the Accidents or occurrences of ioy can be sweete or comforta∣ble any way. But as hee was thus iocund walking homewards, hee might heare a Shepheard to sing this Sing, the sound whereof, suddinly made him stay, as the voyce of the Ryder, doth the horse vpon which he is seated. And the rather did hee listen vnto it, because hee was desirous of nouelties, which naturallie pleaseth our sences, whilst staying his walke, betweene (the seuerall passions of) griese and delight, he might heare this pitti∣ous Dittie following. What should I waile thus, weepe, and make those outcries? If my misfortunes, (where themselues they should drowne) Burne their most hote selues, hotter farre, then burneth Thicke smoaking Aetna. Thrise wofull Louer enerlasting wretched, Who still doth lauguish heavily (sans comfort) And nener hopecan, but to liue in sorrow Vntill his life end. Farre better were it neuer for to be borne, Then to be alwayes cru Ily afflicted With such a plague, as hourely more and more doth Growe and increase still. What crosse a man is subiect to by D stini-, (Withouten hope) is sure nere to be holpen. Nor doth it leaue him, till that hee be forced For to leaue lifes terme.
Then (prithee) sweet death, come away and and me, Come, and abridge the number of my bad daies, Nor caust thou blam'd be for to kill a bodie Wanting a line soule. Thon that cuttest off so many of our crosses. (Courteous) come, come dispatch me quickly, He cannot liue, but in exceeding anguish That his owne life hates. There is not anything but hath his ending, And what is mortall, hath not here long biding, (once) But yet my wounds growe more and more, nor death Seekes for to change them. None will (so much) as pittie on me take (now,) Nor on my fancie too too dearely purchast, All (saning sorrowes) in the lash doc leaue me, I being at worst. Thus without dying, doe I vade and perish, Thus flow sower salt teares from mine eies for euer, Whilst thut the heanens scoffe at these my crosset, And my faire euill. But if,  tall Cupid be, and mightie, Able to vanquish men and soneraigne Gods too, Why then my soule (now) heales he not? He cannot, Onely my Loue can. But she (ore cruell) too too much deceiues me, Not from her (as yet) any succour find I, Balne for my sore, she yeelded not vnto me, But my decay seekes. Yet tis my hope, that Cupid (at the last) will Venge on her my death for her oner proud hart. Ofe such deceitfull dames (as she) hane loned, Yet neuer are lou'd. Loue often striketh as he passeth by, blind, And hurts the best; as well as basest persons, Venus is witnesse, Mirrha so, and Dido, Who slewe her owne selfe. And yet before (thus) Mistris mine should plagu'd be, I pray (yee Gods all) let my soule from hence flit, Fore I endure to see that any ill should Vnto her happeu. Too well (to wis them ill) her eies I doe loue, And too too carefull am I, of her welfare, I onely studie, how I best might please her, Though to mine owne paine. He that (indeed) loues, rather had he hazard For to die desprate, thousand times, and thousand, Than for to veiw his Ladie line in anguish, Making her end so. Philestell, knew by the voice, that it was the Shepheard Coribant, who being set le∣ded from his hard harted Dame, was walking all alone solitarilie, sighing forth this Song, which was (in a manner) no sooner ended, but that he might perceiue a faire Nymph to approach towards him, who hauing a warbling Lute in her hand, sitteth downe by the side of the foresaid sorrowfull Shepheard, singing most sweetly these ver∣ses following.
Trust (now) no more, Yee mortals poore, The Gods aboue, Their wonted grace, From you they chase, Nor you they loue. They doe despise, Our sighes and cries, And ue them iest: All pittie milde, They haue exilde, From out their brest. Their Altars proud, No hope doth shroud, Of good to come, And when we pray, As deafe they stay, Seeming right dumme. Then sillie Swaine, And Shepheard plaine, Else where goe crane, Fonds he that mones, To stocks and stones, Himselfe to same. Elsewhere declare, Thy wofull care, And leaue the skies: Thy wofull plaints, Thy hart that taints, They des despise. The heauens looke red, With rage are spred, And borrour too: Tis they, is griefe, Without reliefe, That vs undeo. He is a soe, That thinketh not, That from that place, Through destinie, Most wretchedly, Comes our assgrace. Then better tis, For death to wish, And end our daies, Then still in strife, Lead such a life, So plagude alwaies. For death's our friend, When he doth end Our bitter smart: And through the same, Doth rid our paine. With hickrome dart. This Nymph was Orithia, (amorots of Areas) who after she had sent forth many scalding sighs, spake thus vnto the Shepheard. Whut hope remaineth for that vassasse (who haue taken vp armes against his lawfull Prince, and done him thousands of dam∣mages in spoyling of his countrie) to looke for succour at his hands, when he shall fall into miserie. The law of Iustice, permits to oppose force to force, to suffer wrong, against iniu∣rie, and to repulse violence with all the furie that thay be; Neither is he blame-wor∣thie, who rightly punisheth such iniuries as he hath wrongfull receiued: Inasmuch, as Iustice commandeth that he that doeth ill, must receiue reward according vnto the same. It is a hard matter, to obtaine succour from our enemie, although Coriolanus had that good fortune, and that sumous Aihenian Themistocles, long before him, for the re∣membrance of the iniuries that are past, and those outrages which we haue receiued, doth bandie and set it selfe against the good will, which (perhaps) we might finde in our need. And surely they had neede to be borne vnder a most fortunate Plannet, to be most excellent and worthie men of desert, that dare venture to lend their helping hand vnto their aduersaries, being in a maner halfe dead: yet Caesar did it, although too late it repen∣ted him thereof: for he through sauing of Brutus and Cassius, lost through their vn∣gratefull hands, both the Empire and his life. Malicious hatred being (once) deeplie rooted in the brest, is a poyson so violent and strong, as it can hardly (but with great paine) be driuen out of the hart of man yea (doe the best you can) for your life, yet will there some small sparleles thereof still remaine couot: as we see, we cannot emptie a well neuer so cleare and cleane, but that some fewe drops will alwaies rise to be seene there. Besides these little sparkles will carch hold on fire, vpon the first and least occasion that may be; making oftentimes a greater flame, then there was before. If then dis∣daine, hindereth our enemie from doing good vnto vs, what hope may poore wilde
worldlings haue, to find reliefe from the heauens, the worst aduersarie they haue. For if the faults and iniuries, or the wrongs and abuses, that one offereth vnto another, ma∣keth them to be at deadly hate, what friendship may we looke for from the heauens, whom we so often haue so grieuously offended? It is an ordinarie course here amongst vs, to transgresse the commandements giuen vnto vs from aboue, to tread vnder our feete their ordinances, and to iest and scoffe at their might and power, which if it be so, are they then bound to assist vs, when we are in want? He that will seeke, to obtaine the good will of any man of worth, seeketh how to obey and please him in what he can, studying to applie his will vnto his minde, and to condescend vnto whatsoeuer the o∣ther shall command. For of the agreement in manners, is friendship engendred: where∣as we take a quire contrarie fashion, shewing all the signes and tokens we can, of ill will vnto the heauens, whereby they haue reason the more to detest vs. But you (perhaps) will replie and say, that the heauens are puissantand Diuine, and therfore if they please they many helpe vs. But to this I answere, that therfore we are the more to be blamed, because that fault that one committeth against a great Monarch or King, is more seuerely to be chastised, then that of a poore priuate person: and he is more to be punished, that doth iniurie vnto a wise, graue, and vpright man, than if he had done it vnto one that was wicked, cruell, and vniust. The powers aboue then being puissant, may make our fault to be the more hai∣nous, in that we dare presume to offend them, and they being Diuine, our finnes are lesse subiect to pardon, because we seeke to iniure them, who are so sacred and iust. But of all such miserable wretches as appeale vnto the aide of the heauens, I know none, whom they are lesse bound to helpe, then such as (we call) Louers. For their vnfortu∣natenes, commeth not from aboue, they are not the cause thereof, neither are they these which powre downe vpon their heads this cuill (as oftentimes they doe, warre, Famine, & Pestilence, these being the ordinarie whippes, with which they scourge thē for their impieties) but it is themselues that are causes of their owne sorrowes, because they driue away sage Reason from them, who is of might sufficient, to deliuer and set them free. The franticke Bedlem that wilfully killeth himselfe, can he, dying, accuse any other of his disaster, or complaine of a straunger, when he hath murthered himselfe? No more can a fond Louer, hurting himselfe, be angrie with the heauens, who was not the cause thereof, but he himselfe. And herein, they resemble little children, that hauing done a fault, lay the blame thereof, either vpon their play-fellowes, or vpon something else, being neuer willing to confesse that they haue done amisse. Fuen so, they them∣selues hauing felt one burning in their brests, the furious fire, which in the end consu∣meth and destroy eth them, condemne the powers aboue for the same. But small reason haue they so to doe, for they that vse it, are rather counted to be full of rage, and giuen to murmure, then esteemed as wise and prudent persons. And yet I cannot denie, but that the heauens narurally, doe (as it were) seeme to be bound to doe vs good, but the accident oftentimes corrupteth the Nature. The Parent by Nature is bound to loue his child, yet, if his his owne flesh, shall be peruerse, and ill giuen, becomming a mortall enemie vnto his Father, this right of Nature ceaseth, and he is no more bound to doe any thing for him, no more than for a straunger. There is a iust law grounded vpon this reason, which permitteth the Father being iustly offended with his Sonne, to dishinherit him of his lands; this being the very same punishment that the children of Sophocles suffered, for that they most maliciously accused their Father to dote for age, and to be out of his right wits, onely because they would haue depriued him of his possessions and goods. Brutus likewise, stucke not to prosecute the death of his too forward sonne, most cruellie, and with great disgrace also, because he had done, as well against the Common∣wealth, as contrarie vnto his owne command. So therefore, although the heauens (I speake all this against my selfe as well as thee) Coribant, for that I am as wretched a Louer as thy selfe art (in euerie degree) be our common Father, and for that cause is naturally bound to doe vs good, yet notwith∣standing,
is he not bound to shewe vs this kindnesse, if we shall gricuously and willingly offend him: as the Accidence of the offence shall be more violent and strong, then the naturall Right is, which by reason of this, quite ouerthroweth the other. For as water quencheth the fire, and maketh it cold as any Ice, which by nature is hote, burning, and full of heate. So the discourtesies and iniuries, which we offer vnto such as by Nature were prouided to be our protectors and defenders, drowne and extinguish all their de∣uoire and Right, altering their good mindes from vs, quite contrarie vnto that it was at the first. A man that is by kinde borne vicious and bad, and such a one as bringeth forth of the wombe of his mother, wickednesse with him into the worlde, may (per Accidence) through (good education, and bringing vp) become vertuous and wise. Euenso, the Accident of iniuries and displeasures, may chaunge and alter the curteous inclination of a kinde friend, sowring and sharpning the same against vs, as the Lees and dregs doe the sweetest wine. And this mischiefe falling vpon our heads, wee cannot condemne anie for it, but our owne selues, who are the chiefe and efficient cause thereof. And therefore we are much in the wrong, to lay the blame on him, whom through our owne meere follie we haue made him our soe, although he be slow and slacke to helpe vs, we being falne into miserie, although before he by nature, was bound to lend vnto vs his helping hand, and to assist vs, in what he could certainely, if we were well and godly giuen, and without prouoking or tempting the Eternall Power aboue: would we, but confirme our selues in all our actions, according vnto his desire, keeping vs with the bonds of his commandements; there is no doubt, but he would aide vs, hearing vs when we should call vnto him, and would nor sticke to raine downe Manna (as he did) for the children of Israel, nourishing vs in the wildest Desarts that be. But what law can force or constraine him to shew vs this mercie, when we shew our selues to be his mortall enemies, going about to increase his wrath euerie houre against vs. But say that he were willing and readie (as we are most vnworthie thereof) to helpe vs, and that it would please him, to haue this pittifull and fauourable regard ouer vs, yet may you be well assured, he would neuer take any charge, nor euer make any account of Louers; for their griefes is not numbred amongst the plagues of other miscrable creatures (the second cause whereof the heauens oftentimes are, our sinnes being the first) Loue being seene to be but a verie meere follie, and therefore neuer moueth the heauens with compassion to heale them. A great and grose error therefore it is amongst Louers, to imagine that the hea∣uens are the Authors of their paine, but a farre greater fault is it in them, to require their aide and assistance: for Loue is not any kind of contagious disease, causing men to die, cutting off one after another, and for that cause, hath reason to implore the heauens for aide to helpe them (as they doe when any great mortalitie or plague rageth amongst them: but it is a sickenes, that continueth still without dying, with which onely sensuall persons and sooles (and none else) are infected. This is the reason, that we haue neuer knowne any Louers, to haue bene cured through miracle, whereas we find written in diuers learned bookes, that the bodies of many men, being dead, haue bene restored to life againe, and that many haue bene cured of incurable discases, onely this vaine sicknes is vnworthie of remedie and reliefe, be∣cause it proceedeth not, neither through the anger of the heauens, nor by reason of the contagion of other diseases, but onely through our owne foolishnes. Now as that amitie cannot be firme and strong betweene man and woman, where they answere not one another in desires and affection (although naturally they are bound to loue one another) euen so, the heauens cannot be accused of crueltie, in not scourging mortall creatures, if the cause which should drawe them vnto this charitable endeuour, be taken away from them. Let vs then no more exclaime against the Celestiall Power aboue, but let vs thanke our owne selues that we deserue no better of him, our sinnes being the cause, he giueth vs ouer. As the fellon cannot blame the Iudge that condemneth him to death, nor accuse him of ouermuch seueritie, in that he dieth, but rather his owne bad liuing that brought him vnto so vntimely an end; for he is not to be thought ill of, who doth
rightly discharge his office, wherein he is placed, following the line of Iustice in all his proceedings, though neuer somuch discommoditie happen thereby vnto the wicked; because it is a vertue to punish vice, and not any Tyrannie, what punishment soeuer is afflicted vpon those that are ad and leaudly giuen. Neuer trouble thy selfe then to crie vnto the heauens, to assist thee in thy trou∣bles; for they are deafe at the praiers of Louers, and are not obliged, to require and make whole that sore, which we (through our owne foolishnes) haue made to corrupt our owne bodies. After the Nymph had thus schooled her Shepheard, she without stay∣ing for his answere, began to sing in a sweet note, this Ode following. Now that Boreus with his cold Doth this Countrie round infold, And his Isicles displaies, Whilst the Verdure greene he slaies, We must end our life ere long, And shut vp our mournfull song. Now that more than cruell paine, Brings our hopes for to be vaine, And that Loue makes vs distill, Salt teares (sigrnes of ou kind will) Needs we must our liues tearme end, Vnto t'h eanens to ascend. Now that such is our sad care, As of helpe we helplesse are. That crosse Fates seekes vs to grieue, Why should we desire to line? Better tis to die, than still Follow what workes vs more ill. Now that sighes, and sobs, and teares, The subiects of our verses heares. And whilst this plague gaines our hart, Let vs likewise make it smart. By a death that one day may, Make vs victor euery way. Now that skies with lightnings blast, Forct our pleasures not to last. And that Sunne no more doth shine, We must yeeld to tempests time. (Loyall we) will lay vs downe, And goe (willing) to our Tombe. Now that cold and chillie feare, Haunts vs gastly euerie where. Seeke we must, by crueltie, For to end our miserie. For an end to euery thing, Gentle death (none else) doth bring. Now that burning fire are bright Hath our soules consumed quite. Leauing nought with vs but greanes, Lets our selues rid all at once. Dying, lets our courage prous, Oenon like for Paris lone. The Nymph hauing made an end of her drearie song, began to speake a fresh in this sort. I assure thee (Shepheard) though I sing, yet doe I take small pleasure in the same, for my note is like the tune of that snowy Bird which singeth in the Riuer Me∣ander,
and yet with these my sighes, the extremitie of my paine is somewhat slaked and asswaged. Grieuously doth he die, that is not able to disgest the potion which he hath in his stomacke, so the griefe which is inclosed in the minde, doth most suddenly choake vs vp, if there be not some way deuised for a vent, by which it may passe. That Cannon bursteth, into which powder is put, if there be no void place, through which the fire may issue forth. There is not a heart, be it neuer so couragious, but the paine of Loue will make it to bend and breake, vnlesse it ease it selfe with sobbing and weeping: and yet alas, these re∣medies are but as worthlesse Plaisters of subtill Chyrurgians, who to keepe the wound the longer from healing (to the end they may gaine the more of the Patient) winne time (still) by laying such salues vnto it, as rather make it worse then better. For to speake truth indeed, Loue passeth not away through length of time, weareth not away with wee∣ping, nor is satisfied, though we lament and sorrow neuer so much. He is more proud and fierce, more stubborne and hard, than the Rocke, that is made hollow with the often droppings of water. And to giue you a sufficient testimome of the same, besides that I my selfe haue had experience thereof, I will report vnto you a strange Historie, in which, you shall haue a tast, of millions of cruelties that he did committ, bringing his louing flaues to their vtter ouerthrow in the end. But what? did I say I would display Loue in his colours? Alacke it is impossible, for I my selfe am not able to report the least part of mine owne griefes, not much vnlike vnto the principall Actors of my Tragedie. But it is all one, I must, and will report it. Examples that are gone and past, teach vs (that come after) how to liue well, and beate plaine the way, which leadeth vs, either vnto blacke infamie, or else vnto immortall glo∣rie; besides, the times with such chaunces as they bring forth, are found (often) to be like, and agreeable in effects. Harken therefore, for now I begin my Tale. It is a comman speech (almost of euery one) that beautie, ought to be accounted, as an inestimable Iewell, be stowed vpon vs, by the Gods, whom (as it is thought) it doth resemble, they themselues, hauing vouchsafed to honour it (here) vpon the earth, to the end, that men, adoring the same, may (the better) learne how to worship them aright. For one would thinke, it were impossible to encounter or meete with anything, more excellent, or, that is of more power to commandouer the hearts of mortall men. Not∣withstanding all this, I am of a contrarie conceit, being of opinion, that beautie ought rather to be christened by the name of the Fountaine, from whēce sprang forth (in great aboundance) all the misfortunes, and calamities, that happen in this world. For the more beautifull a thing is, the more it is desired, this desire ingendring in the minde of man, a thousand deuises, either, cruell, vnhonest; or vnreasonable to obtaine the same, and to carrie it away, because, to purchase what one doth couetor like, a man carrth not (often∣times) to infringe and breake, the barres of Iustice, Honour, and of Lawe, imagining that the accomplishment of all things, lieth in the effecting of his desire. So as, I am not of their mindes, who place beautie aboue all other mortall things, but rather iudge it, to be more pernitious vnto men then Serpents, whom they loathe and flie from, as from their deadly enemies. This beantie serueth for a Subiect and matter where vpon Loue may worke the bet∣ter, to exercise his most vnlawfull and tyrannicall effects, in as much as (without him) he could haue nothing whereupon he might be working. Now the cause of vice being taken away, the effect thereof eth, and he that shunneth the occasions of sinne, can hardly or seldom offēd. Only beautie is the occasio, of all such enormities as Loue doth commit, and therefore vpon her, may we well lay the foundation of all humane calami∣ties. For what wickednes is there, but Loue hath perpetrated, and brought forth? Helena the faire, wrought the ouerthrow of famous. Troy, and all the Phrigian Nobilitie; Bry∣seis the beautifull, sowed discord and difention, amongst the Gretian Captaines: And louely Cleopatra, filled the whole Sea and Land of Egypt, with streames of goarie blood. And now harken, how I will confirme what I haue spoken, to be most true, by this Histo∣ne following. In the Marchesse of Lomherdie (a most sruitfull countrie) there dwelt a Gentle, man, noblie desceded, being Lord of a  goodly Castle, wherein (for the most
part) This Gelle man  more challe)  be made much , by her husband, she hauing two such  bounding miner. This their maritage (at the first) was the  them both, for there wanted nothing more to  Paris and  conceiued, when they were first  Admitus with Alcesta: or that of Vltsses with Penelope; or  was nothing, in respect of the true delight that these two  being coupled so sacredly and surely together. But what is too violent (be it aduersitie or prosperitie) can not be  more then hee who ouer swistly, and too too hastily beginning his course, loosert (v on the suddaine) his breath, and so in the midst of his race faileth, both in force, and in run∣ning, whether it be, eyther because their violent beginnings ingendereth their proce∣dings, (for that without reason, no sure foundation can be layde or else, that their hues passeth away with their owne ouermuch violence, as a great and outragious fire, consu∣meth in a sinall time great store of wood and sewell. But not to digresse from our first matter. Not farre from this gallant Lombard, called Leander, was there an other faire place, the owner whereof, was a neighbour of his, a youthfull Gentleman, a Batcheler, and vnmarried; which two, what by reason of the nearenesse of their houses, and the conformitie of their manners, grewe to be so inward and deare friendes, as they could not abide one to be from another; and their loue was so great, as all things (as farre as honor would permit) was common betweene them. Pilades was neuer so great with Orestes, Theseus neuer nearer to Peritheus, nor Alex∣ander, neuer more beloued of Ephestion: then Leanaer was of his friend, and his friend of him. Neuer went they on Hawking, Hunting, or anie other such like laudable exercise, but they were together: Being at home, they had but one boord, and being abroad, but one bed, and one purse betweene them: as if they had benesworne brethren, and both borne of one mother. But now marke the difference betweene leaud Loue, and loyall Amitie. This friendship betwixt these two young neighbours, so sacred, so religious, and ho∣nest, was famous euerie where, and commended throughout all the whole Countrey there about: which neuer thelesse, cruell LOVE diuided and brake in sunder. Yea, and in such sort, as that which was the chiefe ioy and contentment of them both, cost them both their liues. By this then, may we perceiue how contrarie LOVE is vnto Friendship: for where∣as the one is laudable, honest, praise-worthie, and profitable, the other is wicked, and cruell, sowing discord and malice, (amongst such as were, and should bee) most faithfull and firme friendes, one vnto an other. So did LOVE drowne and extinguish (long since) all respect, friendship, and du∣tie, which Medea ought vnto her Father, bereauing her of all naturall pittie, tearing in peeces her owne proper Brother, to succour and helpe her Louer Iason. And so likewise this mischieuous LOVE, forced the daughter of Minos, to be his mortall enemie, onely to follow her deceitfull seruant Theseus. Neither did this wicked LOVE worke a lesse villanie against these two friendes: for Leander, hauing (as I said before) a most excellent, faire, and modest wife, but (as Hellena, vnfortunate) was the occasion that shee ministred meanes and matter vnto LOVE, to put in practise, and to exercise so manie cruell and vniust parts, (as hee af∣terwards did) but if the Innocent merit to be excused, then is shee not to be accused, as the losse of her owne deare life afterwards shewed. But what? kingdomes (oftentimes) which of themselues are rich and necessa∣rie, set a fire, most hurtfull, damageable, and spoyling warres, of which notwithstanding,
they are manie times cleare of) crauing no other thing, then onely to submit them∣selues vnder the dominion and gouernement of the right and lawfull heire vnto the Crowne. But the ambitious desires of men are they that make the wounds, by reason of the greedinesse they haue to enioy that, which in their conceits, they iudge to be faire, pro∣fitable, and pleasant. This Gentleman, the friend of Leander, called Antonio Picchio, made account of Le∣unders house as his owne, being seldome or neuer from thence, and the longer hee stay∣ed (there) the better he was welcome, his marryed friend, and his wife (for his sake) gi∣uing him the best entertainment they could deuise. It is an olde said sawe, that a man alwayes liketh his neighbours house, better than his owne. Whether it be the chaunging of lodgings is the cause, or the straunge and good companie that he findeth,An old saying. where there is good refort and merrie. Now whilst our Batcheller passed his time most pleasantly away, hee began inward∣lie to cast an affection vnto his friends wife, and to loue her farre better then hee did her husband. And thus are many men now a dayes made account of, onely for their wiues sakes: as manie kisse the children, onely for the Nurses sake. Tuta frequens{que} via est, per amici fallere nomen, Tuta ftequens{que} licet sit via. crimen habet. The safe and surest way it is By fri: udship to deceiue: Though safe and surest way it be, T' is knauerie by your leaue. So long he beganne to like her, that at last he was troubled in his minde, so as a se∣cret conceit ranne still in his braine, a nouell flame was kindled in his brest, and a new strange desire chaunged the nature of his first humor: And in so much as within a lit∣tle while after, he became another kinde of man then he had bene heretofore. I will (now) maruell no more, why the Poets haue set downe so manie humane bodies to be chaunged (through LOVE) into diuers insensible and senslesse likenes, and shipes. For there is no doubt, but that the very countenance, the conditions, and the desires of Loers alter and chaunge, in so much as they turne themselues into new bo∣dies, (as the Snake doth cast her skinne) by reason this extreame hote and supernaturall passion, comming vppon the suddaine) and crossing the right nature of man; breaketh and chaseth it soone away, as a suddaine flood of water, carryeth before him, both hed∣ges, Trees, and houses, and whatsoeuer else withstandeth his violence. And so did it happen vnto foolish Antonio Picchio: The desire he had to see his shee friend, and chase the Deare with her husband, was the occasion he came oftner to Lean∣ders house,Louers meta∣morphosed and changed. then (otherwise) he would haue done: for he was passing craftie, and knewe too too well, how to colour his comming thither, Loue being his Schoole-master, and hauing taught him this cunning. Louers neuer want a pretext or shadow to cloake theit affections. It is the first les∣son they learne in Cupids schoole, and which they studie carnestly to obserue, to the end (that for want of concealing that,The first les∣son that a Lo∣uer learneth. which they are most desirous should be hid from the sight of others) they feare it it should be afterwards discouered, and appeare in his right forme and likenes. The eyes of his Mistris onely seemed in his iudgement, worthie to be marked and regarded, although they resembled the Viper, which as well hurteth as helpeth a man: for no sooner did he gaze vppon them, but that his soule swallowed downe a sweet poy∣sonous potion, feeling at one instant both pleasure and paine, yet could not hee liue, without approching neare this ardent Fire. Although the nearer hee came vnto it, the more (by degrees, hee consumingly) both melted and wasted away.
Wherein he resembleth that sicke patient, who doth nothing else but drinke, and af∣ter he hath drunke, findeth the drinke to double his griefe, thoughout his bodie. Had he had but the libertie of speech, and might he haue bene bolde to haue vtte∣red his minde, hee had not endured halfe the torments he did, but being preuented by vnhonest meanes, and because hee was vnworthie to receiue anie succour or helpe, hee was forced (though much against his will) to be silent, and to hold his peace; For o∣uermuch talke (oftentimes) doubleth a mans shame, and hindereth him not a little. His aime, was at the marke, which onely appertained to his Friend. And like as the Theefe feareth to deliuer his minde vnto the Iudge, because of the great desire he hath to commit some one Robberie or other: Fuen so, a Louer (being in his conceits dishonest, and quite repugnant to Honour, dareth not but conceale the same, as much as hee may, to auoyd greater disgraces that may ensue, for feare of further danger. This was the cause that the sonne of Seleucus louing his Stepmother ouer dearely, (because he kept his mouth so close, his lippes being sealed with the Signet of dutifull respect and lawfull Honour) endured great torment, lying at the point of death. The hart of man being tainted with poyson, dyeth soone, vnlesse by some meanes or other, the venome be cast forth; and therefore most insupportable is their anguish and tortures, who dare not discouer their hurts, because they are vnworthie of helpe. But what? Who euer saw, but that a Louer vaine, Conceales his griefe, nor dares bewray his paine? And so did Picchio, onely his heauie eye, and sadde countenance, supplied the office of his tongue, by which he declared his minde by sighes, though otherwise hee durst not. And therefore, it is a hard matter for those that loue constantly, to conceale their passions, doe they neuer set so hard and close a Bridle before their tongue; for either the pale colour of their face, either their sad and heauie countenance,A Louer can hardly cōcale his griefe. either the teares that (alwayes) flowe from their eyes, or else their continuall sighing and sobbing, will disco∣uer and bewray their affection, for this passion is too terrible, too vehement, and too hote, to be keptsecret, without disclosing some signe or token of the violence thereof: no more then fire can be hidde vnder the Ashes, which (neuerthelesse) sendeth forth a heate. Yea, and sometimes a flame too. This then, was the occasion, that Antonio was chaunged both in fauour and shape, and yet notwithstanding, these were not sufficient strong testimonies, for the standers by, to iudge that he was in Loue. Seldome or neuer is the Criminall condemned to die vppon bare suppositions or likely hoodes; if neither his owne eyes, haue giuen anie shrewde gesse, or his owne tongue discouered his offence. And yet this alteration of bodie in Picchio, made euery one to wonder, in so much as they were maruellously desirous to know the reason thereof; for the nature of man is alwayes verie cur lous, to heare of straunge matters, delighting in nouelties, and to vnderstand the seuerall euents, and occasions of the same. But to what ende should the Physition enquire of a sicke man, the originall of his discase, what it is, and how it came; if the patient be stedfastly resolued to die, and will not liue? Euen so, it was but lost labour, for those who did importune verie often poore Picchio, to discouer where his most paine lay, when he meant not to tell them. For he had bene worthie to haue bene registred for a right Dolt indeed, if he should haue made them acquainted therewith, when they could doe him no good at all, and who were so farre from helping of him, as they sooner would haue brought poyson then Balme, for his recurelesse wound. O Tyraunous LOVE, thou art not content alone, to inflict vpon vs manie cor∣rosiues and dolours, vnlesse thou forcest vs also to commit manie villainous Actions,
making vs thy executioners, by doing of which, wee loose our whole contentments, our honours, and our liues. Was not the anguish and agonie that haplesse Antonio endured, sufficient to con∣tent thee? but that he must needes perpetrate so hainous a deed, as must cost him the life of her, whom hee so dearely loued; must cause her husband to die, and make him to spill his owne heart blood, and all to satisfie thee? But it is a thing vsuall and ordinarie, to see in thy Theater, thousands of Tragedies, of all sorts of murthers, horrible Treasons, and most damned villanies, presented vpon the Stage before thee. It is not (as thou thinkest) enough to haue life of one onely, (as those cruell Gods vsed to doe, (who demaunded men to be sacrificed vnto them) but thou wilt haue ma∣nie to appease thy wrath, that thou mayest be (as it were) drunke with their blood, and grow fatte with eating and feeding vppon their flesh. But to come to kinde Leander, who seeing Picchio in this heauie taking, began to condole wonderfullie with him for his sicknesse, and as it were, to participate, and beare parcell of his paine, crying out for the sorrowes of his friend. But that which grieued him most of all, was, because hee could not learne of Antonio, what the cause of his dis∣contentment should be, taking it passing vnkindely at his hands, that hee would neuer tell him. But, had hee but knowne the minde of him, hee had cut off manie wofull in∣conueniences which after followed. But alas, Men haue not windowes in their bodies, that we may see into their harts, and onely God aboue knoweth the secret thoughts of euerie one. Priam thought that he had broke asunder the fatall threed of the destruction of Troy, commaunding that Paris (his owne sonne) should be cast amongst wolues, to be deuoured of them. And yet (good man) he could not. Danaus causing his owne daughters, cut their husbands throats, came for all this vnto that lucklesse ende, which the Oracles of the Gods, had fore-told him. Astiages sought to murther, and to make away Cyrus, and neuerthelesse, he dyed a wretched death, as was before allotted vnto him. Oft may Destinie be foreseene, but (neuer) can it be preuented: for what the Hea∣uens decree against mortall men, that shall happen vnto them; let them seeke neuer so much to preuent it. Leander was ordained before his byrth to haue this hard happe, neither could his good Fortunes hinder it: had hee sought neuer so much to auoyde the same. For can poore men, with their weake feeble power, The force of Gods crosse, when they gin to lower? The Titans, those monstrous Gyants, were blasted with Lightning, and tumbled downe headlong into hell, because they would pesume to encounter with the Gods: And Tamirus and Marsius, the one lost his eyes, and the other his skinne, because they dared to compare with Apollo, and his sacred Sisters. But neuer thelesse, to beginne where wee left. Although Leander often intreated, sollicited, yea, and Coniured Antonio, to make manifest the cause of his sicknes vnto him, yet could hee not so much as get one word from him, which made him so much the more disconsolate. And yet to say the truth, who would haue done, but as Antonio did, beeing in his case? For to haue discouered the truth thereof vnto him, had bene as if a guilty wretch should haue confessed his criminall misdeeds before the Iudge, and to put himselfe into the hands of his vtter enemie, hauing iust cause to be reuenged of him. Meane space Leander (after his olde wont) taketh on, and lamenteth, that he hath not that kinde interest in his friend, as (before) hee thought he had had: Crying out that hee loueth him not. For otherwise, hee would not let to haue disclosed a greater
matter then that vnto him. For (saide he, weeping) vnto Antonīo, Perswade thy selfe (deare friend) that I will spend my heart blood to doe thee good, and neither shall any meanes be left vnsought for, to helpe thee, so I may but onely knowe the cause of thy maladie. Thou know∣est thy well-fare is mine, thy sicknesse, my sorrow, and that as long as thou art ill, I can∣not be well at ease. Why then (thou that art the sweetest part of mine owne selfe) shouldest thou thus deferre to reueale thy discontentment vnto him, who is thine owne sworne brother? and who cannot be content, as long as thou art thus displeased? Now (good now) doe not delay any longer, but let me know thy minde, since I am grieued as much as thy selfe, to see thee in this most grieuous taking. Truely, truely, if you doe keepe this still (thus from me) I cannot chuse but thinke, you are no perfect, nor true friend indeede: for no fortune bad or good, ought to part such as knit in true frienship, and loyall affections bands, and they ought to be partners, as well of weale as of woe. Then why shouldest thou doubt me, or be thus strange vnto me? haue you seene or marked any thing in me, that might make thee conceit mee, not to be the same man towards thee, that I haue bene of yore? Or doe you imagine, that I am not as willing to take part of your bad fortunes, as in former time I haue bene, to be acquainted with your good? If you thinke so hardly of mee, I protest you doe me the greatest wrong that may be. No, no: one friend must not conceiue sinisterly of another, neither mistrust him, without vehement and most apparant presumptions, but must alwayes iudge the best, rather then imagine the worst, no more then one ought to condemne him that is ver∣tuous and honest, vnlesse there be apparent proofe and restimony against him of the same. The affection that is betweene two friends, is so sacred and religious of it selfe, that there is no sense, why any should take exceptions against it, as long as it sheweth no con∣trarie effects, but such as be worthy of all commendation and praise. If thou thinkest, that to recouer thy health, or to purchase some comfort for thee, it lyeth in my power, and that I haue that which may doe thee good, then hast thou the more reason to demaund it freely: For rightly may hee be counted but a counterfeit friend, that will not employ the vttermost of his power, to helpe his friend, and the ra∣ther, for that true friends indeed, reioyce, and are not a little proude, when there is any occasion giuen them to engage themselues, or what they haue, for to profite one ano∣ther. For as a learned Scholler desireth nothing more, then that his learning may be knowen abroade in the world: so a sure friend, doth not couet for any thing so much, as to render some assured testimonie of his infallible friendship, vnto his best beloued friend. Then doe not smoother this thy griefe within thy selfe, but make me acquainted therewithall: Otherwise, thou wilt induce me to haue this opinion of thee, either that thou doest hold me for thine enemie, or else, that thou art no right friend vnto me, and therefore, iudge of me by thine owne selfe. Although these speeches were vttered with great earnestnes, and with a most hartie affection, yet could they not worke any thing at all in the minde of Antonio. As the wilde Boare, sitting vppon his tayle, standeth stoutly in his owne defence a∣gainst the dogges, not stirring once, as much as one foote, from his first place, now tea∣ring one Brache, and then shaking in pieces another: euen so Antonio Coneealeth still (within his brest) his paine Nor, (but to Mistris his) will tell the same. But the meanes how to discouer it vnto her, he knoweth not: much lesse, how to finde occasion to breake his minde vnto her.
O how hard a matter is it to doe ill, and when wee haue done it, to conceale the same? whereas the behauiour and carriage of the well-meaning man is safe and sure, not vnlike a common beaten way, that is easie to be found. But now Leander looketh for an answere of Antonio, who could not chuse, but that he must needs answere him, and answer him he did: but (God knoweth) in such man∣ner, and with such simple and bare excuses, as Leander perceiued too plainely, that the young Louer meant not to acquaint him with that which troubled him so much: which was the reason that for that time, hee gaue ouer to importune him any more, and the ra∣ther, for that his conscience told him, hee had done what he could, to the vttermost of his power, as much as did belong vnto him. For, when one hath offered vnto his deare and beloued friend, (as much as in him lyeth, to hinder, or crosse and keepe backe some inconuenience that is like to happen vnto him) although he cannot bring what he would to passe: yet is it farre lesse griefe vnto him, then if the pretended mischiefe had come, and he had offered no kindnesse at all vnto him: because we beeing mortall creatures, are not able to cope with the Gods, whose wills it is, it should be so, and to be ouercome by them, (after we haue done to the vttermost of our strength and power) is not a cause why wee should chafe or stomacke thereat; in as much as wee are subiect vnto them, and the rather, because we are made and formed by them. But now Antonio his discase increaseth (daylie) more and more, hee taketh no rest, nor can he eate or drinke, his colour is earthly, and his face is pale and leane. The day he spendeth in sighing, and the night in sobbing, whilst his eyes looke redde, with con∣tinuall weeping. (For though teares be forbidden braue and gallant Spirits) yet are they tollerable in them, when they chaunce to fall into the amorous and ardent passi∣ons of Loue. His armes are brawne-fallen, and on his bodie appeareth little or no flesh at all, in such sort, as he resembleth an Anatomie, or dead carkasse, rather then a li∣uing man. As hee that is plagued with a hote burning Feuer, giueth manie testimonies of the same. One while, by suddaine shaking and shiuering, throughout his whole bo∣die, another while, by a colde sweat, and then by a hote one againe. Euen so, Anto∣nio, his in firmitie appeared by many signes, there beeing not one ioynt or member of his coarse, but what shewed him to be extreamely tormented, and as it were, at deaths doore. Which Leander seeing, began to be halfe madde, for the very anguish thereof: what to doe he knew not, and therefore was almost at his wittes ende. To set vppon him a∣fresh, to see if he could perswade him to shriue himselfe vnto him; he thought were but follic, by reason, he found him (before) so vnwilling to participate vnto him, or con∣fesse any thing. At the last he began to thinke, that although he kept it from him (perhaps vpon some secret occasion) yet peraduenture, another might wring it out of him. Where∣vpon, he went vnto his wife, praying her to take the paines to see, if shee could learne of Antonio, that which hee had spent so much labour to knowe, and yet by no meanes could attaine there vnto. The chaste Ladie, who was wonderfull willing to obey her husband, and who affe∣cted (yet with modestie) what her Lord liked, being of her owne disposition, so cour∣teous and pittifull, as she gricued for the hurt of an other: especially he being the dea∣rest friend her husband had, gladly accepted of the proffer. Promising him to handle the matter (both by her diligent care, and good aduifement) so cunningly, as it should goe hard, but that (before fewe dayes were gone and past) shee would vnderstand and know all. And so shee did indeed, speaking (then more truer then shee was aware of. For after shee had vsed to come and visite him (now and than) he began to recouer preti∣lie well: insomuch as one day, the gentlewoman finding him alone, intteated him ve∣rie kindely to walke with her into the garden hard by, somewhat to recreate himselfe, (and to reuiue him in that feeble and weake estate) telling him, it would not be amisse for
him (now and than) to take the open aire: which words, she deliuered with so sweet a grace, and so lonely a smile, as (now) he was ten times deeper in loue with her, than he had bene before. O how foolish are Louers, who because they themselues are senselesse, therefore they thinke that euery one else is so likewise; and that, because they loue, therefore, none should be exempted from louing: especially this is one of their conceits, as concerning such women as they affect, that because they are men worthie to be liked, therefore (forfooth) these women must loue them, if they but giue them neuer so little entertainment. And so this vaine Antonio perswaded himselfe verily, that his friends wife, affected him, because she vouchsafed (in priuate) to walke abroad with him. He that hath bene long sicke, is so desirous of his health, that the least ease or amendment that he findeth, maketh him beleeue he is well recouered and whole. And so fareth it with these Louers, who if they receiue the least fauour that may be, at their Ladies hands, they (strait∣waies) thinke, they are their owne. Now was Antomo where he would be, for he might (at leisure) behold the beauti∣ous eies, the louely face, and the faire breasts of his sweet Mistris, but the more the fond man gazed vpon them, the more he was burnt with a secret inward fire, these rare beauties of hers, drawing him into the bottom lesse gulfe of his vtter ouerthrow; as the whirle Pooles in the Seas, by many windings and turnings, still by little and little the ships within their circled armes, and so deuour and swallow them vp: meane space, wretched Antonio, one while, by his lookes, another while by his sighes, one while chan∣ging countenance, and another while, looking red as fire, discouered vnto his Mistris (so liuely) the secret griefe that tormented him within his soule, as she needed to haue knowne no more, had she bene trained vp so well as hee, in the schoole of Loue. But, as the right, true, and honourable Captaine, suspecteth not any treason, because he knoweth not what it meaneth, and for that he neuer did couet to learne the same, so this rare Gētlewoman, hauing neuer learnd, how to entertaine or like any one, except her husband, could not conceiue the amorous fashions of Antonio, nor what he meant, making loue vnto her, which was the reason, his sorrowes slaked not, but rather encrea∣sed more and more. His fearefull glaunces which he stole vpon her, and his scalding sighes (faithfull messengers of his minde) forget not to set out the sorrow that he endu∣red. One while he looked pale for feare, another while he blushed red for shame, often∣times, beginning to speake, and so made an end before he had begun. His heart is wil∣ling that his tongue should discouer his sicknes vnto his Physition, but his tongue (who doubteth he shall make the matter worse by speaking) hath not the courage to speake one word. His head is intoxicated, and troubled, whilst thousands of imaginations run in his braine. Now he is resolute to bewray his griefe vnto her, and now againe he is of a quite contrarie opinion, not to doe it, whilst he both hopeth and feareth, and all at one in∣stant. But, ô wretched carkasse the while, to entertaine so many, and so diuers enemies, within it. Feare opposeth himselfe against Loue, who faine would speake, and yet respect doth stop and hinder his desire. Faine would he haue some stranger to deliuer his minde vnto his Ladie in his behalfe, by which meanes (should he haue the deniall which he al∣readie apprehended in his thought) yet being deliuered vnto him, at a second hand, he thought it would not be altogether so terrible vnto him. But he too well knoweth that there is not any that can doe it, or that knoweth his secret meaning but himselfe, and therefore as the saying is, he must make a Page of his owne age, or else he must continue as he did, without bewraying his minde at all. One while he held downe his face for shame, fixing his eies vpon the ground, and an other while Loue lifted them vp againe, forcing him to stare, and gaze vpon the faire counte∣nance of his Mistris, he had all the gestures and signes of a most miserable Louer attain∣ted of Loue, speech onely accepted, and he that is a firme and zealous Louer indeed, neuer walketh without respect and fear. The Centlewoman perceiueth such alteration in his face, and that he often began to speake, was very importunate with him to know what he ment, and what he ailed. But
euery word she spake, was as a stabbe of a Poinard, giuen him at the hart. He feareth to speake, what might make his wound worse, and doubteth as much, least he should dis∣please the Ladie, who (as he thought) might (perhaps) enquire the cause thereof, be∣cause she would heale it. The fit opportunitie he had, made him to think, that it were best for him, (now) to lay open his minde or else neuer, thinking, that when he would, he should not finde so apt a time againe; and now againe a new toy taketh him in the head, perswading him to remit and referre this busines vntill another day, but then, by and by, he condemneth himselfe as vnwise, that hauing spent so much time, to finde this commoditie, and now (at the last) hauing gotten it, he goeth about to leaue it. In the end, being vrged (still) by the Gentle∣woman to resolue her of her doubt, and seeing that he could not well be rid of her, vn∣lesse he did satisfie her, in what she demaunded, he determined whatsoeuer should come of it, to breake this Ice, and to bewray his Loue vnto her, whereupon with a sad counte∣nance, and often faultring in his voice, he thus began. (Faire Mistris) I was in good hope, that my often sighing, with my heauie and per∣plexed countenance, had bene sufficient to haue bewrayed the sorrow that galleth my heart, without of hauing had any neede to pleade for pittie vnto you, with my mourn∣full tongue. But seeing it pleaseth you, that my speech shall deliuer what my heart gaue my troubled countenance in charge, I thinke it but reason so to doe, it being the command of her, who is the cause of this my wofull martyrdome, I know I doe but sow my seede vpon the salt sea shore, and that I lay my nets (although in vaine) to catch the windes, and yet had I rather to depriue my selfe of all comfort and ioy, then displease you, and send you away iustly incensed against me. He that hath deuoted himselfe vnto the ser∣uice of any woman, & will shew all dutifull respect that may be vnto her, will haue great regard that he offend her not, & will rather endure any punishment in his owne person, than moue her whom he vowed to adore with all reuerence. Seeing then you haue so earnestly commaunded me to open vnto you the very se∣crets of my soule, and the first causes and originall of all my trouble, I will condescend vnto you, and most faithfully deliuer the same, without keeping backe any thing from you at all. Knowe then (sweet Ladie) that your diamond eies, haue bene the torches that hath first lightned this fire, your beauties haue bene the Fewell, and your courtly behauiour the bellowes to kindle the same. You onely haue made the wound, and if you list may heale it, and from no other but from your selfe, am I to seeke comfort, for the wounds of Loue are healed by the selfesame dart that made them, as the Scorpion doth, who is of power to helpe such, whom he before hath stung. Iudge then (I beseech you) in what a pittifull plight I am, and what great cause I haue to curse and bewaile my hard disaster. For what hope to recouer my selfe of this daungerous disease haue I? and how is it possible for me, to obtaine that, for which (so much) I wish? Alas, I know not I, and yet Mirrha, ioyned her desire (although it were incesti∣ous) with her owne Father. And Passiphae, Queene of Candio, had her pleasure of a Bull, quenching by that meanes, her vnhonest heate. But I (poore wretched Caitiffe) how may I purchase that which (so faine) I would, except your fauourable grace, take compassion vpon me, in vouchsafing vnto my deadly sore, that comfortable remedie lying in your hands, which (onely) is offorce to make me well. Then, what should I vse so many words, or trouble you with so tedious a discourse? Onely this I will say, that I hate mine owne selfe, because I would loue you, assuring your selfe, that my life shall as soone be conuerted into ashes, as my soule is likely to be bur∣ned through the fire of Loue, vnlesse you cast this necessarie water vpon it, to quench the heate thereof, putting my dying heart in securitie of some good hope to come. I am bold (deare Mistris) to be thus plaine with you, because I am resolute, and haue set vp my rest, to chuse one of these two waies, either that of death, as soone as you shall pronounce the sentence of deniall vnto me, or that of life, if I shall finde you readie and milde, to ease me of my paine. Thinke then as you please of this my speech, and censure of me as you shall best
like: here I stand, before the barre of your beautie, expecting either life, or death, the one being as agreeable vnto me, as the other: and although I must needs tell you that it shall be farre greater glorie for you to saue me, than to cut me off before my time. Antonio, hauing deliuered his minde in this desperate kinde of manner, made the Gentlewoman so amazed to heare such an occasion vnexpected from him, as she scarce knew where she was. Her speech was gone, pale, earthly, was her sight, A stone (not liuing creature) seemd she right. But being come vnto her selfe againe, she began to curse within her selfe, her foo∣lish ouer hardines, in that she was so earnest and inquisitiue to know of him the reason of his discontentments, when it concerned her nothing at all, doubting least if any disgrace should happen about the same, all the blame should be laide vpon her. How to replie (vpon the sudden) she knew not, and whilst she was musing what she might doe, she be∣gan to hate him deadly, wishing vengeance to light vpon him, for presuming to court her with such shamelesse impudencie. Now whilst she stood thus bethinking her selfe of the matter, Antonio straitway, imagined it was for his good, that she delaied so long to aunswere him; but he found the contrarie too soone, for (in the meane time) she remembred her owne honour and chastitie, and the great friendship her husband had shewed (though vndeseruedly) vnto this traiterous friend of his, which so incenst her with iust rage and choller, as she began to take vp my Gentleman in this sort. How now sir, what is this you say, dreame you, or are you well in your right wits? What signe or likelishood of vice or dishonestie haue you seene in me, that you should thus proudly sollicite and importune me, to dishonour my selfé and my kinde husband, who loueth you farre dearer then his owne selfe? was there euer any so bold to attempt an enterprise so difficult and hard as this is, which thou goest about, without he had bene assured before by some gesse or other that he might bring the same to passe? I thinke none but thy selfe. But tell me I pray you (Antonio) what notice or testimonie of lightnes haue I gi∣uen vnto the world (at any time) that you should dare thus immodestly to accost me? Goe to your Minions and Curtizans abroad, and court them and not me, there make a spoke vnto such like huswiues, who haue no respect either of good name or fame. You are no Chapman for my Marchandise, no gold can buy mine honour, I hold it at so high a rate, neither can any loue or affection purchase the faith which I haue paund and promisde vnto my husband. I am no Laies, nor any Thais, that thou shouldst seeke to vrge me thus; thy perswasions being so perillous vnto me. Besides, I am least bound vnto thee, than vnto any other (in that) thou, as my mortall enemie liest in waite to spoyle and ruinate that which is ten thousand times more pretious vnto me than mine owne life. Thinke, that neuer the Romane Lucrece redeemed more couragiously the losse of credit, with the price of her blood, then I desire after the same rate to preserue mine, and that I had alwaies chuse rather to die, a chaste and faithfull wife, then liue like a most dishonest and disloyall harlot. I rather couet the troubles and crosses of Penelope, with her slainlesse vertue, then the merrie life of Clitemnestra, with all her foule and beastly pleasures. And the death of a sober Polixena, shall be still more agreeable vnto me, than the voluptuous liuing of a wanton Semiramis, being glutted with all sorts of vaine deli∣ces and dainties whatsoeuer. Talke no more (then) vnto me of this matter, for thou do∣est but loose thy labour: for sooner shall the heauens become Sea, and faire grow to be Ice, before I will yeeld vnto the least of thy requests. And were it not but that I am in hope that there are some sparkes of grace in thee, and that thou wilt become a new man, I would take such order to make thee giue ouer, and to bridle this thy rash attempt, as thou shouldest (neuer) speake more vnto me thereof, by laying open and displaying thy shamelesse practise vnto him, who may with good reason and Iustice, be reuenged of thee for a busing him (so much) as thou hast done. Cynthia, (for so was the Gentlewomans name) hauing cooled Antonios heate with this sharpe iniectiue, moued with iust chollor, left him, and returned into her house, he
being as much amazed and confounded therewith, as those were, who went about the building of the Tower of Babell, seeing themselues so sodenly to haue so many langua∣ges amongst them, and so different in their proceedings one against another. As that Murtherer is mightily astonisht, and in a most bad taking, vpon whom the Iudge at vn∣awares commeth, as he is wiping of his bloodie sword, and standeth by the carkasse of him that he hath slaughtered, because he seeth there is no way (but one) with him, which is the losse of his life: Euen so was Antonio in such a plight; long time did he stand as still as a stone, and no sooner was he able to speake, but that he began to lament and crie out afresh. No heart (were it neuer so obdurate and hard) had bene able to haue endu∣red so heauie a burthen of torments as he did. And now he beginneth to hate Loue, the motiue of his miseries: he accuseth his Mistris, the Author of his dispaire: detesteth his fortune, that his successe was no better in his sute: and curseth his tongue, which for being ouer sawsie and presumptuous, had vtterly ouerthrowne him for euer. All ioy he bids adue, all hope farewell, No longer now in sorrow, he will dwell. He is fullie bent to die, deuising with himselfe, what kinde of death he were best to chuse, to the end he might be rid, both of the world, and of his wretched estate, all at one time, he will (now) neither sigh nor weepe more for the matter, determining to change his teares into blood, and his sighes into wofull death: onely his desire is, to be fitted of a conuenient place to put in practise the same, for he durst not lay violent hands vpon himselfe in the Castle of Leander, least (perhaps) it should come to light why he made himselfe so away: whereupon he priuily conueieth himselfe away from thence, and get∣teth him into a thicke and darke wood, not farre from thenee, where he resolueth to end his life, and make that place his graue. It was aunswerable vnto his minde, it was se∣cret, obscure, & vnfrequented of all. This was the cause he began afresh (being all alone) to sigh and sob, and to ban and curse his ill fortune againe, which being done, he draw∣eth his sword, he feeleth the edge of it, to see if it be keene and sharpe enough, and that done, prepareth himselfe vnto death, thinking it to be much better to die by his owne proper hands, as another braue and high minded Aiax, than to liue in continuall vexa∣tion and miserie, as a base and degenerate Thesites. And now he setteth the pommell of his blade vpon the ground, the poynt whereof was placed iust against his heart, when (as he was minded to thrust himselfe quite through) behold, death (as he thought) ap∣peared vnto him, with so horrible and gastly a visage, as he gaue ouer his enterprise: long was he not in this muse, but that he drew his Raiper againe, condemning much his first feare, when (vpon the sodaine) an other humor (more diuilish than the rest) tooke him, which was not to die, vntill he had obtained what he so much coueted, vowing within his soule, that he would haue his will of the faire Cynthia, at what high price soeuer he bought it. His Loue (now) was turned into hate, and his respectfull duetie, into sensuall lust. He thinketh not of the dāger he is like to incurre, by entring into so infamous an actiō. All former friendship and kinde Hospitalitie is forgotten, so he may haue his wish, ei∣ther by violence, or what way else, he cares not, although (afterward) he die for the same: for (so to die, he imagineth) he shall be most happie: and this is his most certaine and constant resolution. O franticke rage, O cursed madnes, and O cruell furiousnes of Loue! This made Medea worse than a Bedlem, to massacre her owne children: and this brought the fa∣mous Mark Antony, to lose both his honour and his life. Now Antonio hammering in his head this wicked practise, began to set a good vpon the matter, as if all had bene well, beginning to looke cheerfully, and making the world beleeue he had quite forgotten all former sorrowes, as if he would haue bene merrie euer after, which recouerie from his sicknes, made euery one glad, especially his true friend Leander, and the Ladie his wife, who (verily) thought, that Antonio had forgotten all his old loue to wards her, and that her schooling of him, in that shroad manner as she did, had made him to be come a new man.
But alas (poore soule) how much was she deceiued, for all this while, Antonio was working of treason against her, and her husband, which wrought their vtter ouerthrew. As a fire that long time lie hid in a hollow hole, when it bursteth forth, becommeth more violent, more outragious, and more hurtfull, than when it beginneth first to burn; Euen so the villainie of Antonio, was farre more terrible (making no shew of any such thing) then if he had put it in practise (before) when he was in his sicknes, languishing through paine: for he hauing bethought himselfe what he would haue them to doe, get∣teth a companie of notable Rascalls (secretly) together, certifying them what he would haue them to doe for him, euery one of them being as readie to condescend vnto him, in hope of base gaine, as he to commaund them: and the rather, when they knew it was to put in practise so damned a deed, such cursed murtherers as those being (alwaies) more prone to euill, than vnto good. Thus hauing set euery thing in order; he most solemnely inuiteth Leander and his louing wife, to feast with him, vpon a certaine day appointed for the purpose, who sus∣pecting no treacherie, very kindly accepted of the same, promising for himselfe, and for his wife, not to faile but to be there. O how worthie is a false and trecherous friend of the greatest punishment that may be, who plaieth the false counterfeit, and of a deare friend, becommeth a deadly foe? and how farre more hurtfull is he, than an open and profes∣sed enemie, for of the one a man can hardly take heed, because he carrieth the vaile of friendship to nide his treacherie, but the other we may easily auoide, by reason we know, he seeketh to doe vs any iniurie that lieth in his power. Poore Leander found this to be true vnto his cost. For comming vnto Antonio his house, with his wife, at the first meeting, he made a shew vnto them, of a most solemne and hartie welcome, but no sooner were they set at the table, thinking to be merrie, and that they were there as safe, as if their had bene in their owne Castle, but behold the ruffi∣anly Murtherers being disguised, brake in (vpon the sodaine) amongst them, with their naked swords in their hands, running vpon Leander, and giuing him many wounds, and that done, they laid violent hands vpon his wofull wife, carrying her away (perforce) and leauing him there for dead, wallowing in his luke-warme blood. It is an old saying, that gold is a bad seruant, being the occasion many times that his owne maisters throate is cut, and that rich men liue the wretchedst liues of all others, be∣cause they haue great care, and much adoe to keepe their goods, and are in as great a feare (continually) least they should lose them: yet I am of this conceit, that a faire wo∣man is (farre more) hurtfull vnto her husband, she being as much laide for, or rather more than his gold is, for gold (except it be taken away by force) neuer offereth him∣selfe vnto a straunger, nor betrayeth his Lord: whereas, a beautifull wife (oftentimes for∣getting her selfe) her honour, and her faith, suffereth her selfe to be carried away by ano∣ther, and so betraieth her husband, who (afterward) either dieth for griefe, or (else) hath his throate cut by his wiues Champion and friend. So was Agamemnon slaine by his wife: so died Achilles for Polixenas sake: and so were the Sabin women, the cause of the warres betweene their owne countrimen and the Ro∣manes. But (now) who could in liuely colours set forth the vnspeakable griefe of mourn∣full Cynthia, the espouse of Leander, she thinking he was dead, and her selfe being in the hands of her most deadly enemies? What penne were able to write all her pittifull com∣plaints? what paper were sufficient to containe her laments and what report, her more then dolefull speeches? Vngratious Antonio, the Author of all these euils, hauing now the prey he so long time desired, leaueth his house (presently) carrying her away (in post) with him, mea∣ning to goe (so farre off) as he should neuer be heard of afterward, not caring for any thing else, but for her person; and the rather, because he had gotten in his purse great store of gold and Iewels to defray his charges in his iourney. But leauing him galloping away with her, we will come (againe) vnto Leander, who being found to haue (as yet) some life in him, was carried home vnto his Castle, where his wounds being searched by a reuerend Hermit (dwelling not far from him) and one that was very skilfull in Chyrurgerie, and soueraine medicines applied vnto the same, he recouered, and was cured before he was aware. But though he was well in bodie, yet
was he not so in minde, for the vnfortunate knight had many fearefull conceits, that troubled him in his head; one while the dissoyāltie of his friend gaulled him, and an o∣ther while, the departure of his wife grieued him, but that which most vexed his soule, was, that he had a vehement suspirion, she should be priuie vnto this conspiracie, and so (by consequence) partaker of this murther, as willing, he should be made away. Neuer were the ships of Aeneas or T'lisses, tost so furiously and with contrarie windes, vpon the swelling waues of the soming Seas, as his minde was canuased and carried too and fro, with diuers opinions and thoughts, as concerning this matter. When a man hapneth to haue any strange mischance, he (still) doth consture eue∣ry thing in the worse part; because, he thinketh euery body should be against him, by reason ill fortunes is so common and ordinarie vnto him, and therefore he laieth the cause of his Disaster, vpon euery one, and this was it that made the distemperato Lean∣der to suppose, that his modest wife, had bene consenting vnto his plot laid for him, and that he had made her Pailiard, to put the same in practise, because he had such a firme confidence in his friendship, as he could (hardly) be induced to thinke, that he would (euer) haue perpetrated such an hainous act, vnlesse his wife had very earnestly prouoked and vrged him to baue done it. Thus we see, how the Pilgrim (oftentimes) in the night, taketh the wrong way fot the right, and how some take blacke for white, and yellow for red, in colours. Yet must I needes say, that such are to be pardoned in some sort (although they censure ouer∣rashly and hastily) who comming from hauing a shrewd turne done vnto them, know not, but as they blindly gesse, whom they should iustly blame, for true griefe deserueth pardon, and loosers haue alwaies leaue to speake. But the righteous God aboue, who knoweth the truth of all things, did discouer this, at the fittest time for distressed Cynthia, to cleare her, as sometimes he did Susanua, of this villainie, falsely imputed vnto her. Leander, waxing strong in bodie (although troubled sore in minde) determined, either to die, or else to find out the traitor, that had offered him this monstrous outrage, vowing to be reuenged on him; as also, to seeke his wife, whom likewise he ment to punish, if he should find her accessarie, in any point of the same. Whereupon, he armeth himselfe, getteth vpon his horse backe, and accompanied by three or foure Gentlemen (his friends) he searcheth all the countrie thereabouts, to see, if he could heare any tidings, either of that treacherous villaine, or of his wife. In the end, he lighteth vpon a great thicke & gloomie Forrest, through which, as he rode, he found a dead carkasse of a man, and a woman lying by him, being in little better case then he was. But leauing Leander and his companions seeking their aduenture, we will come vn∣to wofull Cynthia his wife, and (when fit time shall serue) we will discouer who was that creature dead, and who that woman, being almost in as bad a taking as he, vpon whom Loander (so strongly) hapned. Cynthia being carried away from her husband, so soden∣ly, and by such barbarous treacherie, was (for a great while) as one in a traunce, hardly comming vnto her selfe againe. And certainlie (I thinke) that if women were subiect by nature to die for sorrow, then (no doubt) but she had died, for neuer was there woman in this world, more sad or heauie than she was, no not Niobe, Hecuba, Oenone, Porcia, Cornelia, nor any other La∣die, were she neuer so ouerwhelmed with miseries. But this kinde of death seldome or ne∣uer is incident vnto the Female kinde, as that of sodaine ioy is. Long lay she in this Extasie or sound, and (long) was she before she recouered her right sences againe, and (so much) was she astonisht in her minde with the same, as the passage of her speech was kept close, and shut from her, yet (at the last) her vitall spi∣rits recouered force within her, and her tongue had libertie to speake. But alas, she could not as much as pronounce one word, neither was she able (once) to open her mouth, so wofully did she weepe, and so pittfully did she sob and sigh. Di∣uers sorts of colours (and that in great number) must a cunning Painter haue, to draw a faire and great Picture: Euen so, thousands of teares, and millions of sighes, had this
wretched Gentlewoman need of, if she meant liuely to set forth and bewaile her Disaster at the fall. For neuer was any Ladies sorrowes to be compared vnto hers. Hellena was rauished, (but) with her owne consent. Neither did her rauishment bereaue her husbands life, as hers did. Penelope was dailie and hourely sollicited and importuned, by a number of tedious and impudent suters, but yet she was suffered to liue chastly, and to attend the returne of her Vlisses. Hecuba (after shee had seene her husband murthered, and all her sonnes slaine) was led away as a captiue or slaue into Greece: and (yet) had shee more reason to haue borne with patience these her misfortunes, (though in a higher degree of miserie) ra∣ther then Cynthia in hers. For Hecubas mischaunces proceeded from her enemies, to whom the law of Nati∣ons giueth leaue to doe what mischiefe they can: whereas haplesse Cymhias vnhappi∣nes, came from him, whome she esteemed as the dearest and most faithfull friend her Husband had. Lucrctia, for losse of chastitie slewe her owne selfe, but her death was the death of her aduersarie, and the life and libertie of all her Romane Citizens. And theresore no wo∣man can be said to haue bene more wretched then hopelesse Cynthia: for she saw her Le∣ander murthered as she thought, whilst she remained as prisoner, in the power of him, that was his bloodie Butcher, looking (euerie houre) to be forced of her honour and good name. Infinit were the occasions that she had to complaine, and the reasons without num∣ber, that compelled her to exclaime against the most partiall Destinies. For what could she loose more pretious and deare, then her sweet Spouse, whom she esteemed more then her honor, and her owne life? Needs therefore, must her complaints be greeuous, and her lamentings heauie and bitter, as one that dispaired of all comfort to come. Ah (woe is me, cried shee out) why was I borne, and why did my mother bring me into this world? since there is no person liuing (so vnfortunate) as I am? for I doe not count those miserable, who haue liberty to shorten their owne dayes by death, but onely such as faine would die, and yet cannot. Is it possible, that one should be borne vnder so hard a Planet, as not to be able to die, when most fainest he would? O how great is that euill, when it forceth vs to require ayde of the Fatall sisters, to ridde vs of the same, whom men detest and loath, as their mortall enemies? And (yet) can none but they, relieue and ease such wretched creatures. The healthie man, (whilst he is well) loatheth and abhorreth, to take, or taste anie potion or medicine, but when he is sicke, he is glad and faine to swallowe it downe, be it neuer so bitter and sower. So we, whilst we liue merilie, and at harts ease, we contemne death, but when our griefes are so great as wee are not able to endure them, then we ac∣count our selues, as happie to haue him. O God, is it possible for me to be able in words to deliuer my losses, for my sighes to deplore them? for mine eyes to bewaile them? or for my heart to be of force to en∣dure them? If the losse of paltrie goods maketh men outragious in their passions, and if the death of our kinsfolks or friends, be sufficient to engender afflictions in vs, how much more then, haue I cause of insupportable sorrowes? Alas, I haue lost my kinde husband, but am I able to say so, and not my soule to flie forth of this miserable bodie? or is my condition so miserable, that I may say, I haue lost him indeed? No, no, I will neuer belieue it, rather will I die, then perswade my selfe, of any such vnwelcome matter vnto me. But say I die, yet haue I lost him, yea I haue lost him, and onely through mine oc∣cation. I haue bene the homicide of my husband, and I (alone) haue slaine him: but why then (alacke) doeth not the rigour of the Lawe passe vpon mee, which condem∣neth such murtherers vnto death? Was it not enough for mee to be brought into the most wretchedst estate of all others, to be depriued of my deare Leander, but that I must be the cause of his vtter ouerthrow also?
Damned and accursed Beautie, how wise was that young Romane Gentleman Spuri∣us, who (most cruelly mangled) and defaced his louely face, because hee would haue none to like him. And so, thrice happie had I bene, if I had spoyled, and made foule, this my wicked countenance, which was the first motiue of all these euils and mis∣chiefes following. O faire soule, of my deare Spouse and Bedfellow, great reason hast thou (now) to complaine of mee, iust are thy accusations, and most right thy greeuances against me, yet since the Gods are appeased with the sacrifices of men, I hope that my life shall be a sufficient satisfaction for the offence I haue done vnto thee. Thou liuest in the hea∣uens, where nothing is hid from thee, and seeing thou knowest all things, thou needest not to doubt of mine innocencie herein. But what is this vnto thee, seeing (now) thou liuest no more, and that thou art cut off, before thy time appointed? But I will presentlie follow thee, neither had I stayed so long as I do, but that I am preuented much against my will. For with what weapon should I pierce this my fainting brest? or what kinde of death were I best to die of? and in what manner will these mine enemies giue me leaue to slaughter my selfe? Alas, they will not doe me so great a fauour, and too too narrowlie doe they watch mee, that I can not hurt my selfe. Thrice happie wert thou (miserable king Perceus) in comparison of mee, since thy Conquerour Paulus Aemilius, gaue thee libertie to make away thy selfe, so to ridde thee from thy seruile bondage. But I haue lost my Husband. Porcia would not suruiue hers; No more would Cornelia, Cleopatra, and diuers o∣thers, all which, made away themselues, to followe their husbands: and shall I not be as willing as they were in this case, and as ready to take the same course to follow death, that I may liue with my deare Leander for euer? Yes, yes, I will be as forward as the best, and I will deuise some way or other, to ridde my selfe out of this loathed life, which can∣not liue without his soule, who was my frendly husband. Besides, the longer I liue, the greater feare I am still in, to loose my chaste honor, which although God hath (yet) preserued, yet doubt I sore, I shall not long continue so, but be forced by them, vnlesse I escape away from them, by some miracle from a∣boue. But, say I should be so fortunate, as to be freed from out the handes of this Tyger, (who holdeth me as his slaue) without anie violence offered vnto my chastitie, yet who would belieue the same, seeing he hath attempted so desperate and villainous an exploit, forgetting all religion and friendship, onely to haue mee in his possession, and conside∣ring the strange and extreame affection, that he hath made a shewe vnto the open world to haue borne mee? A graue and wise woman, must not onely be free from blame it selfe, but as well must be cleane from all suspition of the same. For what maketh her to looke without blushing, but her vpright carriage and her good name (alwayes) vntainted, which being once defiled, resembleth a barren Tree, that is without fruit, or hath bene blasted with Lightnining or Thunder, neuer looking (afterwards) greene againe. Filthie and base is the most excellentest beautie of any woman, if (once) her modest life be corrupted. Venus was faire, but (yet) of no account, because of her immodest desires. Hellen was beautifull, but too much defamed, because of her luxurious life: and so were Thais, Flora, and Laxis, louely to behold, but (yet) accounted of, as common, because of their shamelesse, and too too wanton behauiour. In what a pecke of troubles then am I in, looking still euery moment, when I shall be froced to make shipwracke of my chastitie; for the defence of which, I haue (of∣tentimes) hazarded my life. But I appeale vnto the Almightie, who shall be my iudge, if I be forced, how much my soule abhorreth this vice, for though my bodie be defiled, yet shall my minde neuer be, I being fullie resolute to wash the same cleare, with the dearest blood I haue, assoone as any opportunitie shall serue me to put it in practise.
Mine onely hope is, that when I shall haue most need, God will vouchsafe to giue me a sweete taste of those comfortable words of his, who hath promised to succour and helpe those, which be his faithfull true seruants, in their greatest extremities, and when they least looke for any such aide or assistance from him. Thus wailed the distressed Cynthia, dispairing of all meanes how to relieue her selfe in her wretchednes: suffering her selfe to be carried away with the violence of her crosse, as the Shippe is tossed too and fro vpon the Sea in a Tempest. But our heauenly FATHER aboue, kept safe and vntainted her Honour, and so (by that way) receiued againe into his mercie, her chaste and pure soule, which hee before had lent her. It is in our aduersitie that wee finde the admirable succours of GOD, so pro∣fitable vnto vs; for in prosperitie wee cannot rightly taste them. No more then the Drunkard (being ouercome with too much liquor) can iudge of good wine, whilst wee being rocked a sleepe in the cradle of sensualitie, despise his mercies, as Porklings and hogges doe Malt and Acorns, when their bellies is full of them, but being once pinched with hunger, runne vp and downe for them, as they were madde. So wee, whilst we liue in pleasure, cannot rightly know how sweete the fauours and kindnesse of God is, because we are glutted with worldly delights. But when wee are (once afflicted with miserie, wee (then) finde the comfortablenesse of the same, and can quickly iudge, how necessarie it is vnto vs, for our good and welfare. And this Cynthia found, although after a straunge fashion. For those vngodlie Theeues, which wicked Antonio had hired, to be his bloodie executioners in this his vil∣lainous Teagedie, (not daring, for feare of being tortured with plagues) to stay in the Countrey, after they had committed this detestable outrage, followed him as fast as they could; Amongst which, there was one, more bolde then the rest, who marking the fa∣uour and comelinesse of Cynthia, (although as then she looked pale and leane, for verie anguish and griefe) grewe to be amorous of her, determining with himselfe, to haue his pleasure of her, although he paide neuer so dearely for it. Thus was the poore Gentlewoman, come out of Gods blessing into a warme Sunne, and fallen from a plaine Ague, into a hote burning Feuer, and yet this misfortune, tur∣ned in the end, vnto her good. Thus Heauens make proue, that profitable oft, Which mortall men account of, as of nought. The hand of the Lord is mightie and strong, who rewardeth sinne, according vnto his desert, not winking thereat, at any time, but either soone or late, punish the offence that is committed: For as we haue vsed others, so shall wee our selues be vsed, and such measure as we giue vnto strangers, such measure shalbe meated vnto vs againe. The murtherer (most commonly) dieth by the sword. The high-way Theefe is robbed and spoyled, the Adulterer shall be dishonored and shamed, and the cruell man, shall find no mercie of them into whose power he is fallen. If wee well remember this lesson, we shall find it to be most true, confirmed as well by the words of the euerliuing SONNE OF GOD, as by a number of ancient exam∣ples in the Sacred scriptures. Dauid for defiling the bed of Vrias, saw ciuill discord and discention amongst his owne children, he himselfe (after he had seene his daughter Thamar defloured, and his sonne Ammon slaine) being chased vp and downe by his owne childe, and reuiled and railed at, by a base and abiect Peasant of the Countrey. Iezabell, for hauing shed the blood of the Prophet, died a shamefull death, she being flung from out a high window, in her owne Pallace, vpon the ground, to serue for foode for dogges. Pilate for pronouncing an vniust sentence against the Innocent, was condemned vnto a most heauie death. And in our time, and in these our dayes, we see Fellons and Theeues most wretchedly perish.
The law of God permitteth not one neighbour to offend another, but that he re∣ceiue his reward thereafter: for otherwise God should not be iust, except he should doe good for good, and euill, for euill. And so did it happen vpon the Traitor Antonio, who was repayed with such iniu∣rie, as he had done vnto his deare friend, (but yet with great reason, hee hauing violated and infringed the lawes of friendship and Hospitalitie) by one of that cursed-crewe, which wrought the foresaide villanies, and in whome hee reposed greatest confidence and trust. So wee see the rauenous Wolues to howle, and to bicker one with another: the greedinesse in feeding, hindering them to knowe themselues, although they be all of one companie: and so the sent and sweetnesse of the prey, maketh Theeues to forget their former kindnesse (amongst themselues) egging them forward, to cut one anothers throate, to haue the more gaine. And such was miserable Antonio his misfortune, who hauing (as I saide before) got∣ten a good round summe of money and Iuells together, to liue vnknowne with his Mi∣stris, (not minding to returne any more vnto his owne home, where he had committed this wickednes) the smell of his Gold began to come into the noses of these murthering Rascalls: who when they knew not from whom to steale, vsed to robbe and filche, one from another. It is a very difficult and hard matter to giue ouer any kinde of vice, especially, if a man take an habit in the same: for then, the more hee marcheth forward to exercise it, the more he is plunged ouer head and eares in it. Not vnlike vnto the horned Stagge, who the more he seeketh to get out of the Toyle, (which as a snare, was left to intrappe him) the more he intangleth and windeth himselfe therein. Denis of Siracusa, had gotten such a custome, to spoyle and robbe the Gods in their Temples, that hee thought he had not spent that day well, in which he had not pilled some one God or other of his ornaments, or shauen the golden beard of some others: But hee and his were punished for the same, their fortunes beeing, to be banished out of their Countrey, and to die in great want and beggerie. But to come vnto the bolde Theefe, (of whome I spake before) who being deepely in loue with Cynthia, and whose fingers itched to be busie with Antonios golde, called his copes-mates together, vnto whom he told so swoothe a tale, and (so cunningly) per∣swaded them, to set abroach this second Tragedie against Antonio, as their teeth being seton edge for the Treasure, they quickly condescended vnto him, and the rather, be∣cause it was their ordinarie trade. The wicked still, heape sinne (like Hills) on sinne, So long, till they their Soules doe soyle within. And now the Holie one beginneth to raigne downe vengeance vpon the head of periured Antonio, who least thought of danger, when it was nighest at hand: hee not (once) as much as dreaming of anie mischiefe that hung ouer him, his chiefest studie, being how to perswade the sorrowfull Cynthia, to giue ouer her pensiue mourning, and to cast away all care and sadnes. And as hee was one day (alone) in her chamber with her, verie busie to comfort her, and as earnest to sollicite his olde loue vnto her, seeking to winne her good will and sauour: Behold (vpon the suddaine) this notable Rascall, with his fellowes, breaketh in vpon them, who without speaking (so much as one word) ranne furiously vpon Antonio with their naked swords, massacring him, as Caesar was in the Senat; and that with such impositie and outragiousnes, as they spoyled one another, especiallie the miserable: but then, most happy and fortunate Cynthia, who wonderfullie desirous to die, rushing into the middest of their brandishing blades, and presenting her naked breast vnto the mercie of the Theeues, was (in the ende) wounded to death amongst them, her chaste and purple blood, streaming out of her weake and fainting carkasse, as from a running Fountaine.
And (yet) may we count her fortunate, in this her misfortune, since she was borne by destinie to be miserable, her happe (being so good) as to die without the losse of her honour and reputation, carrying away with her, her good name and fame, euen vnto the graue. Thus was the chaste Iphiginea sacrificed: so was the bashfull Polixena, put to death: and so dyed the vertuous daughter of Iepha, with diuers other Virgins, who to conserue their Chastitie, left both their liues and soules together. This murther done, there followed another, for these Rakehells, fearing to be ta∣ken for doing the deed, and willing to be gone, vrged their fellow Theefe to make haste away, with them, but he was so farre in loue with Cynthia, (who lay at the point of death) as by no meanes he would leaue her: which they perceiuing, and doubting least (if hee should be found there) he would bewray, and appeach them all, thought to make sure worke, as nigh as they could, and so thrusting him through, they trussed vp their bagge and baggage, carrying away Antonio his Treasure with them, leauing Cynthia readie to giue vp the ghost, who though shee were so nigh her ende, yet could she speake a little. No sooner were these Hell-hounds gone from her, but shee beganne to take some small comfort in her minde, counting her selfe as blessed, to die in this manner, hauing a sure confidence, that she should see her husband in Heauen: the glorie whereof, she ho∣ped to enioy, because she had so luckily preserued her honour. O how sweete a thing is death vnto them, who are desirous to die, when they see themselues disfranchised, and freed from all misfortunes, and when they find their mi∣series, with the vpshot of their liues. Such was the death of the modest and pudike Cynthia, and with such ioy did This∣bie leaue the world, to follow her beloued Piramus: for death is not of power to vnbinde the hearts of true Louers. No, no: they must follow one another, euen into the Eli∣zian fieldes, and there, tye (againe) those chaines, which death before had broken in sunder. And now sweet Cynthia perceiuing her selfe to be alone, and readie to render vp her Soule vnto her first Redeemer, lifting vp her eyes to heauen, began to make this prayer. I knowe and acknowledge, I confesse, and proclaime all abroad, that thy speech (ô most gratious GOD) is both Sacred, true, and veritable: which is that thou assurest succour and aide, vnto such of thy distressed seruants, as be readie to dispaire, for want of helpe. So diddest thou relieue that Countrey of Aegipt, which was wel-nigh starued with famine, through the wisedome of chaste Ioseph. Thou diddest assist the Iewes in their great extreamie: when the red Sea gaue backe, to make them passage, drowning their e∣nemies, which went about to pursue and follow after them. Thou diddest send the fore∣said people most miraculously Manna from heauen, when they were (almost) dead for very hunger. Thou diddest make cleare water to flowe from the hard and frozen Rocke, to staunch their drinesse: and thou (Lord) didst free them from the power of Senache∣rib, by thy holie Angell. Thou diddest deliuer Daniel from out the Lyons denne: and the modest Susanna, out of the bloodie hands of the two olde Palliards, the Elders. And so (sweete Sauiour) hast thou protected mine honour, which without thee, had bene o∣uerthrowne vtterlie. Thrice happie I, that through thy sacred guiding of me, haue escaped this misfor∣tune, but far more blessed, in that I shall leaue this world, in this bad and wretched time, where nothing doth raigne and dominiere, but vice, Treason, and violence. I most humblie thanke thee, most mercifull Father, for so great a benefite bestowed vpon me: For what could happen more acceptable vnto me, then to follow my deare Husband into heauen, thereto continue with him, and to enioy euerlasting glorie with thy Saintes? Let vs die willingly, then (Cynthia) with a braue minde and constant resolution, leauing a rich testimony of our loyall loue and affection, vnto the posteritie that shall come hereafter. And although a faithfull Christian ought not, (as hee is dying) either to desire, or to wish anie vengeance for to light vpon his aduersaries and enemies: yet must I needs confesse, that it is a great solace and contentment vnto mee, to die in the middest
of such as were foes vnto my Leander, land mine honour, and the rather, because they are dead as well as I, to make satisfaction for their faults. O GOD, how sacred are thy decrees, how iust thy iudgements, and how rightfull thy proceedings? Thou hast not permitted the murtherers of my Husband to liue long, after they had done so horrible a deed, and contrarie to all expectation, thou hast defended mee from their most furious and vnchast lust: and therefore I will take this my crosse most patiently, and will be contented to die, as willinglie, as when I was first ioyned by the holie Church, vnto my deare Husband in sacred marriage bandes, most religiously. And yet (my Soueraigne Sauiour) I greatly feare thy Iustice, the number of my faults, weighing farre more heauie then my good deeds, but thou canst (if thou so please) deface them all. Thou art the God of all mercie, and art mercifull vnto all men, for the consolation and saluation of whome, thou thy selfe (of thy great compassion) hast bene willing to die. O then, let this innocent blood of mine, shed by the aduersaries of thy glorie, be sufficient to wash my sinnes away, through thy grace, and let my modest and stainelesse minde, be as a fire to consume the number of mine offences. O yee mine eyes, the Authors of my disasters, cruell and proud eyes, first motiues of these our common miseries & calamities: soone shall you loose your wanton lights, and soone shall you be closed vp, with an yron sleepe of death for euer. But ô gentle Death, when commest thou? come I beseech thee, come away vnto mee, who art so courteous, so apte, so fit, and so profitable for my sorrowes. Often haue I desired thee, a thousand times haue I called for thee, and with thou∣sands of intreaties and prayers, perswaded thee to come to assist mee, and (now thou art come) I salute thee, and thanke thee, entertaining thee, as one who can saue mee from a great losse, thou being able to withdraw me from shipwracke, and of power sufficient, to bring me safely into the Hauen, where I long so much to be. O how foolish is that Marriner, who being miraculouslie arriued in the Port, will backe againe into the Sea, whilst the storme playeth his part, and not stay vntill the wea∣ther be cleare and calme. Euen so, how madde were I, if hauing cast Anker at the Hauen of my well-fare, I should now begin to wish to liue once more, returning backe into this miserable life, in which we encounter so many dangerous Rocks, and perilous stumbling blocks, as we can neuer be quiet. Then let vs die: what say I, die? Nay (rather) let vs liue, for hee onely liueth hap∣pily, that changeth this fraile and transitorie life, after an immortall and an euerlasting estate. That Farmer may be saide to be right fortunate, who leaueth his Farme which hee holdeth of his Lord, to enioy a faire Mannor in Fee simple, to him & his heires for euer. This was the cause that so manie holie and graue persons haue wished for death, thinking that being dissolued from life, they should become farre better by this altera∣tation and change. Elias liuing in the wildernes, did often couet it. Old Symeon demanded it, and Saint Andrew refused to liue, to make his choyce of death. Who then can hinder mee, but that I should desire it? imitating so many worthy personages? No, it is that I onely re∣quire and looke for. For the griefe thereof, is lesse, then the least paine we feele, when we are aliue. That debtor, that is still vexed, haunted, and abused by his Creditor, because hee should pay what he oweth, is he not happie, when he hath made euen with all men, that he may (after) liue in quiet? If so, why (then) farre more blessed are they, who pay their due vnto Nature, vnto whome they are indebted, and who by tendering the same vnto her, (which they must once doe) are quited and freed from all worldly calamities afterwards to come. My onely desire is to see, and stand before the presence of my most gracious Lord and GOD, and to behold the face of my louing Husband, wayting and atten∣ding vpon him.
Dispose thee, then once more Cynthia, to goe this pleasant voiage, resoluing to giue ouer this mortall life, to enioy an immortall felicitie. Lord, then receiue my soule, and deliuer it out of the hands of mine ancient and sworne enemie the diuel. So said the dolorous (or rather) ioyfull Cynthia, who hauing laide her selfe downe in a comely manner, expecting euery minute when she should die, tooke thought for nothing but how she might be buried orderly. But God tooke order for that matter. For no sooner had she made an end of her Praier, but Leander (by chaunce) came that way, who perceiuing (farre of) these dead bodies, and desirous to know what they were, set spurs to his horse, to ride towards them, and when being come neare them (by little and little) he found, what he so much sought for. As the young amorous Bull, seeing (a farre of) a young Haifer to brouse vpon the bankes of a cleare Riuer, approacheth neerer & neerer, to know ye better, if it be his Loue or no, and as he marcheth forward, holdeth vp his head for ioy, because he findeth her by certaine markes to be the same. So Leander, euery step he goeth, reioyceth greatly in his minde, as assuring himselfe, that he hath (now) found, that which with so great la∣bour) he had made search for. But as that Marchant is not throughly ioyfull, who after he hath made a long, and dangerous voyage, findeth but the halfe part of his Marchandise in his ship, the gaine of which, drew him to aduenture abroad, and to leaue his countrie and friends. Euen so, Leander found himselfe, but halfe contented and pleased, when he percei∣ued those to be dead, whom he so much coueted (in his minde) to haue encombred them aliue; neuerthelesse, he drew neerer vnto the place where they lay, marking very wistly, both his dead enemies, and his wife. As he stood (thus) gazing vpon them, diuers conceits ran in his head, not know∣ing well, what to thinke of the matter, one while he thinketh that his wife loued Antonio so dearely, as she would needes die with him: an other while, he iudgeth rightly of the fact, imagining that ciuill discention had caused one to kill an other: now, he iudgeth that some foe of Antonios, had stabd him, and then againe, he gesseth that some of his friends had offered him this cruell outrage, for doing so great villainie against him. But Loue crossed all these contrarie conceits, dispearsing them heere and there, as the cracke of the thunder forceth the cloud to giue way, when it breaketh through the same, and falleth vpon the ground below: he thought, he had many iust occasions to hate his wife, meaning (if she had bene aliue) to haue inflicted vpon her, that punish∣ment, which he had (alreadie) found her to endure; and yet, when he had a little better considered thereof in his minde (seeing her to be brought vnto so pittifull a straight) he could not chuse, but must (needes) lament and bewaile her hard mishap. Whilest she liued, he loathed her, nor will he (by any meanes) be induced, to beleeue that she is culpable of that fault, of which he (before) accused her, seeing that (now) she is dead. A friend is neuer knowne (so well) as when he is mist. He commeth neerer and nee∣rer vnto her, which wofull Cynthia perceiuing, and not knowing who it was (but rather supposing, that the villaines were come backe againe, although she were not quite dead, yet did she faine her selfe to be so, fearing least they would offer some violence vnto her bodie, if she should haue made shew, that she had bene still aliue. Leander (lighting of his horse) kneeleth downe by his wife, weepeth bitterly, and then kisseth her, which the poore soule perceiuing, maruelling much what this should meane, openeth her dying eies a little, when after she had a good while (wistly) looked vpon him, she sawe and knew him to be liuing, whom she held and accounted to be dead. That Romane woman, who died with sodaine ioy, seeing her sonne returne safe and whole, from that bloodie battaile of Cannas, and whom she esteemed to be dead, was not halfe so much rauished with true delight, and amazemēt, in viewing him, as Cynthia was, when she saw her spouse aliue and well. And now she striueth (as much as in her feeble strength lieth) to open wide her languishing eies, that she might the better gaze, and looke vpon her husband.
But (alas) mortall and deadly were the glaunces she cast vpon him, mortall were they vnto her, & to Leander, she now began to wende away, as mildly as a lambe, whilest her wofull husband (what sinister conceit soeuer he had before of her) died for very an∣guish to see her in this wofull taking. He was aliue, and not wounded at all, his wife readie to giue vp the ghost, all to be mangled with gorie blood, and yet, had not he his tongue so readie to command, as his poore Cynthia had, for so great was his griefe, as he could not speake as much as one word, which she perceiuing, and (now) knowing throughly who he was, with a kind of hollow and broken voice, she spake thus vnto him. Ah my deare husband, art thou then come from heauen, to assist and helpe thy faithfull wife, she being readie to giue vp the ghost? and hast thou dained (so much) as to remember her, and to honour her at her end, with thy welcome presence? Ah say, is it thine owne selfe whom I see? or is it some euill spirit that hath taken thy shape vpon him, to mocke and delude me? If it be thee, and that thou liuest (as yet) then thrise fortunate is Cynthia to see thee, before she giueth ouer this wretched life. And yet if thou be that Leander, who (sometimes) wert the kind husband of vnhappie Cynthia, how (then) canst thou abide to approach neere vnto her, she hauing bene the occasi∣on, of so many euils lightned vpon thee, thou knowing not whether she be cleare from them or no? But I see well, that Loue draweth all such doubts in thee, and will not suffer thee, to beleeue any thing that is not good for me. And (yet) Leander, hast thou reason to conceiue the worst of me, because I haue bene the occasion of many troubles, that haue hapned vnto thee; notwithstanding, I sweare vnto thee, by that God before whom I hope to be iudged, & who reuengeth eue∣ry periurie, that I am meerely innocent of what ill so euer is done, I hauing not bene de∣filed, either in bodie or in minde, the Almightie hauing (most miraculosly) preserued me, from all such harme. Whereupon she began to discouer vnto him, all that had hap∣ned, since she last sawe him, and withall, how she had not made him acquainted with the affection which Antonio bare vnto her (the cause of all this mischiefe) and the reason, that it might haue bene preuent, if he had knowne thereof. But (said she) I was in good hope he would haue become a new man, being loth to bewray his soilie vnto you, because you made so great account of him, thinking he would (neuer) haue borre so bad a minde towards you. But now I see this sore to be vn∣recurable, I know not what to say, but onely to craue pardon of you for the same, and withall, to take some order for my buriall. Then (sweet husband weepe no more) for what reason hast thou to bewaile her death, who hath brought thee so many losses and vncurable dammages, whilest she li∣ued with thee? rather haue you cause to reioyce and be glad to see her finall end, and therefore I most humbly beseech you, if you doe loue me indeed (as you seeme at this time to make some shew that you doe) drie vp your teares, cease these lamentings, giue ouer this sighing and sobbing, and suffer me to finish this small rest of my life in some pleasure: for my sorrow proceedeth not from my death, but for that I see thee thus to take on. Trouble not then I pray thee, that contentment which I haue to view, and be∣hold thee, before I shut vp my dazeling eies, through thy too much lamenting for my death. If thou hast loued me, then call to minde this thy good will towards me, and let the remembrance thereof (now I die) perswade thee to doe so much for me. It is the last office of friendship, which thou must doe for me, for (now) I shall trouble thee no more, my glasse being runne, and the date of my life (in a manner) quite expired. Then graunt me this my request, for my daies, were but daies to serue thee, my soule, but a soule to honour thee, and my heart, but a heart to affect and onely loue thees and I hope, thou hast found, knowne, and perswadest thy selfe, that I speake nothing but truth. Which if thou doest, then let me obtaine this last Boone of thee, and be not so cruell, as to denie me so small a matter. Grieue then no more (my good Leander) for me, which if thou doest, I then will close mine eies, and shut vp my tongue, because I cannot abide to see thee in this heauie
plight for her, who is vnworthie that thou shouldest torment thy selfe (any way) for her cause. Hauing thus complained, she held her peace, when her wofull husband (who du∣ring this her lamentable discourse, had recouered his speech) began thus to comfort her. Ah my sweet Cynthia, what cause of mislike, haue I euer giuen thee, and when did I vse thee otherwise than became me, that thou shouldest imagine, I were not able to forbeare thy companie, without great discontentment vnto my selfe? Doest thou (then) thinke, that I loue thee not? If so thou thinke, (O God) what wrong doest thou vnto me? yes (Cynthia) yes, I loue thee, yea, and in that sort, as thou canst not die without me. Death is not of power sufficient to extinguish my loue, which shall liue in despite of him, and shall still continue with thee, be thou aliue or dead. Not so soone canst thou command, but I will as willingly condiscend vnto thee in any thing, and yet thy entreatie cannot hinder me, but that I must bewaile thy Disaster, and farre more should I take on by oddes, but that my hope is to see the (shortly) in ano∣ther world. Too zealous and affectionate is my loue towards thee, to see thee suffer that thou doest, and I not to be moued with the same. O would to God thou wert without hurt or wound, and that I had had that misfor∣tune, to haue falne vpon me, which thou now hast. But seeing it cannot be, thou shalt not chuse, but giue me leaue to beare some part of thine anguish. When we were well, and liued at hearts ease, there was not any thing, but what was common betweene vs, all things were alike betweene thee and me, why then shouldest thou oppose thy selfe (now) so much against me, as to denie me, that I should participate of thy troubles with thee? No no, I will beare a heauie burthen, in this thy sorrowfull song, and mine eies shall streame forth, before I die (as two fountaines of water) all the liquid humour that re∣maineth within my restlesse bodie. Thou goest thy way (my deare Cynthia) and leauest me here plunged in deepe per∣plexitie, but I will not stay long behind, soone will I follow after thee, and quickly ouer∣take thee. Is it possible mine eies should giue light vnto my bodie, and want thy sight? and is it likely I shall be able to abstaine from thy companie for euer, when I cannot endure to forbeare thy presence one short day? O (deare wife) now I coniure thee, by the chaste pleasures of our sacred Hymen, and vnspotted nuptiall bed, by that Loue of thine and mine (as yet neuer broken) and by thy heart, and mine, which neuer were but one, let me entreate thee, that thou take it not ill, although I die with thee. Great is the authoritie that Loue hath giuen thee ouer me, but yet not so great, as it shall disturbe my desire, or make me follow any other course but death. Certainely, certainely, I will beare thee companie euen into thy graue. O faire and beautifull eies, mine were you, whilest you liued, and mine shall you be, when you are dead. No man liuing, hath interest in you, but my selfe, and you, will I as well see, being dead, as when you were aliue. O curteous death, if it be possible for thee to be entreated by the Praiers, or the cries of mortall wights, or if euer thou hast done any kindnes vn∣to them, then I beseech thee, let me finde this fauour at thy hands, that I may breath my last gaspe, before my Ladie. Doe me this good turne, for all the euill thou hast done me, and in recompence of such great losses, as I am like to sustaine by thee, in snatching away from me (most vio∣lently) the onely support and Atlasse of my life, which if I may not obtaine, I will com∣plaine and exclaime against thee, making it knowne vnto the whole world, that thou art cruell, and partiall, against me onely: for it should much abate and asswage my tor∣ments, to goe before her, to the end, I might be exempted from those (more then dead∣ly darts) which will pierce deepely into my soule, when I shal behold her to be laid with∣in her graue. O cruell Tombe, must thou be so fortunate, as to lodge and entertaine so pretious a treasure, to possesse so rare and louely a beautie, and to enclose and couer a bodie so
exquisite and perfect, that same, being the chiefe maintainer of my glorie, and the one∣ly vpholder of my life? O that some gentle power would be so kind vnto me, as to transforme me into thy likenes, to the end, I might enioy that benefit, which is permitted to be thine, and of which (whilest it liued, I was Maister and owner. And yet thinke not thou shalt haue the bodie of my deare wife alone, no no, thou shalt haue mine also, to beare hers companie, and by that meanes, thou shalt receiue two bodies, which (liuing) had but one soule betweene them. And now (my sweet Cynthia) let me (once more) take thee by the hand, for a finall farewell, and let me kisse thee (once) againe; to the end that my breath may issue out of this his earthly mantion, and part hence, at the selfe same instant, that thine passeth away. Leander hauing so said, and weeping most tenderly, taketh the cold carkasse of his wife in his armes, often kissing, and rekissing her colde mouth, he being neuer sufficient∣ly satisfied with the delight of that dying, which was wholy at his commaundement whilest it was liuing. His lips neuer parted from hers, whilest his eies streamed downe teares, and his heart sent forth scalding sighes in aboundance. O thrise fortunate soules, whom neither death nor sorrowes could part asunder, and ô happie couple, who would not haue but one Tombe to enclose you (both) together. And now Leander began to faint as well as his wife, he being sore wounded with griefe, and Loue, which she perceiuing, forced her selfe to vttes these fewe words (as well as she could) vnto him. It is enough (sweet husband) it is enough, you too much trouble your sicke selfe with an vnworthie burthen, for we may count our selues blessed, in that we haue incountered one with another before we die. The end crowneth the workes of man, their glorie lying onely in their deaths; which death shall make vs famous for euer, allotting vnto vs the Garland of commendation and praise, to continue hereafter. For mine owne part, I can no longer liue, and had it not bene for your presence, I had bene dead long since, the same hauing bene the occasion that the thread of my life was drawne forth so long as it hath bene; For thee haue I liued, euen vntill this houre, but (alas) what talke I of liuing, when all my sences faile me, when my voice is going away, and my heart beginneth to be colde within me. What should I say more, but that thou liue happily after my decease, banishing away these sighes, and drying vp thy too too drerie eies. And this (sweet husband) I require and desire thee, (nay more) I coniure thee, as thou louest me, to lament no more, what cannot be recouered. Once more adue (sweet Leander) I goe before to prepare a place for thee in the heauens, and so farewell deare husband. Come come, embrace and kisse me, to the end that my soule (comming forth of bodie) may make his passage into thine, which (whilest I liued) was his earthly Para∣dise. The sad knight hearing her say so, embraceth her anew, holding her closely in his armes, whilest death approaching vnto her, seazed vpon her, closing vp her beautious eies, and leauing her sencelesse coarse, as cold as any stone, which when Leander percei∣ued, he sought all the meanes he could to bring her vnto life againe, although it could not be. And as the wilde Beare from whom her whelpes be stolen, searcheth vp and downe for them, leauing no place vnlooked, and yet (doe what she can) she cannot finde them. So Leander leaueth no part of his wiues bodie vntouched, to see, if he could finde any one sparke of life in her, but all in vaine, for death had alreadie extended his heauie hand ouer her. As ye Damaske Rose being once withered, hath not one greene lease about it, but such as be drie, and fallen from their naturall colour: Euen so was her bodie without force, or mouing, lying along without any motion or sence at all. And yet although she were dead, she laie as louely, as if she had but bene in a smiling sleepe. No maruaile then, if whilest she were liuing, she was so gratious with All, when (be∣ing
dead) she was able to make men fall in loue with her, for the cruell destinies were not of power, to take from her the propotion of her beautious visage, but onely the rare vermillion colour of the same. But now, how is it possible for me to describe (at large) the true sorrow wherewith her kind husband was possest by reason of her losse? It is a taske too great for me to take in hand, and therefore I will giue it ouer, neither meane I, to set downe, with what great pompe, and exceeding charges, her funerall obsequise were most solemnely perfor∣med. Onely I will speake a word or two of his end, which was, that after her death, he ne∣uer ioyed (so much) as one smal houre, nor liued any long time after her. His chiefest de∣light was to thinke on death, his diet he fed on, was sighs, teares, sobs, and lamentings. Besides, he caused all his Castle to be painted with blacke, mixing here and there white teares amongst the same, neither did he, nor any of his followers, weare other than mourning apparell, as long as he liued. And to conclude, so vehement was his passions, in his sorrow, that they brought him into a recurelesse consumption, wherein, he conti∣nued not aboue three months but that he died, hauing giuen order (before) to be buri∣ed in the same Monument, that he erected for his constant Cynthia. This Tragedie was so pittifully deliuered by the well spoken Nymph Orythia, as she forced all her Auditors to shed salt teares, especially when she made a conclusion of the same, when they perceiuing that the Sunne was downe, began (euery one of them) to withdraw themselues vnto their proper Lodgings, but she staied them a while, meaning to reuiue their dulled spirits, after the hearing of so dolefull an Historie, with this Song following. Blest is he that nere did proue False in Faith, in all his Loue. Loue (without fidelitie,) Is a plague, that makes vs die. Without Faith, one sues in vaine, Loue of beautie faire to gaine. Blest is he, that nere did proue, False in faith, in all his Loue. Beautie soone, away posse will, Sacred Faith continueth still. Th'ones diuine, and nere deceiues, Th'other oft our hearts bereaues. Blest is he, that nere did proue, False in Faith, in all his Loue. Without Faith, Loue could not be, For through Faith (aie) liueth he. Who a Louer's, and not true, Louers name to him's not due. Blest is he, that nere did proue, False in Faith, in all his Loue. Oh how sweet a thing it is, Two to loue, and faith not misse. Tis two soules in one to bind, Whilst daies (turned to nights) they find. Blest is he, that nere did proue, False in Faith, in all his Loue. No sooner had the Nymph made an end of her delightfull Song, but that they might perceiue a strange Shepheard hard by them, who (after he had saluted them) de∣sired them, to resolue him of this Riddle following.
Though light as Feather yet a burthen great I beare, And liue within the lappe of my chiefe enemie, One while I shake, and nod, as if a sleepe I were, Another white as swift as flight, away goe I. Light though I am, I (often) heauie armed men Carrie, and am their faithfull friend and saue their wealth, Yet (with my selfe) I cast away them, now and then, And (many times) through swiftnes mine I saue my selfe. But after I, in many a place haue serud their turne, And old become, they throw me strait into the fire, Whilst, I (of cold) growe hot, and in the flame doe burne, To serue these men, loe here, you see my goodly hire. For all my labour (done to them) in pieces they me spoile, And hauing done thē seruice good, I am nought worth, & vile. The learned old man, studied not long about this darke Enigma, which he ex∣pounded in this sort. These verses (said he) doe signifie a ship, which being made of wood, and light, as sailing, carrieth away people within her, she remaining (alwaies) in the water, which is her mortall enemie, because it rotteth her. One while, it lieth still, and rideth at Ancor, as one idle and a sleepe: and an other while it maketh profitable voiages, scowring the huge Seas. She is a guide, and an assistance (oftentimes) vnto Souldiers, whilest they encoun∣ter and fight with the enemies: vpon the top of the Hatches thereof, notwithstanding, (now and than, she drowneth these which she carrieth, and her selfe also. Sometimes she escapeth (alone) when being (afterward) emploied of her wares and commodities, and now growne old and rotten, they breake her in pieces, which they fling into the fire, it being burned there, although (by nature) the wood thereof is cold, and being in the fire, it complaineth of men, who pay her with burning her, for requitall of so many good seruices done by her, vnto them. The old man (hauing deliuered this exposition) satisfied the strange Shepheard, who left him, when he and the rest of his company retired (as fast as they could) vnto their owne Lodging; where we will (as now) leaue them. The end of the third daies meeting of Iuliettaes Shepheards.
THE FOVRTH DAYES MEE∣TING, OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHEARDS. LOVE pierceth not (so farre) the tender brest of a young Hart, in the loue of a fresh and iollie Doe, or that of the sturdie Bull, towardes his fatte and faire Heifer: as was Coribants, pricked through the remembrance of Deliaes beautie. What rest tooke hee in the night? what sleepe went downe with him? what pleasure felt hee? or what contentment did he perceiue or finde? Night, which otherwise is the mother and refresher of all trauell, is the Nourse of Louers labours: For in that they are (then) solitarie, and alone, nothing crosseth the meditation of their Loues. Their torments present themselues (daylie) before their eyes, and they bethinke themselues euery houre, how with a thousand troubles and crosses, they may (but speak) vnto their Mistresses. Solitude, doth more hurt then good, to him whome griefe tor∣menteth: and that coueteth to find out a place to his desire, wherein to complaine him∣selfe. Euen so, the young Bull, depriued of the loue of his iollie Heifer, goeth away roa∣ring, to hide himselfe, in some coole caue or denne, and there he beateth and tormen∣teth himselfe, roaring and crying out with maine force. No otherwise braue Orlando, depriued of his Angelica, sought out the most remote and secrete places, therein to complaine his disastrous mishappes. Solitarie and sadde night, therefore, in stead of bringing anie relaxation or ease vnto the torments of this Shepheard: more renewed them, euen as the Smyth maketh the heate of his Forge more ardent, when he throweth water vpon the same. Onely God Morpheus beguiling him, might haue giuen him some asswagement of his griefe, but (yet) such as would not long haue continued. For Truth chased away imaginations and dreames, and discouered her face. These torments, these dreames, these labours, and these flames, are stirring verie earlie. And as the Hare goeth out of her Forme, betimes in the morning, to feede in the corne fieldes, being afraide, lest (in the day) shee should light vpon some vnhappie encounter; In like manner, the Shepheard can no longer remaine in his Cottage, when hee seeth the day dawne, on that side of the heauens, where the Sunne riseth: hee will (by no meanes) that his bright beames should reflect vpon his drousie head. This would turne him (as he thinketh) to great shame, to be discouered by the Sunne: And he fea∣red the like reproach, as Mars and Venus receiued, being found together, and taken with∣in the industrious Net of Vulcan. A sluggard neuer acteth any thing of importance: Glorie is not obtained by be∣ing idle, but by plying out fingers, busying our selues in manie matters, and styrring (earlie) about our affaires.
The Sunne yet wet, in rising from his moyst bed, let fall certaine droppes vpon the earth, & it seemed by his appearāce, that some flagitious fact by him seene, had made him looke all pale, sad, & heauie: notwithstanding, by degrees, he euer drew nearer & nearer. Oh, what a power hath this goodly Lamp, which giueth life vnto all creatures, keeping and preseruing the same in them, as also by the same hand, he taketh away, perisheth, and confoundeth the same: notwithstanding, there is no good, how little so euer it be, which is not farre better, then the best griefes of the world. In like manner, thogh the Sun shew∣ed himselfe pale, morphewed, & ghastly, yet was hee by all creatures, a 1000. times more desired then night, how cleare soeuer. The clifts euen smoaked, with a desire to see and feele his beams vpon their toppes: euen as the furious Bull casteth fume out of his nos∣thrills, when he seeketh after fight, & desireth to meete with the Lydian Lyon, to set vpon him. There was not so much as the flowers, which smiled not at his cōming: they being his beautifull kinsmen, to the end to please, & ioyfully receiue him. The Birds called vp∣on him, in their notes, the beasts, by their sounds & voyces, & men, by many signes and demonstrations: Desired therefore, of all liuing creatures, he commeth & spreadeth on all sides his flaming eyes, causing all the world to behold his faire & bright countenāce. Euery one beholding the same, blusheth thereat, & is ashamed: heauen it selfe appeareth more neare and cleare, and the Shepheard, conducted by this immortall light, with slow pace, arriueth within the Desarts. He neither draue lambs nor sheepe before him, for the iniquitie of the time had dispoyled him of them: robbing him of his bleating troupes, and of whatsoeuer else he had receiued by the benefite of Fortune: Hee went out there∣fore, all alone, walking along with an awaked spirit & mind, disburdened of all drowsines, all quick, and liuing, whilst he thus said to himselfe; It is with speciall reason, that men tearme heauen their Father: for in truth without him, what could they performe? Doth not he bestow on them their being, life, vigour, contentmēt, & pleasure? Whatsoeuer fa∣uour or bountie men feele, it descendeth from aboue. For the earth of it selfe, produceth vnto them nothing good or excellēt: but on the contrary, bringeth thē forth a thousand maladies, cares, torments & labors. And though there tumble down from heauen, some∣times miseries & scourges, which torment & whip men, yet neuertheles, their own sinne is the cause thereof. For this is the liuely fountain of malediction, & not heauens: euen as the fountain is no occasion of the water that harboreth within the same, but the spring from whence it floweth so cold. Is not heauen the nourice of this faire Sun, which ripe∣neth all things, heateth as well those bodies sensible, as other immoueable, & that giueth vertue & power vnto the earth? On the other side, within heauen dwelleth the Eternall Deitie, in the same is his seate, there within is his Empire, & there his diuine Tabernacle. In heauen dwelleth this great and mercifull GOD, who doth not only pardon men during their liues, but euen whē they are dead also. His mercie walketh ouer the Tombs and Sepulchers of the dead, and goeth seeking them out, euen vnder the earth, to relieue them, by his charitable office, giuing vs triall, not onely of admirable Clemencie, but al∣so of diuine Iustice. That which maketh him to be knowne for true God, is only his Iu∣stice and his Mercie. For hee could not be God, except he were both iust and mercifull. Besides, hee most liberallie giueth vnto vs wherewith to maintaine our life: hauing a care of the least haires that fall from off our heads, and of the least byrd that liueth. Hee giueth nourishment vnto euery one: yea, vnto the Crowes little ones themselues, that call vpon him, when their olde ones denie to giue them foode at all. O an hundred times worthie of infernall punishment is hee, who loftie and proud, will not giue thanks vnto God, for so manie of his benefites I seeing besides a thousand others, he might haue iust occasion so to doe, for this onely good, in that he hath procu∣red mankinde to be borne, maister of all other creatures, and giuen him a soule immor∣tall in felicitie. For if the enemies of men be punished and if sometimes the Ancients ordained equall paine, for one Ingrate, as for a murtherer. Surely, the man ingrate to∣wards Almightie God, that acknowledgeth not so many blessings and graces from him, ought to suffer much, as worthie of most grieuous punishment. Thus sayd the Shepheard to himselfe, and had further discoursed vpon this subiect, but that a sudden storme of raine made him runne out, to goe stand vnder a thick Rock, the toppe whereof, saue garded him from the iniuries of heauen. And being there aboue,
he heard a voyce, which vttered this which followeth. Blessed be they which are either perfectly happie, without euer hauing felt griefe: or altogether miserable, hauing neuer made tryall of any contentment. For he which (suddainly) cōmeth out of the Stoue, fin∣deth the aire colder, then he (who hauing neuer bene within) hath alwayes stood without doore. In like māner, those which neuer felt any good during their life, endure nothing so much as they which haue bin happie, & are afterwards becom miserable. For if white maketh vs better to know and discerne black, in like sort, good maketh the griefe (which ensueth) more cruell & intollerable: the remēbrance of which losse, terribly tormenteth our soules. It greeueth not one so much to goe without cloathes, who ordinarily goeth naked, as well in winter as Sūmer: but it would be a cumbersome & hard matter for him, who hath bin well and warmly clad, to be stripped, thrust into his shirt, and forced to go all bare. In like manner, the miserable that haue knowne nothing but griefe, are not so greatly oppressed with paine, as they who haue sometimes tasted of felicitie, whereof at the same instant, they finde themselues depriued. More cruell was king Perceus his change, who of a puissant king, became miserable, a seruant, slaue, and laughing-stocke of Fortune, then if hee had neuer knowne any such greatnes, remaining as a priuate simple man, and without a Diademe. Of the selfe same now speake I, by experience, for more cruell at this day doe I feele the griefe, to see my selfe absented & depriued of my deare Diana: thē if I had neuer seen her, or that she had not pleased mine eies, as she hath done. Alas: Can it be that I should remaine without her, or that my soule may continue in my body, being depriued of her faire and shining countenance? If the bodie cannot moue without the soule: Oh how can mine liue, en∣ioying no more that Sun which caused it both to liue and moue? Oh my Diana, in what part soeuer thou glaūcest forth thy beautifull and celestiall rayes, let the heauens be al∣wayes fauourable vnto thee, in recompence of the good thou hast done me, in suffering me to behold thy countenance. Farre frō thy yeares & dayes let pale death flie: all dis∣contentment, absent it selfe from thy soule: all vexation & griefe auoyd thy hart: & let sadnes be banished from thence: & to conclude, let no feeling of griefe euer touch thee liuing: let heauē alwaies make thy beauty durable, thy chast vertue immortall, thy sacred fidelitie & power, eternall, and thy excellent glorie endles. Alas, if the heauens preserue thy noble perfections, who vnder the Sun shall liue, more perfect or happy thē thy selfe? for none can equall thee in these worthie vertues: vertues (alas) which augment misfor∣tunes, & make my complaints more bitter. For he hath greater cause to complain, that hath lost much, then he that hath endured the losse but of a small matter. I haue lost thy diuine presence, which only chased and droue away my obscure nights: now I wander in darknes, in night, in horror, & vexation. I haue lost my Sun, & my dayes are turned into nights. (Alas) but haue I not likewise lost my miserable life? Alas, my Goddesse, if thou wouldest (if thou wouldest I say) take my soule, & as thine owne, retaine it with thee, why takest not thou in like manner my life, causing him to die, which cannot liue, remoued frō thy light? but I must scoure both sea & land to find thee out. I will flie neither paine, danger, nor labor, to see thee (yet once more) before death reap my sad & wretched daies. And then in all repose, contentmēt, & pleasure, I will yeeld this miserable carkasse to the earth, shaken & quashed, with so many hitter griefes, & euen broken (as it were in pieces) with a thousand martyrdoms. During these daies replenished with obscurity, & dyed in la∣mentation, & darknes. In that I shall not behold thy beautifull & diuine countenance, my teares like streams, shall poure out frō my blubbered eyes, sighes shall come forth, euen from my soule, sad wailing & mourning frō my hart. No apprehension of pleasure shall dwel within me, no apparāce of life, to signe of pleasing delights, nor any note of health. Miserable will I alwaies remaine, no ioyfull accident, no chāge of fortune, or new forme of life, can administer the least consolation to my soule, voyd of pleasure & ioy, of all good and contentment. I will sigh continually, while destinie (moued at my long complaints) together with my life, cut off my teares & troubles. Thus spake this wretched Shepherd, wretched surely, & miserable, who neuer felt so much as one smiling glaunce of fortune, miserable (certainly) in that he was borne to suffer, & neuer knew what ioy meant: & yet more wretched, in hauing spent his years, emploied his whole life, offered his dayes, and yeelded his time to seruice of many, who permitted pouertie to swallow vp his years, and manage and ouermaister his life.
And though he were peerles in miserie, and that his state of life, was onely swayed by misfortunes, which held him caytif: notwithstāding, cruel enuie, which biteth all things, though they be incorporeall, ceased not to make a thousand malicious & iealous of that little cōmendation, which his dolorous Muse acquired to his years. In all cōsiderations therfore, he was most wretched aboue all others. But that which gaue the greatest blow, and that made his griefe insupportable, and fell, was the absence and losse of his Diana. The remembrance wherof, was sufficient to forget, choak, & quite extinguish all the mor∣tall pleasures he could haue tasted of in this world. Euery one maketh his chiefe felicity, of that he best liketh, & things which are sometimes held for happy & cōmodious of mor∣tall men, are in contēpt with those, who haue placed their soueraigne good in some other matter, as Louers flout at riches, treasures, Empires and kingdomes, which mortall men propound vnto themselues, for the good of their contentmēt, & vpon which, they build their most pleasure and delight. But the onely presence of their Ladies, is their chiefest good: for their soules be more ioyfull in beholding of them, then are the eyes of a coue∣tous mizer, & when they take pleasure in contemplation of the goods & riches of fortune. In the number of these, was this miserable Shepheard, who scoffed at the commodities of that blind goddesse, desiring no other thing for his full satisfaction, and delight, then the presence of his faire Diana. Diana, who surely amongst the fairest, was most faire, sage, chaste, prudent, and of the stock of the most famous families in Europe. Diana, who took pleasure in reading of his works, & that neuer shewed him frowning countenance, in that she knew he honored her honor, more then her beautie: and that his chaste loue, loued rather her soule and mind, then her bodie. Nothing could hinder sage and chaste Diana from shewing good countenance, & chastely louing excellent spirits. She should haue bene a cruell Beare, if her soule had bene void of amitie: and this learned Queene of France, kissed learned Chartier, finding him a fleeepe, vpon a bancks side, though (a∣mongst all other euill fauoured and deformed) hee was most crabbed of countenance: giuing this excellent answere to those that wondered at the same: I kisse not Chartier, but that excellent mouth, from whence haue issued so manie learned discourses, not lo∣uing the man, but his doctrine: In doing thus, no Ladie can be blamed. For one may, and that more commodiously, affect chastlie, that which meriteth Loue, then impudent∣lie, that which tendeth to vice, and corruption. The Shepheard, (after his dolorous complaint) beganne to sing this Sonnet which followeth. SONNET. Come, and approach, and heare my cries, you Hagges, and Hob-goblings, And doe receiue in gree, my heauie plaintes, and abuse. Vnto your cruell fatall Sisters, nought doe I profer, For, I (no more) life haue, t'is, with my griefes ouerdead. LOVE, that hath tooke my loyall Hart, for a pawne euerlasting, (Gagd'e, for my Truth) is dead, splitted in euery part. Whilst, to an auncient Elme, I seeme like one that is, Spoylde with Lightnings blast, when (but the roote) doth remaine (O kinde Death) all mortall woes, who makest an end of me, In this my chiefe pangs, thee doe I call, mee to helpe. (Sweet) let me die, through thee, that then, I truely report may, LOVE hath wounded my heart. (Death) of my paine, make an end, Onely (in the) is my hope, a hope, God knowes very slender, Nought hope I in my cares, but, for to dye out of hand. Dye would I rather, then in woes lie, still for to languish, Blest is the soule that departs, when that he cannot be curd'e. But you, mine eyes are accurst, to haue seene my Ladie so cruell, Since that distoyaltie, hath (to me) done such a wrong, Well had it bene for you, if, with a night euerlasting, Shut had you bene alwayes, your proper death not to see. That so sacred Light, you are neuer like for to see more, Which did reuiue my spirits, when that they first were in thrall.
Sweet should I (then) count my miserie, comparde to my bad hap, If that the world I might leaue, as in my minde I doe wish. Sigh'd haue I, more then a thousand times, yet she with her hard hart, Is no more mollified, then in the Seas is a Rocke: More doe I pray, more doth she say nay, for all mine intreating, Whilst that her lookes are so sower, as they my woes make the mor. These Verses could not (yet) content him, but with the same conceit, employing his Muse, which (she furnished him withall) he carued these two Sonnets, vpon the hard front of the Rocke. SONNET. I. More hard then Rocks, I feele my Martyrs hard, The flinty Rocke, the chisell doth endure: Yet nought but death, from hurt can me award, So great's mine ill, which is without recure. Yee heauenly Gods, cast Lightnings on my face, As on the Mounts of Epire, or consume Mee Phoenix like, reuiuing (in a space) For I, (in Loue) a Phoenix am become, Too much I haue abid, then from these eyes, Since you haue drawne forth fountains of salt teares, So many sighes, from heart, let it suffise, Nothing so strong, but sorrow (quickly) weares. Each thing, (except my selfe) with change doth mend, (Yet see my cruell Destenie) I am still, In paine, and yet my paine doth neuer end. Liuing, I die, though (dying) I doe liue, This is the fauour, my FAIRE doth me giue, SONNET. II. What may it be, my Mistris should me scorne So much, as not on mee vouchsafe to looke? Was I then vnder such hard Planet borne, As that my sicknes strange, no Salue can brooke? That Beautie which, so often doth me wound, Those sacred eyes (Authors) of all my smart: Kill mee, when I, to looke on them, am found, Nor helpe they me, as I, to death depart. What Destenie then, may change this mine ill hap? What alteration may my griefes appease? I, ill Fortune, in such sorrowes doth me wrap, As (though they would) yet mee they cannot ease. For shee that is, of torments mine the sourse, More sacred is, then heauens, and more diuine: Fierce Destinie, and Fortune (in her course) She doth commaund, and with her beck combine. Then, to this Goddesse, must I seeke alone, To cure my mortall wound, or else to none. He had further sighed, and spoken more in renuing his long complaints, if Coribant (sad for his griefe) had not drawne neare, labouring to comfort him. For oh how true, and assured friends be they, who both in deed & word, asswage the griefe of their friends: and worthie of cōmendation, is that Amitie, which the iniurie of time & fortune, cannot chāge nor alter. It resembleth that gold, which we highly esteem of, whē purified in the furnace, it hath passed the fire: Euen so, sacred is that Amitie, & worthy of cōmendation, which the iniurie & oppression of fortune, cannot kill, nor destroy: Coribant therefore, approached to this miserable Shepheard, saluted him, sate downe by him, and saide;
Teares haue alwaies bene held (for reproach) in noble hearts, magnanimous mindes neuer weepe, they leauing this effeminate and base qualitie vnto women. And in verie good consideration, the victor Aemilius, cast in miserable Perceus his teeth, pusillanimi∣tie, and want of courage, in addicting himselfe to lamentation, why then doe you weepe? Brutus with a constant and cheerfull countenance beheld his childrens death. And that Phylosopher was no whit at all moued, vnderstanding of the death of his onely sonne. In lamentation, Time slippeth away, and in the meane while, there is no reme∣die found to come out of miserie. There is a double losse, the one of our health & quiet, which reares ouer whelme: the other of precious time, which in steede of bestowing of it in complaints, we shuld employ in searching out proper remedie for our miseries & tor∣ments. That thing only should be deplored, the which is without recouerie and reme∣die. But that which may be remedied, should not be lamented, but with diligence sought out to be recouered. For what can be ouer difficult for men to performe? Are not all things subiect vnto thē? and doth not the wise man command ouer the starres? which is to say, he may by his wisedome, auoid the sinister aspect of the heauens, make them otherwise disagree of their disastrous Influēce? What care moued resolute Diogines, any thing at all? either the cruell blowes of peruerse fortune, or the terrible constellations of heauen? Li∣ued he not happy, without sighes, in his Tunne? By his knowledge he surmounted both the starres & fortune. For properly, he may be tearmed victor, that feareth not his ene∣mie, and when he can no wayes iniurie or offend him. And if all men would frame their liues, after the exāple of this wise man, when shuld we heare any sighes proceed frō them? or what dolour could entangle their repose? Nothing wanteth in man to be perfectlie happie, but resolution. For when he is resolute to be constant in misfortunes, without so much as being once moued at the darts of aduerse fortune, nothing can annoy him, hee remaineth braue and couragious, like the Conqueror within the Lystes, against whome none dare make further tryall of their force. In like manner, fortune feareth the noble hart, & he (which with a braue resolution disposeth himselfe to resist inconstancie) shee dares no further lay hold vpon, but permitteth him a free life, quiet breathing, & happie repose. She is like the cocke, who hauing bene well beatē by an other, and bleeding in all parts of his body, dares not returne to encoūter, but auoideth the pit, & vāquished, flieth away. In like manner, resist thou this vniust fortune, who hath made vpon thee so huge and cruel a warre, & resolue as a Marius, to withstand misfortunes, without changing thy countenance thereat, more then he did. For mans wisedome is not discerned in prospe∣rous fortune, in that it is an easie matter to shew himselfe wise & constant in his felicities, but rather in aduerse and contrarie occurrences, the which to surmount, valour, con∣stancie and vertue, is requisite. Shepheard, (replyed Arcas) I confesse, that the losse of earthlie thinges, yea, and of the life it selfe; should not drawe tears from the eyes of the wise, nor en∣force his heart to send forth sighes. For they be things of small value, & the anciēt Sages thought alwayes that they carried their treasure about with them, in bearing their know∣ledge: but this doctrine taketh no place in Loue. Euery thing hath alwaies some excep∣tion, and the very threatnings of the eternall God, chaunge oftentimes, and saueth some one or other. So (notwithstanding, we may iustly maintaine, that teares & sighes are vn∣beseeming a valiant and noble man) yet must wee alwayes say, except onely in amorous actions. For the Gods, Goddesses, and the Heroes, haue lamented in this case. Did not Venus bewaile her deare Adonis, mouing to pitty therewith, euen things with∣out life? did not Apollo lament his Daphne? did not Hercules mourne for his wife, which the Centaure took away from him? did not cruell Achilles bewaile his Brisais? did not V∣lisses the wise, take on for his wife? and that Palladine of France, Orlando the Frenchmens honor? did he not a thousand times bewaile his Angelica, becomming furious & madde, in that hee had lost her? hath not braue Renaldo, and all those valiant Heroicall spirits made moane? whose complaints wise and mellifluent driostus reporteth vnto as? O (Shepheard) why art thou then astonished, if I bewaile and grieue, for my sacred Diana? the fire of loue like thunder, which neuer commeth without raine, although of it selfe it be burning fire, and hotely kindeled. In like manner, the flames of Loue are alwayes mingled with lamentations and teares. For Loue oftentimes forgeth his fire∣brands
of contraries, that is, of Loue (oftentimes) and of hatred, both mixt together. Experience giueth testimonie of the same: For onely Louers lament and are sadde, when they are not beloued, but hated of their Mistresses. And behold, euen as the thunder is engendred of heate, and cold, so be the flames of Loue compounded, of loue and hatred: so that it is vnpossible for the Louer to loue, except he be beloued againe: but bewaile, and lament he may, because these contraries proceed from him, and render diuers effects, of their sorme. Why wonder you therefore, that I weepe? Oh Shepheard, he which soweth vpon the Sea, sand, spendeth not his time more vn∣profitably, then he which bestoweth it in searching remedie for his Loue. For what can enforce an heart of Diamond, or a loftie, proud, and cruell dame, to loue against her will? Violence in this thing is forbidden, and though law would permit it, yet would liuely and loyall Loue hinder it. For the Louer will neuer doe any thing (though he may) which shall be displeasing to his Mistresse: all meanes of remedie ceasing, we must (necessarily) haue remorse to lamentation and teares, which be the armes of the afflic∣ted, crying out of the iniustice, and crueltie of the Starres, which make vs loue, the thing that hateth vs, and to desire the thing that flieth and shunneth vs. And if the wise (as thou saist) ouercame, and surmounted the diuers assaults of Fortune, I answere thee withall, That Loue hath tamed them, as well as my selfe: and none can make head a∣gainst him. Let Plato, Aristotle, and that prudent King endued with the gift of wisedome beare witnes: I will no more therefore thinke my selfe foolish, or depriued of reason in louing, seeing these great lights (as well as my selfe) haue by Loue bene darkned; &, that these Sages haue troddē the path of my error. But Shepheard (replied Coribant) if some haue offended, will you conclude, that by their example, euery one may erre? And if a∣mongst the auncient Sages, some haue bene fooles, and deceiued by Loue, will you af∣firme that others haue yeelded themselues to this inconuenience? You should in this doe them great iniurie, for all the Iewes (for the most part) were wicked, and yet the A∣postles, being of the selfe same nation, were good men. The cruell daughters of Danaut, killed their husbands: but pittifull Hypermuestra, (that saued hers) must not be put in the number of these bloodie sisters. In like manner, a thousand learned personages, which haue not onely subdued Loue, but euen the starres themselues, ought not to be taxed of reproach, because there were some amongst them, suffered themselues to be transported away with this furie: for the vice of one particular man, obligeth not a generalitie to the blame which he onely deserueth: and an othres offence, cannot preiudice the innocent. If Plate haue erred, wise Aristetle stumbled, & Sage Salomon gone astray, will you say (for all this) that diuine Socrates, wise & graue Cato, & prudent Moses, haue bene sinners, and plunged in the selfe same vice: and, if the former be not to be followed, nor imitated, take example by the second, doing like the wise Apothecarie; who extracteth the iuice and vertue of hearbes, and afterwards casteth away that which is worth nothing. Fuen so, amongst the Ancients, we must imitate those, whose excellent actions may serue in stead of a guide, & patterne, leauing this, who, in imitating of them, may cause vs stumble into the pit of vice: in which, they be drowned and washed: You conclude not well therefore, in drawing a libertie of doing euill from an other mans vice: but on the contrarie, our neighbours error, must serue vs in steed of a darke night, wherein, du∣ring the same, to kindle our owne vertue, must shine bright, instructing our selues, by his famous example, as the ancient Spartaines caused their slaues to be made drunke, to the end that their children might hate wine, by the brutish, and dishonest actions they sawe these base creatures commit, being possessed with this liquor. It is a foolish conclusion to say, that if my neighbour be a foole, I must therefore become insensate, and set fire on my owne house, because I see my neighbours on a bur∣ning flame: It is rather requisite, that an other mans doing be beneficiall vnto vs, and that the vice of our neighbour, reforme our owne, and not make vs to offend like him∣selfe: For vertue would be imitated, and vice auoided. To maintaine that no man can be constant and resist Loue, were to erre grosely: For Alexander amidst his great victories, delights and conquests, performed it.
Demosthenes refused the Loue of Lais, louing ten crownes better, then the enioy∣ance of her. This wise and graue Philosopher I say, whom she could neuer set on fire, ei∣ther by her wanton enticements, amorous lookes, or her beautie so renowmed: so that she thought him an insensible stone, and not a man. You should in this doe iniurie to modest Scipio, who being conquerour of all Affricke, religiously abstained from the loue of a woman: And a thousand others haue liued free from this misfortune, which you may not (rightly) place in the number of offenders: For their fault, obscure not the ex∣cellent glorie of the vertuo, and drawe not from their offence matter of opprobrietie against the wise: It will be greater honour vnto you, to see wise men in name offend, and your selfe free from fault, then if you erred after the example of some simple crea∣tures. Oh Shepheard (replied Arcas) I denie the foundation of your argument: for I will not confesse that it is a fault or crime to loue, and iudge Louers no lesse wise, then those that haue not loued at all: for he may iustly be said to be peruerse and an offen∣der, whose offence procureth publike dammage, but (so farre of) is a Louer from preiu∣dicing men, that quite contrarie he profiteth them greatly. The Louer (like the prodigall man) iniureth none but himselfe: he onely beareth, he onely endureth, he onely suffereth: but from his torment ariseth mortall glorie to the subiect he loueth: for was there euer Ladie faithfully by her seruant beloued, that did not both honour and sing forth (according to the abilitie of his inuention) her ex∣cellent and rare vertues. What can mortall men desire more deare and precious, then to see themselues ho∣noured, and made immortall to future ages, the which Louers fauoured by the Muses, may make their Ladies and Mistresses? That great King of Macedon, thought he not Achilles happie, to haue bene set forth and commended by Homor? and all great perso∣nages, haue they not desired the like honour? Not to be moued with the passion of glo∣rie, is to be brutish and without feeling, or not to be stirred vp with a desire to make ones name liuing after death, is a signe of a base and boorish minde. They to whom the hea∣uens haue not imitated either Art or Learning to attaine to this glorie by writing, seeke after it, in buildings, or other rare workes of great charge and expence, which continue for some time, but not so long as bookes. But it is certaine, that the Muses hauing taken Loue in a snare of flowers, would say nothing else, but crowne this God, with greene garlands, acknowledging, that they should be nothing without him, who giueth them vttrance, power, & breath, to set forth their verses, in despite of time it selfe: For neither ye greatnes of gifts nor of feare, nor the hope of rewards, nor threatnings, could neuer make a learned Poet write well of any one, if he doe not loue and affect him: but (on the contrarie) onely Loue will make him speake better of those whom he shall loue simply without hope of reward, then of those whom he loueth not, and yet expecteth from them some recompence. Questionlesse, without Loue, many excellent bookes which are made in the honour of men, would be yet to doe, & a thousand other noble Acts (which now) through him be apparant to the eies of men: Commendable therefore are Louers, and more then any other sort of men, at least they loose not time, nor consume it not in doing no∣thing. (Oh Godhead) replied Coribant, but on the contrarie, a thousand euils haue procee∣ded from Loue: The ruine of Troy, may verifie this, and a thousand other testimonies. I but quite otherwise (replied Arcas) Loue stood the Troyans in steed, for he sent them the meane to kill Achilles, reuenging the death of their Princes; & he being dead, they (in such a sort weakened the enemies Campe, that without Treason, Troy had neuer bene subiect to the Greekes But what hath Loue to doe with the Treason of men, as long as he is not the cause thereof? And yet the selfelame Loue (replied Coribant) was it not the cause of the death of modest Hipolitus, who was pittifully slaine by the vniust dealings of his wicked Step∣mother? Nay rather quice contrarie (aunswered Arcas) he was the occasion, that he was made immortall, he being raised from death vnto life againe, by the cunning of that learned Esculapius, who could neuer haue done him so great a good turne, vnlesse he had
(first) tasted of death through Loue. But what say you then (quoth Coribant) vnto Loue, which forced Tarquin to offer violence vnto the castitie of Lucres, being the cause of so great a mischiefe? It was an occasion (replied Arcas) rather of a maruellous good turne, by reason it was the cause of libertie of the Romances, with ye vtter ruine, & ouerthrow of their Tyrāts, and Lucretia dying in that order (as she did) was she not most fortunate and happie? For doth not such a one die happily, who as Codrus by his death preserueth his countrie, ma∣king the same (through his losse) to be fortunate afterward? And yet the verie same Loue (said Coribant) was the Author of the cruell perishing of Piramus and Thisby, they hauing but a sorie guerdon, for their so constant affection which the one bare vnto the other. Is he not then bloodie minded and cruell? No truely (replied Arcas) for what more sweet and pleasing kinde of death could they suffer than they did? And had it not bene a thousand times better that one of them should die with the other, thā to be separated & diuided? seeing the Louer that loseth his Mistris, or that Ladie, that hath lost her seruant, liue not at all, but rather languish. And yet still the same Loue was it (said Coribant) which vrged the daughters of Minos to betray their aged Father, giuing instructions vnto Theseus, how to slay the monster, and to get out of the Labyrinth when he had done. Why? and the same Loue (answered Areas) was the occasion of a greater benefit, in deliuering Athens from such a seruile bondage, as forced them to offer their prettie little children vnto the gree∣die lawes of that deuouring Monster. To conclude, much honour, great glorie, and infinite good, hath proceeded through Loue, in so much as he that hath neuer loued, deserueth not the name of a man. As the Shepheard had made an end of his speech, the faire Nymph Orythia arriued, who hauing her Lute in her hand, sung (in a most dulcet tune) these Heroicall verses following. What? shall my Fortune neuer mend, in which I doe languish? Yet (O yee Gods) let me die, for line without heart, can I not now. Cruell he, that my soule commaunds, doth mocke at my hard haps, Curst be the flame, that euery thing doth burne sane our anguish. Ah shall I neuer see, my life nor my Loue to be ended? Neuer; for these skies are cruell vnto my plainings. And they doe seeme to be deafe, when with my cries I doe mone them, More, that I liue, I plague my selfe, and am mine owne Hangman. Cruell (alone) is that griefe, that no remedie findeth, But for to suffer (without hope) if destinie mine were. Why was I brought into this world, and why was I borne then? Better (nere) to be, than alwaies so to be tortred. Woe to me, hope haue I none, that ere my paine will be swaged, Yet no griefe there is to be found, but findeth his easing: Excepe such, as ouer desperate, onely by Loue comes. Then since I needes must langnish thus, content will I hold me. For (at last) my comforts this, although that I perish, Yet from all these cares and troubles soone shall I rid me. That man neuer feares, when death doth venter vpon him, When to loose this wretched life, he rides in a Hauen, Free from the Tempests of this world, to liue euerlasting. After the Nymph had with many scalding sighes deliuered these verses, she thus bespake the Shepheard Arcas. What time wilt thou limit vnto my sorrowes, and when wilt thou make an end of tormenting me as thou doest? If pittie cannot induce thee to succour me, at least let these mine earnest praiers moue thee. Why takest thou delight thus to be importuned, and why is it a pleasure vnto thee thus to be sued vnto? Ah wy doest thou not restore my heart vnto his former health,
and why deuiest thou, to helpe him, who is so much affected to doe thee seruice? Cruell is that Lord, that maketh his faithfull seruant to serue him still, and yet yeeldeth him no recompence for his paine: vniust is he, and hatefull both to God, and man. For what vice more horrible can there be, than barbarous ingratitude? Ah wash from thy soule, that foule fault, and suffer not thy selfe any more to be reproa∣ched, in that thou art hard-harted and bitter, against her who onely deuoteth her selfe vnto thee. After the Criminall hath his fatall sentence pronounced, he is put to death pre∣sently, without making him languish any more, in prolonging his miserie. Fuen so, let me intreate thee, to dispatch, and giue thy verdit of life or death against me, without de∣lighting thy selfe any longer in my Disasters. The fire put into the mouth of a Cannon, forceth the pouder to flie out suddenly, which turneth into a flame: Euen so, I am not able longer to endure, without my griefe burst forth of my soule, or that I giue vp the ghost and die. But what talke I of death, when it is denied vnto me? No no, had I but had the be∣nefit of the same, thou (cruell man) hadst neuer heard so many praiers come from me, neuer had I made so many vowes vnto thee, neither had I moued thee so often vnto compassion as I haue done: for with some desperate instrument or other, I had finished both my life and griefe long ere this, and both at one time. But (alas) I (being immortall) must endure this anguish, whilest being able to helpe others, I cannot heale mine owne festring wounds. Not vnlike the Physition, who dieth after he hath conserued the liues of other, not hauing the skill to preserue his owne. Were some God the cause of these my plaints, and that by reason of some one Deitie or other, this mischaunce had hapned vnto me, I were not worthie of some excuse amongst mine equals. But when I call to minde, how I haue suffered my selfe to be vanquisht by a simple Shepheard, and yet am not able to perswade him to haue remorse vpon me, I needs must confesse I am worthie to be blamed, and that rightly. But alas, I know not wel what I say, for my Ladie the Goddesse Diana, loueth a Shephcard as well as I, and vnder this weede oftentimes lodgeth, vertue, learning, and beautie. Neuer was any more beautifull than Adonis, none more faire than Narcissus, and none more liuely than Paris, when he was a Shepheard, neither was there euer a Nymph more amiable than Enone the Shepheardesse. Angelica, the peerlesse Paragon of all beautie, left many great Princes, and valiant Paladines (all which were suters vnto her for her Loue) and accepted a poore common Souldier for her sweet heart and Loue. Loue respecteth not riches, onely he hath an eie vnto the perfection of the person that is loued. Then (sweet Shepheard) fancie me, and giue me some sure proofe, of thy affection towards me, without putting me any more to further troubles. So said the pensiue Nymph, when Arcas, being rauished with the contemplation of his faire Mistris, as if he had bene speaking vnto her, and as if Orythia, had bene farre from him. Began to speake thus. O sacred Diana, haue I not as yet giuen thee sufficient testimonie of my zealous good will towards thee, considering my long and many sorrowes, but wilt thou still see more, and yet neuer yeeld me, any recompence for the same? Alas, the Goldsmith trieth gold but once, if it will indure the fire, which he vseth to make so me excellent piece of worke withall: and the Eagle is contented to carrie his lit∣tle ones but once against the Sunnie Beames, which if they are able to abide, he suffe∣reth them to liue, making account they are his owne. Why then (deare Mistris) art not thou content with these many proofes of my faithfull Amitie, without demaunding (still) new at my hands? If it be, because I am too base a creature to be beloued, and that thou thinkest me not worthie of so high a fauour; Ah then, I beseech thee remember Iupiter, who disdained not the Loue of Europe, or of Semele, although they were mortall women, nor Thetis, who (although a God∣desse) yet vouchsafed to espouse Penelus, an earthly man, and sacred. Apollo who vouchsafed to affect the Troyan Cassandra; yea, remember the Goddesse
of all beautie, who was willing to accept the Loue of Anchises, & to beare a child by him, which was called the wandring Prince Aeneas. And therefore, be not angrie, although I dare to loue thee, for I feare not that the torment of Ixion shall euer punish me, because I honour thee, in as much as my loue, is neither dishouest, beastly, nor viticus, but ra∣ther sacred, vertuous, and chaste, and therefore not subiect to any reprehension. Why, doest thou thus oppose thy selfe against that faire glorie which thy worthy carriage doth permit? why doest thou reiect that praise, which euery one would render vnto thy peerlesse beautie? why doest thou disdaine that honour which the heauens haue ordained for thy matchlesse perfection? And why doest thou refuse the seruice of the most loyallest Louer that euer breathed? In times past those beautifull Ladies counted themselues happie, that could vant themselues, of the faithfulnes of their Louers. Hero, thought her selfe fortunate, in that she had Leander, for her faithfull friend: and why then doest thou denie to be most faithfully serued of thy deuoted and true hearted Arcas? Suffer him, suffer him (hard-harted as thou art) to honour thee, for the Gods themselues forbid not men (although vitious) to adore them, because friendship is not to be scorned from whence soeuer it commeth, in that it proceedeth from a wil∣ling and well-wishing minde. Thus said the Shepheard, when the Nymph hearing him to make this straunge kinde of Tale, pursued her former complaint in this manner. Ah barbarous and dis∣dainfull man, why doest thou stop thine eares against my pralers? Take heed, take heed, least the heauens (iustly punishing thee) harden not the hart of her whom thou honourest, against thee, as thou most vnkindly hast done vnto me: for (oftentimes) we fall into the snare which we haue laid to intrappe straungers, we be∣ing scourged with the same plague wherewith we haue afflicted others. Is it not enough for thee to be contented with these my sorrowes, but that thou must mocke mee there∣withall, making a shew as if thou sawest another and not me, vnto whom thou framest thy speech? But the Gods be iust, and therefore thanked be they, seeing thy Mistris ma∣keth thee know (and that vnto thy cost, if thou so much louest, as thou makest vs be∣leeue) how insupportable the torments are, which thy Sauadge rigor maketh me to feele, for he onely can talke rightly of griefe, that hath felt the same, and daily experi∣ence maketh vs perfect in the knowledge of such things as we practise. If thou feelest this euill, and if thou knowest how full of anguish it is, then permit not me to abide the same any longer, which if thou doest, thou wilt then force me to call for aide vnto the heauens, that they assist me, to take reuengement vpon thee; for he ought (and that iustly) to be punished, who knoweth the euell that he doth, is acquain∣ted with the greatnes of the fault he committeth, and yet (neuerthelele) will not giue it ouer: for onely ignorance excuseth the offence, which knowledge condemneth, be∣cause such as did perpetrate the same, were not vnacquainted with it: Open then, those deafe eares of thine, and shew me some pittie, to the intent, I may commend thee for kindnes, as long as the world shall flourish. The Shepheard (notwithstanding these her earnest perswasions) seemed not to heare one word, but as he did at the first, so still he continued, making solemne interces∣sion vnto his good Angell Diana, in this wise. Alas, must the distance of place, hinder thee (faire Virgin) so much, as thou canst not aunswere me? and must I be so miserable, as I may say, I am farre exiled from thee? Can my soule breathe and not behold thee? O wonderfull miracle, that wretched Arcas can liue without the chaste and prudent Diana; for she is his soule, and the bodie without soule, how is it possible that it should ioy at all? Certainely, I should thinke my selfe much blessed, if I might but onely see thy face, without speaking as much as one word vnto thee, for then would I most willingly yeeld vnto death: but I see it is my desti∣nie to die, and not so much as before my death to see thee. Vnfortunate, my Tombe to be so farre off from thee (my deare) and accursed mine eies, to sleepe in any other resting place, than where thou abidest. But alas, art thou the cause of my distresse? no no, it is the heauens, who are ouer
iealous of my glorie, and who would faine loue thee themselues, they knowing thy like is not to be found in the whole world: and therefore are the more vnwilling to haue any Corriuals in their Loue. But in despite of them, will I loue thee, nothing being of force to quench this outragious heate of mine, no, not death it selfe. Thus wailed the sad Shepheard, thinking verily that he had bene before the pre∣sence of his diuine Diana, and more would he haue lamented, but that Coribant plucking him by the sleeue, and wearied with hearing him (and the amorous Orythia) put him out of this amorous dreame in this sort. Enougn (man) enough, no teares nor sighes make a man the wiser, after the fault committed; but rather more miserable and wretched. Cease I say, cease, both of you to lament, and rather seeke some remedie how to re∣dresse your sorrowes. And because I would be glad to perswade you to giue ouer this dan∣gerous Loue, which maketh you thus to torment and massacre your selfe continually, I will account vnto you a most lamentable Historie, by which you may gather how cru∣ell and damned a plague Loue is, for we cannot come from out this Rocke, as long as this tempest lasteth, and which is but scarcely new begun. Arcas and Orythia seeing there was no remedie, considering the foulnes of the wea∣ther, sat them downe, when Coribant, sitting betwixt them (and they lending a listning eare vnto him) began his dolorous discourse in this manner. Yee hollow Rocks be witnesses, what here by me is sed, Within whose gloom it horror darke, the night is shadowed. Yee stately Rocks, to powder burnt, of times most cruelly, When Ioue, your tops with thunderbolts, doth scortch and bruse, from skie; Ah be your witnesses of this my sad discourseile tell You, which of late the loues of these two Shepheards ouerwell Conceiude; of these two louing wights, whose lucklesse hapile show, Vndone by Loue, by Loue who dares the Gods to ouerthrow? Adye broad Beeches, in your shade that often hane themseene, When they reposing of themselues under the same haue beene. You; which a thousand letters caru'd, within your tender rinde, (Knots, and deuises in their loue) and such like Toyes may finde. You dark  Caues, where whilst the day did last in bright some wise, They (blushing) of theor chastest Loues did mongst themselues deuise. Yee pretrie Foordes, and christall springs, yee Riuers murmerous, Whoat the sigh of them became for to be amorous. Yee vncorh Desarts, witnesses, what they in secret did, Importunde by their often plaints, which from you were not hid. And thou, thicke priuate shadowing groue, that knowest most of all, To thee (and all the rest) to heare, what I will speake, I call. Vnto you all (beare witnesse then) I to you all appeale, Since tis as true (as pittifull) what I shall now reueale. In that same time, when mongst the woods, as yet Loue was not knowne, In that same happie golden world, when none through Loue did grone, Wren Shepheards (free from Cupids darts) as carelesse did remaine, And for to languish were not forc't, through too much amorous paine. But rather not so much as once thinking of this proud Loue, 'Voide from all ill, themselues sought still, merrie to make, and proue, Whilst want only amongst themselnes, in ioy they spent the day, And pleasantly to their contents, the time did passe away. Freed from those cares, that Louers haunt, and brings them to their graue, Making them pale, and wearie, fore their youths they passed haue. Then was no wailing there, nor eies, that teares doe shed apace, Nor (that they grieued were) could you perceiue ought by their face. Cleerd from all plaints, releast from sighes, not knowing what ment care, They did despise, and eke contemne the Cyprian Goddesse faire.
Her cruell Sonne, the very Syre, and father of all vice, Of them Oblations neuer had, nor any Sacrifice. The mighty power of Cupid blinde, (as then) they did not know, Nor what did meane his fire-brands, his Arrowes, and his Bow. Withouten troubling with this Loue, their neuer troubled braine, A kinde of ordinary kindnesse did, mongst them remaine. In merry laughter, and in sport, they spent the soone gone yeare: Their chiefest pleasures, thousand songs, and Madrigals then were. Which they sigh'd forth, with comely grace, whilst beut the flowing banke, Of some cleare riuer, all the Crue of them, themselues encampe. One while they daunced hand in hand, within the Meadowes greene, Another while, bout foote of Rocke, for cooltnesse they were seene. (As then) plaintes were not their repasts, nor tcares, as drinke to vse, (As Louers wont) who what is ill, still for themselues they chuse. Consuming sorrow did not gnawe, nor gripe them at the hart, Nor was their chiefe reliefe of Death, the penetrable dart. But rather, without carke and care, without malice or strife, As happie soules (in all content) they wore away their life. No palenes was within their cheekes, no hollownesse in eye, Which frighted with a suddaine feare, most pittious you might spie. Nor could you once perceiue as much, as signe of heauie chance, In their well featur de faces all, and louely count enance. Ah trebble blessed such; For he cannot be said to liue, Who for Death wisheth, that his woes, no more might make him grient. In steed of pastimes to be blithe, they sounded their shill Crowde, And with a hundred Songs, they fild the Groues with noyses lowde. Whilst their soft instruments, apace (according to their vse) Oftimes well tun'de, and then vntun'de, as they themselues did chuse. A thousand Brawles, and Pastorall Odes, they sung in plainest sort, Whereby (the more) they did increase, their merriment and sport. In coole of day, to daunce (about) you might en them espie, And when the heate was great, in midst of shadowing Groues to lie. There would they many an olde wiues tale, and iesting Fables tell, Whilst (some of them) to blowe a fresh, thir Bagpipes fell. Now vnder cooly Trees they would (friendly) make their repast, Feeding on bread and Mornings milke, for to delight their taste. And dipping in the water cleare, their Hattes, they that did drinke, Which better farre then any wine, (though daintiest) they did thinke. But weladay, the nature of this sauadge inhumane LOVE, Did alter this sweete course of life, and worser made them proue. He chang'de their pastimes into playes, and spoyled so their sense, As (weakening courage theirs) hee forc't them stand without defence, As we doe see amaz'd to stand, the gentle harmles Sheepe, (And that in running here and there) no order they doe keepe. When as at vnawares, the Wolfe, wtih reuenous mouth them takes, And of them as him liketh best, a bloody slaughter makes. Or as we vieu the Shepheards from the fields in haste to runne, One here, one there, least that by death, they should be ouercome. When Iupiter, to threat the earth, with which he seemeth wroth, From heauen he, in angrie wise, his Thunder sendeth forth. Making a thousand flashie Lights, (the children of dread Feare) Vnto their frighted eyes, and on their bloodlesse cheeks appeare. Whiist furie of the Thunders hard, with such a suddaine cracke, As one would thinke it were hard by, and euen at his backe. Euen so did LOVE, these Shepheards fray, & trouble to them wrought, Consumde their liues, and chiefest glee, and to their end them brought.
And thus it was: Nature had framde one Shepheardesse mongst rest, More perfect then the other all, and fairer then the best. Young was she in experience, and in age, for but as then, She passed had of yeares some fine, and ioyning to them ten. Yet stature hers so comely was, and full of Matestie, As for a second Venus her, they did (of right) descrie. Her hatre farre brighter then pure gold, in knottes was tyed fine, Empaling round her head most rich, of Princely Crowne the signe. Whilst those her tresses amorous, did genttly moue with winde, As we the calmy waues in Sea, to role and rise doe finde. Her Forhead (heauens sweet mount) was smoothe, by Nature framed faire, No Art (though exquisite) could mend the same, it was so rare. No wrickle was there to be seene, no frowning in that place, (That) truely got by Beautie was, Beautie gaue it such grace. Her Eyelid, lids of Ebony, inclosed there within, Which Gods and Men amazed made, and euery hart did win. Her sparkling eyes, two starres did shew, then Lightning far more bright, More cleare then glorious Sunne, when he doth shew his chiefest light. Eyes, which who so presum'd to dare, their lookes for to behold, They soone were strucken blinde as t' were, for being ouerbold. Eyes where as LOVE in all his pride, did seeme for to repose, And through the sparklings of the which, lies chiefest honors rose. Eyes, which as sacred and diuine, all did adore and feare, Although to euery one their full, and ouerthrow they were. Her Checkes that checkt greatst Potentates: which Beautie beautifide, Of ruddie Rose, and Lillie white, the equall combat tryde. Her Checkes vermillion colloured, by Nature, not through Art, The perfect Type of louelinesse, to each one did impart. Her witching lippe was Curr all white, like to a Gillsflower: Which atred was in pearly deaw most supple euery hower. And as her Lippes, so was her Mouth, her mouth like Orakell, From which, a speech forth came, that did Pallas (though wise) excell. Her Lippes inuiting to sweet sport, did grace her dimpled chinne, Whose sight was such, as was enough (in thought) to make vs sinne. Her snowy Throat was seemely plac'te, so was her sweatlesse Neck, Which whitest Marble of the Alps, and Porphery did check. Her matchlisse Throat so delicate, her daintie Skinne so cleare, As through the same, what so she dranke, the coulour did appeare. Her beautous Breasts, LOVES lobbie right, right way to Paradice: Where grewe those golden Apples rare, vnvalued for their prcie. Two Mountaines there were plac'te, from whence on amorous sweet fire, Did send forth sighes (children of Care, begotten through Desire.) Her slender Middle like a Spanne, did shewe her waste so small, Which who so lookt on, as he lookt, he languisht therewithall. Next was that place. (Alas, that of that Place, I may not showe) Vnworthie we, such Mysteries and such rare sights to knowe. Her hands were white, as Whale his bone, so matchelesse was her foote, The first whereof, were Arrowes, which Dan Dupid vsde to shoote. Then such this wonderous Beautie was, of this faire Shepheardesse, Who many a Shepheards hart did chaxm, & wroght them much distresse. Her name was FLORA (FAIRE surnam'd) well worthy of that name And worthie was that name of her, so glorious was her Fame. Her exercise, and vse (as then) was bout the Fields to walke, And chiefest pleasure which she tooke, in shadowy Groues to stalke, Whilst (as her harmlesse flocke did feede) about them she did sing, (Full merilie) some pleasant Round, which made the woods to ring.
For spitefull LOVE (as yet) had not his malice gainst her bent, Nor had he (yet) through his deuise, spoylde this worke excellent. Free was shee from a Louers life, from amorous annoy: With libertie (most pleasantly) her youth she did enioy. But (soone this humor for to change) she gainst her will was forc't: (Compeld to Loue) from her hearts ease, (poore soule) she was diuorc't. For, by her dwelt a goodly Swaine, that did increase her care, A valiant Shepheard, gallant and louely, as she was faire. Borne on the selfe-same day, that she into this world was borne, And subiect, by the selfe-same chaunce) vnto this fatall storme. Hight NV MIDOR, he cleaped was, both affable and kinde, So courteous and so debonnaire, as like you could not finde. In feature, shape, and comelinesse, Adonis he did passe: And (if hee did not him exceed) his equall (sure) he was. Each morning, when the breake of day began for to appeare, He vsed to accompanie, his FLORA, loued deare. Vnto the Meadowes with her Flocke, and there with her would chat, In friendly wise, as they did walke, of this, and then, of that. And afterwards, they both would set them downe, or in some shade, Of some thicke Pinetree, or by Foord, which trickling murmure made. There would he cate of vittailes hers, and she on his would feed, Whilst (what they had emongst themselues) as common, they decreed. When any sport commenced was, mongst Shephear as she was found, The first that led the Daunce with him, and he began the Round. No sooner was it night, but they, together home did goe: And in franke manner one of th'other, Gifts vsde to bestowe. These pretie sports, were but a light (as t'were) more strong to tie, And to begin to binde them in, more perfect Amitie. And yet this plaine and simple kinde of Courting (though plaine stuffe) To set their harmlesse harts on fire, too much t'was, and enough. Since LOVE we see engendred is, only by looks and speach: And so continueth through the same, beyond all humane reach, This was the cause that manie woes they did endure, Of Friends, they loyall Louers did, become most firme and sure. As both their Birth-dayes were but one, so was their Loues but one: Equall they in affection were: and loue they did alone. One minde there was betweene them both, two bodies, but one soule, One Conquerour, both of their harts, and fancies did controle. What one did wish, the other would (alike) was their Desire: If th'one did burne through heate, the other did feele as great a fire. If th'one did send forth pittious plaints, with many a drery teare, The other, for to waile with sighes, and sobbes, did not forbeare. No loue, like hers, so passionate, so loy all (ere) hath bene, Anchises loue, with Venus faire, so constant was not seene. Nor Pyramus, may I compare, vnto these Louers true, Although so deare his Dame hee lou'd, as that himselfe he slue. In euery Rocke and Tree, they did ingraue the houre and day, In which LOVE (cunningly) had wrought, to bring them to his bay. In midst of Groues, and thickie Woods, cut in the tender kind, Of Okes and Elmes, these Louers names, engrauen you might finde. Whilst as they romed here and there, a thousand Songs they sung, To make them to forget their paine, fierce LOVE, them so had stung. The louely Shepheard, Sonnets made, in honor of his Dame, And in her presence sung them oft, presenting her the same. Which she accepted gratiousty, whilst with hote sighes from hart, She shewde, how he grieu'd not alone, but that she bare a part.
And thus (long time) both comfortlesse, did comfort one another, Long time, this secret Fare (hid close) in bosome they did smother. Whilst in some sort, the heauens did seeme, their actions to allow, And LOVE made show (as good, what so they did) for to avow. Bin weladay, what mortall thing, can euer lasting bee, When they themselues must (once) decay, and vnto ruine gree? When Fortune (enuicus of our good) such interest hath and power, That he can alter our delights, and pleasures in an hower. No maruell (then) though that sweet life of these two Louers in aine, He topsie turme turned quite, for pleasure bringing paine. As you behold a stately Oke, in growth surpassing prowde, Vnder whose shade of late, the Plants, were glad themselues to shrowde. Whose cooly leaues and braunches greene greatst Conquerors doth scorne Vpon their helmets and their Crests, most brauely to haue borne. Vpon (the suddaine through mischance) with Thunder sirucke, as the Whilst (blasted with the Laghtning flash) his head doth lye fall low. His scorchea leaues look black and swarth, his verdure all is gone. The Tree it selfe, shewing like a Truncke a Blocke, or barea stone. No sappe or iuyce remaines therein, but dead it seemes to bee, Nor former glorie of his greene, you anie more can see. Euen so by malice most vniust, through Fortune full of strife, Of these two Louers (happie-once) did end the pleasant life. The iealous heauens repining that, they thus should liue on earth, (Exempt from canes) Death sent to them, to stop their vitall breath. Death did they send as messenger, to sommon them from hence, And (for to bring the same about) they wrought a false pretence. This which we LOVE call, which two harts makes one, in loyall wise, The same (vow'ae to the other oft) makes deadlyest Enemies. Of cold and freezing iealousie, the Author first be is, Whose sweetnes, sowrest miserie, to follow doth not misse. Nor euer hath there any thing, as yet, in him bene found, But (what with griefe and wretchednes) thicke swarming doth abound. His preasures like are vnto spoyles, or like an Aprill showre, Which is no sooner come then goue, nor any while doth dure. That this is too too true, I vouch, Aenone, she it prou'd, And dolefidl Dido, who did die, because one-much she lou'd. Achilles felt his furie fierce, when he Polixena Did sue to haue, whose witching-face, was cause of his decay. Then of these faithfull Louers twaine, attend the Tale most sad, And marke, through vile iniurious LOVE, what pittious end they had. It channced (now) the Holly-day, due vnto LOVE, was come, In which, once euery yeare, great Feasts, most solemnely were done. His Temple in this Desart was, which holden was diuine, For honor it was wonderous rich, for beautie rare and fine. As well as Neighbours, Forrainers came thither far & neare, The Demy-gods, Fawnes, Satyres, Nymphs, mongst Shepheards and appeare. These with their Crownes of Laurell greene, vpon their bushy head, Themselues did shew (in Courtly pomp) adorn'd and bellished. About their neckes hung hugie chaines, and pretious Carkenets, And bout their armes they Iewells ware, and costly Bracelets. Now that this God propitious, mongst them himselfe would show, Great store of Sacrifices they, vpon him did bestow. Perfumde with Incens offered, and hundred sorts of verse, Which did his power, his Maiestie, and noble deeds rehearse. That done, they did beginne to daunce; each one as lik'te them best, And to what daunce they Fancie had, to that themselues addrest.
Whilst that the Syluans, and the Gods of woods, with Cornets shrill, With Hoboies, Bagpipes, and such like, the place throughout did fill. One doth a Brawle of Poitiers shew, another with a grace The measures leades, the third againe Lauolta treads apace. Thus euery one doth striue to please themselues with fresh delight, No falling out amongst them is, no malice, or despite. Not any was there bent to ill, nor any to displease, One sought another to content, to purchase ioy and ease. Together, mongst this merrie crew, there was our Louers twaine, When, as a curst mishap did chaunce, that cause was of their bane. For mongst the rest, that in that place did daunce, with blith-full glee, Euen in the midst of all their mirth, as merrie as might bee; A Nymph, there was, surpassing faire, for so she well did showe, So faire, as FLORA she did match, if not, before her goe. From forth her eies, like Diamonds, a sparkling fire did come, Whose glaunces shewed to be of force to equalise the Sunne. Her Amber locks (by nature curlde) lay wauing on her cheeke, As Seas doe gently beake on banke (a sight that all did leeke) This Virgin sweet, to NVMIDOR comes, with a grace most trim, And by the hand, the Shepheard takes, to daunce a while with him. Long did they daunce, and as they daunst, her colour fresher shoowes, And (still) the more she daunceth (aie) the more she fairer growes. So beautifull she seemes (indeed) as in that place there is, A Sauadge Satire, who begins, to thinke to doe amisse. Insecret sort, to rauish her, he vowes by force and strife, Or else, before he lose his wish, hee'le lose his hatefull life. This Monster foule (mishapen wretch) vnworthie for to Loue, Dan Cupids fire, within his brest, beginneth (now) to proue. He frets, and fumeth inwardly, and through this vncoth heate, His colour (changing) comes and goes, his heart doth pant and beate. Respect of persons, place, and feare, lest he should not obtaine, His hairie bodie makes to shake, through a cold sweat amaine. Meane space, none doth him marke, or thinke that ere he durst presume, The companie thus to disturbe, in this his fretting fume. But LOVE that forceth mightiest Gods, and them hath (oft) controld, Makes him auditious, insolent, proud, haughtie, and so bold. That in the end (and suddenly) he carrieth her away, As doth the Wolfe, when violently, he seazeth on his pray. Ah helpe (she crieth pittiously) ah helpe, helpe (loud) she cries, Whilst, that through feare, & sorrow she, dead in his rough (armes) lies. All are amaz'd, nor can they moue, onely braue NVMIDOR, Vowes for to rescew her from him, or else to die therefore. With naked sword in hand he runnes, after the Thiefe amaine, Yet all his running's to no end, he laboureth but in vaine. For so fast tripps the Satire, as it seemeth he doth flie, The Eagle faster takes not flight, when he from Ioue doth hie. Nor doth the Hawke (when he hath got the Partridge) seeme so swift, As this rude villaine doth, his feete so fast still moue and shift. But (still) the Nymph (for aide) doth crie, and after NVMIDOR Doth follow, hearing her hard by, which grieueth him the more. He followeth him apace, and (still) he keepes where he hath tras't, And (more he heares her to lament) the more he maketh hast. Yet, though he doth all he can, he cannot him ore take, Which is the cause his breast he beates, and sorrow great doth make. And now hard at his heeles he is, which when the Satire sees, Into a hollow gloomie Rocke, to hide himselfe he flees.
This was the cause the Shepheard lost, the wofull Damzels sight, Onely by crie of hers he knew, how follow her, he might. So long he seekes, that at the last he comes into the roome, Where as the Satire, gainst her will, the Virgin would ore come. Which sight, incenst him so with rage, as that his sword he takes, And trusting him through bodie quite, an end of him he makes. Downe fals the Monster in his gore, his lust begins to coole, Whilst with his streaming blood, he makes the place seeme like a Poole. Which when the gentle Shepheard sawe, no more he wearie was, (Now he had had his will) he for his trauaile did not passe. The frighted Nymph, he comforteth, and bids her be of cheare, Since that the Satire (for his rash attempt) had paid so deare. He wils her thanks the God of Loue, who had him thither sent, Her to protect from villanie, which was against her ment. Nor looketh he, for praise of her, but happier thinkes himselfe, To saue a Nymph from shame, then if he purchast had great wealth. Thus said the Shepheard to the Nymph, but (thus) although he said, Yet answered she him nought at all (for still she was afraid.) She shooke like an Aspen leafe, her hart did throb and pant, And being frighted in her minde, she breath, almost did want. Resembling right a prettie Hinde, by Hounds that being chast, And hardly scaping from their clawes, thinkes scarce the dangers past. She viewes the Satire, wallowing in his owne blood desperately, Yet though she plainely seeth the same, she scarce beleeues her eie. The Shepheard seeing her still doubt, from feare, her for to winne, Once more begins to comfort her, and thus he doth begin. Sweet Nymph, what meanst thou thus to doubt, and why thy selfe dost wrong, Dost not behold thy lustfull foe, dead for to lie along? To feare (where cause is) Reason wills; withouten cause to feare, Argues a minde depriu'd of sence, and signe's of folly meere. Comfort thy selfe, and (if thou can) tell me what new disgrace, May be of force, to daunt with dread; thy bloodlesse palie face. Seest not thy liuelesse enemie, his countenance dost not know? His earthly coarse, as euidence that he is dead, doth show. Cease then to doubt, for feare of ought since now thou hast no cause, Leaue thus to weepe, waile, and lament and make thereof a pause. Take courage vnto thee, and thinke my victorie vpon, The wise (of dangers past) will were so much as (once) thinke on. Then leaue off for to sorrow thus, and seeme not to disdaine, Through too much passion, honour this, which I through thee doe gaine. (So said) he gently helpes her vp, and sets her on her feete, Whilst with a thousand hunnie words, he sweetly her doth greete. The Nymph, now come vnto herselfe, begins to gather hart, To chase away all feare from her, which fore did breed her smart. Her former colour now doth come into her cheekes afresh, Whilst she in humble sort, with thankes vnto him doth expresse. Her gratefull minde, acknowledging in courteous manner trim, How that her honour, and her life, preserued were by him. With blushing looke, and smiling cheare, she crownes with flowers his head, And vowes in modest wise, to be at his deuotion led. But weladay, who ere would thinke, that thanks for his reward, Should be the cause, a recompence he should receiue so hard. This kindnesse, which the Nymph on him bestowd, deseruing worth, Th'vntimely end of him and of his FLORA deare, brought forth. For doing good, the fillie Swaine, his harmelesse life must lose, A slender hire for praise, when at so high a rate it growes.
Things taken well, are still done well; a sinne tis to mistruct, Vpon surmises false and vaine, and proofes not to haue iust. Ah had the Shepheards Mistris bene as wise as she was faire, She had not heapt vpon her selfe, nor him, such dismall care. Meane-time, braue Numidor, through his exploit, most famous grew, And through the Nymphs gratefull report, each one this matter knew. Which FLORA made for to misdoubt, for long time she before, Had markt the Virgin to be faire, the cause she feard the more. She sawe (as she did thinke) that or'e familiar he was With her, and how oft them betwixt, great kindnesses did passe. She well remembred, how they daunct together; and which most Did gaul her, how in hast away, he (after her) did post. When as the Satire snatch her vp, her to haue ramshed, And (how to saue her) he againe his life had ventured. All these compar'd together, made her gesse, all was not well, So that, her bodie quite throughout, an vncoth cold sweat fell. And now she gan to loue so much, as iealous she did grow Of him, that (nere) the same deseru'd, nor had off ended so. She sighes, and sobs, and frantick like, now here, now there doth runne, Thinking her dearest Loue of friend, an exemie was become. Nor dares she (in her soule) him call her faithfull seruant true, Nor worthie of a Mistris kind, since he hath got anew. Against (him say) she doth exclaime, and still gainst him doth crie, Cals him vniust, deceitfull, false, of right, an enemie. And (as if he committed had some monstrous sinne on earth,) She counts him worthie for to die, vnsit to draw his breath. And now, she throughly is assur'd, that he is giuen to range, And that of his first plighted Loue, he hath made an exchange. This forceth her, with face (one while) as pale and wan to looke, Another while to be as red, as fire from furnace tooke. Now doth she burne, and then againe, she suddenly doth freese, Whilst through these passions contrarie, her sences she doth leese. And now to kill her NVMIDOR, she vowes most resolute, Since him, a periur'd wretch (and not better) she doth repute. That done, she meanes to end her daies, and slay her selfe, him by. The more, her constant Loue vnto the world to testifie. But now, Loue makes her change her thought, although against her will, And forceth her (although despite of her) to loue him still. She weepes and wailes, and pearly drops fall from her like small teares, Whilst as a bedlem she doth rent her face, and golden heares. She flings her self vpon the ground, her head thereon she knocks, Whilst griefe so much in her beares sway, as it tongues passage locks. With armes a crosse, vnto the heauens, she lifteth vp her hands, Whilst she, of Venus and her Sonne, reuenge of him demaunds. Yet, after of the matter she, better bethinkes her selfe, And then vnto him she doth wish, all happines and health. Grieuing that she so much hath spoke gainst him, she doth repent, And from her former cruell minde, most willing doth relent. But nerethelesse, she is resolu'd her selfe, to end her life, Thereby to ease her of her pangs, and rid her from this strife. So much, she doth disdaine to liue, as death she meanes to chuse, Since Numidor, a Mistris new, hath tooke, her to refuse. Ah cruell Shepheard doth she say, lamenting pittiously, Hast thou the hart, who thee so deare hath lou'd to force to die? Well, well, most vnkind man, I for thy sake, my selfe will slay, And goe into my graue I will (vntimely) fore my day.
To please thee (not my selfe I sought) whilst I on th'earth did liue, Nor to prolong my daies tle seeke, since thee (I see) I grieue. But at this fault of thine so foule (vngratefull) dost thou thinke, The Gods aboue (true Iusticers) will seeme at all to winke. Thinkst thou (vnkind) the heauens will (ere) vnto thee be kinde, When (how thou fowly hast profan'd their Altars) they shall finde? No, no, th'immortall powers, sharpe foes vnto thy periurie, Shall doe me right, and wreake my wrong, for this my iniurie. Such punishment (with tortors huge) they shall on thee bestow, As they doe on Danaides, in Limbo lake below. And as they Theseus plagu'd because he wreched was forsworne, Or Iason, who Medea left, all comfortlesse, forlorne. With many other Louers false, which like are vnto thee, (There) as thou (rightly) dost deserue, afflicted thou shalt bee. For Iupiter, though (for a while) he men permits to rome, And fickle changings proue, yet in the end he paieth them home. So Paris died (and well deseru'd) Enone that abusde, Who in her life time (better) him (than he deseru'd) had vsde. Then dost thou thinke (fond-man) that thou shalt scape this scourage alone, Who, art the sowrse of all my griefe, and motiue of my mone? Perhaps thou dreamest, because that they awhile their plagues doe spare, They slowe are vnto punishment, nor of the same haue care. What is deferd, is not vnpaid; the time shall come ere long, That thou shalt make amends for misse, acknowledging this wrong. The more to chastise any fault, the Gods (gently) forbeare, The more at last they are rigorous, more cruell and seuere. Then, thinke not (wrech most treacherous) but that the day shall come, That thou shalt smart, for what thou hast to wofull Flora done. My cause to the heauens I doe commit, to them I doe appeale, They know the secrets of all hearts, nor ought will they conceale. And yet (sweet Numidor) forgiue, and pardon what I say, Since tis my griefe (not I) that thus, against thee doth enuay. For should'st thou neuer so much wrong doe vnto me each houre, Yet angrie for to be with thee, nere shall I haue the power. Loue, which is of more force in me, than is this thy offence, Command me (louing thee) with thee and with thy fault dispence. Iudge then of this strange crueltie, that it should me constraine, To loue and honour him who is the Author of my baine. So we, the feeble sicke man see, through senselesse fond desire, (What is th'occasion of his death) to couet and require. So I (arrested by proud Loue) am forst iniuriously, Alack the while, to honour thee, who laughst to see me die. Thee must I like, and follow still, despite of my poore hart, Although void of all honestie, and friendly Loue, thou art. Still for thy sake I languish must, in death, with great disease, Yet I my selfe count happie, since I doe it thee to please. The Gods forget (as I forgiue thee) from mine inward soule, And neuer may they, for my death, as faultie thee controule. As willingly I thee forgiue, as to my death I goe, For, being dead, thou then too late my constancie shalt knowe. Well maist thou haue a fairer friend, but faithfuller was neuer, Who as she seru'd thee, whilst she liu'd, in death shee'le loue thee euer. But thou, great Cupid, rightfull Iudge, reuenge my cause aboue, On her, who traiterously hath stolne from me, my heart and loue. Plague her, that makes me pine away, example let her bee, To Louers all, how they take heede, to vse such treacherie.
Plague her that hath my Louer stolen, my louely NVMIDOR, And let her feele like punishment, as I haue felt ore sore. Ah let her not, who loyall Faith, so shamefully doth soile, Raise Trophees of my ouerthrow, nor triumph in my spoile. Thus Flora prated and sigh't, thus wailde the heauie Shepheardesse, Was neuer Nymph, or Maiden borne, that felt such deepe distresse. In wailing, and in weeping, she did spend the day and night, And the remainder of her life, in sorrow, sans delight. And now she wearie is of life, life doth her vex and grieue, A greater Corsie hath she not, than that she thus doth liue. She doth resolue to die forthwith, and yet she faine would chuse, The gentlest, and the easiest way, her soule from corpse to loose. For to dispatch her selfe with sword, it was too fierce and fell, The fire displeased her, and the rope to her was horrible. To fling her selfe downe from some Rocks high top she had desire, But being there, the height thereof, did make her to retire. Vpon the Seaish banke she stood, minding therein to lep, But raging waues did her afright, from drowning they her kept. As we behold amaz'd to stand, the doubtfull traueller, Not knowing which way for to take, by reason of great feare. (Vnskilfull which path for to trace, beset most dangerously, Which he alreadie, seemeth in his minde, to view with eie. On euery side with Theeus, who all the passages about Haue laid, so as he knoweth not how, from thence to get him out. So Flora doubtfull, and yet full of corsiues and of paine, Knoweth not what death were best to chuse, though she would die full faine. She musing lookes, now here, now there, she runneth euery houre About the woods, and wisheth that some beast might her deuour. O, that we should ill wish our selues, oftentimes we wishing woe Vnto our selues, it lights on vs: poore Flora found it so. No wisedome tis, the Gods (to punish vs) to put in minde, Too soone, they can, if so they please, to plague vs, iust cause finde. Meane time, Loue, at this Shepheardesse doth smile and at her griefe, Who more she doth her woes bewaile, the more she wants reliefe. His glorie he embellisheth, by reason of her care, And his victorious Chariot, with the same doth make more faire. But leauing her (still) languishing, we will againe returne To Numidor, who missing her, doth waile as fast and mourne. He seekes and searcheth euery where, for Flora, he doth call, But yet no voice but Ecco shrill, doth answere him at all. Ecco, doth onely answere him, with wast, and fruitlesse sound, He heares her name, but Floras selfe, can no where yet be found. Like as the Hart (that louing Deare) when he his prettie Hinde, Runnes round about in euery place, with flying pace to finde. Now seeketh her amongst the Rocks, and then the woods among, Then in the Forrests there by Foords, and Riuers all along. And finding still to misse her, then seekes in some hollow Caue, To see if there her companie, as fortunate he may haue. And wearie now, with seeking her, he downe lieth in some place, Sighing full sore for want of her, whom he longs to embrace. So doth our Shepheard; who was now, with seeking her being tirde, Wailes his hard hap, not her to finde, whom he so much desirde. So much he wailes, as hardest Rocks, grieue that so much he seekes, And pittious Ecco, when he sighes, in recompence (now) weepes. Each thing, seemd (to their power) as though they succour to him brought, Onely did Flora want (alas) for whom so much he sought.
Flora, for whom he sought, whom yet he could not once entreate, That she vouchsafe would to his cries, to answere and to speake. Flora, who power had ouer him, him to commaund alone, Whose death and life lay in her hands, for her (thus) did he mone. And now into his troubled braine, did many fancies come, One while he thinkes some God of woods with her away is runne. Or that some other Satire ruffe, hath drawne her to some cane, And there (against her will) doth minde, his will on her to haue. Another while he doubteth sore, lest in this vncoth wood, Some sauadge beast hath seazde on her, and spilt her harmlesse blood, Or else, he feares, she him will haue no more vnto her mate, But rather meanes, some Louer now, into her grace to take. Thus doth he languish comfortlesse, to see his hard estate, And in a manner doth begin to grow as desperate. What hopefull is, that he reiects, no ioy he entertaines, But as a man carelesse of helpe, he wretchedly remaines. As is a guiltie person brought before the Iudge seuere, Conuicted (fore him) for his fault, which proued is most cleare. His conscience telling him of his offence, and his amisse, And for to proue the same, before him, his sharpe witnesse is. Which when he findeth, shame and griefe doth so his sinnes confound, As he his life, not to respect, nor to regard is found. So wofull full of heauie care, this haplesse Shepheard was, And (so, he Flora had not lost) for life he did not passe: But hauing lost her, he did thinke, his heart and soule was gone, And therefore comforted he would not he of any one. Yet he no sooner breath had tooke, but that he nerethelesse, For all his toyling, gan to seeke, and search for her afresh. He prieth into euery bush, through groues he looketh all, Andrunnes so fast, as oftentimes (through hast) he downe doth fall. Trough brambles sharpe, through bushes, and through hedges he doth passe, Through thicke and thinne, and all to finde his long sought dearest I asse. Like to the Deare that chased is, by Hunter, he did runne, And then againe begins the course, that he before had donne. When, missing of his purpose, he laments in pitteous case, And (cruell to himselfe) doth scrath and teare his manly face. Euen as Hippollitus the chaste, was drawne by his faire haire, Through forrests, woods, and mount aine tops, and hurried euery where. And at the last, his limmes were rent asunder one from one, Whilst (frighted with sea monsters) he from Chariot fell alone. So, such our Shepheard seemd to be, resembling such a wight, Whilst streames of blood runne downe alongst his bodie, view you might. He sighes and sobs, within the woods, with voice most dolorous, Whilst on the name of Ladie his, he crieth and cals on, thus. Ah where art thou my Flora dear alas, where maist thou be? And why shouldst thou be so vnkind, to hide thy face from me? What place so happie is to hold thy selfe (mine onely ioy?) Thy beautie (now) where doth it shine, chasing away annoy? (Light of mine eies) say dost thou loue? ah yet vnto me speake? And be not so vnkind, my heart (with calling thee to breake?) Where so thou liu'st, blessed is that place, thrise blessed aie, More willing than in paradise, I there would bide and staie. Alacke what haue I done to thee, thou shouldst be so vnkind, To part from me (my better part) and leaue my soule behind? No doubt, some God hath gotten thee, enioying presence thine, Some heauenly power doth honour thee, which breedeth sorrow mine.
For thinkest thou, withouten thee, I can draw forth this breath? Thinkst thou that in thine absence. I can liue vpon this earth? Then speake (my sweet) vouchsafe so much, as tell me, where art thou? Where bide those rare perfections, and where shine thy vertues now? May I not be so happie, as to know, where thou dost keepe? Since for thy losse, I cannot chuse, eternally but weepe? Without thy carefull Numidor, tell me where doest thou staie? Who (euer) hath thee lou'd, and who will loue thee still for aie? Canst thou, if him (as he doth thee) so much and truely loue, Grieue him so much, vex him so much, and ouermuch him moue? I knew the time, I must confesse, when as thou didst sermount, For loyall Loue, and when of me, thou diddest make account. I know, I know, thou loud'st me once, that loued me thou hast, And that for constant loyaltie, our mutuall Loue hath past. I know that Loue, ore both our hearts, tryumpht as Conquerour, And that or'e both our soules he had, the like and selfesame power. Ile sweare that once thou louedst me, though now thou lou'st me not, Though now that fire extinguisht is, and thou hast me forgot. I know not, if (as wearie of me) thou beginst to range, And that thy fickle minde desires, else where to soare and change. Or, whether, hauing found a man, thou better likst than mee, I am reiected, and shooke off, and quite cassheirde by thee. Which if that it be so, why then, die must poore Numidore, And with his death, his fortune hard, and thy bad minde deplore. If it be so, he must resigne his life to death, and die Rather than liue, thus languishing in paine continually. If it be so, I needs must say (though so to say) doth griue, There is no trust in any one, no faith on earth doth liue. Needs must I say women are false, that constant fewe remaine, And that their Sex doth harbor  ought, but false dissembling shame. If it be so, that Flora, false, to Shepheard hers hath prou'd. Then well I sweare, that loyally, neuer hath (woman) lou'd. But why (alas) talke I so vaine? too idle is my head, Whilst with such franticke raging fits my fantasie is fed? What madding humor vexeth me, what bedlem iealousie? What fond conceit makes me to talke (Sans Sens) so foolishly? Am I so vilely giuen, to thinke that Flora will cassbeire Her seruant Numidor, whom she (before) hath lou'd so deare? That she (to any) but to him, will true and faithfull proue, That she will falsifie her faith, orethrowing her first Loue? O thought most base to haue of her, conceit her to mistrust, O traiterous Shepheard, worthlesse man, O louer most accurst. Haue I (long) heretofore, her Loue with Touchstone throughly tride, And shall she now with sensure hard, withouten cause abide? Shall I, of infidelitie condemne her, and suspect, When I haue euer knowne her, all bad motions to reiect? No, no sweet Flora, I dare sweare, and I doe know too well, Thou lou'st thy Numidor, nor him (for new) wilt euer sell. No, thou dost loue him, though some God, hath tane thee gainst thy will, And keepeth thee (perforce) although, thou neuer meanedst ill. I know thou dearely louest him, as dearely as thy hart, And that his absence makes thee waile, and in thee breedeth smart, I know my presence thou dost wish, and dost lament my losse, I know, that my not being with thee, thou dost count a crosse. I doe beleeue assuredly (nor otherwise ile thinke,) Thy loue so sacred nere can die, nor euer be extinct.
Too much thou louedst me, too much thou (aie) of me didst make, To leaue me, to abandon me, and me for to forsake. Thou louest me, and dost desire with me to be, I know, But that bad fortune crossed thee, the faults thereof to show. Then in what place, thy sweetest selfe doth soiourne and doth stay, And where so ere thy beautie faire her brightnes doth display. Where ore thy gratious eie doth glaunce, controlling with delight, Embellsshing with lulstrious raies, the glorie of thy sight; Ah, there the Gods I doe beseech, all happines to raigne, Downe on thee fast, whilst there thou maist, in pleasure (safe) remaine. Whilst I meane while, will goe to seeke some wofull vncoth place, Some hollow Rocke, where I may liue, since I can finde no grace. For being of thy seemely shape (though vndeseru'd) depriude, I needes must breath my last of force, and seeke to be distiude. Then happie liue thou, liue thou long, and neuer maist thou tast, Of sorrow such as I haue done, to force thy life to wast. Thus said the Shepheard, and therewith, seekes still some hollow Cane, Wherein he soone may finde his end, which he desires to haue. He seekes to finde his death, whilst her to finde he nere doth linne, As did Apollo, Daphna chase, whose loue he sought to winne. Nor wearied is he: Louers nere are wearied, when the fire Of Loue doth burne their entrailes hot, with coales of strange desire. Long trauaile, neuer tireth them, but still they labour fresh, And though they be ore chargde, yet take thy courage nerethelesse. Then Numidor (by Loue) borne out, both day and night doth seeke For his faire Saint, for whom he longs and much desires to meete, As one beholds the Lionesse, at mouth with froth to fome, When she to seeke her little ones (stolne from her) forth doth runne. She neuer staieth, but restlesse runnes the forrests all about, Nor giues she ore, although her bones and backe doe cracke throughout. Running, sometimes vpon the bills, and then on Champions plaine, Another whilst alongst corne fields, with swiftie pace amaine. And in the end wearied with griefe, her selfe flings on the ground, Resolu'd to die (through hunger) staru'd, since they will not be found. So such a part our Shepheard plaide, when he did see with eie, His Mistris he no where could finde, he faints, resolu'd to die. But weladay, before his death, he sawe his Flora faire, Flora for whom so oft he calde, the cause of all his care. The coarse of that faire Nymph, for whom he thought himselfe forlorus, He found a Sauadge beast had all in pieces cruell torne. For whilst through madding iealousie, she vp and downe did fret, In thickest woods, as she desirde, a Lion there her met. Which seazing on her with his pawes, did teare her in a trise, (The goodliest creature that did liue) he slewe in furious wise. Yet as she died, on Nunidor she calde (as he might heare) For helpe, though all in vaine, and though (as then) he was too neere. Too neere to her so pittious sound, too farre to helpe her tho, Which was the reason, that the more it did encrease his woe. (She slaine) away the Lion runnes, when as from mountaine hie, He might perceiue her breathlesse trunke, in peeces torne to lie. Which when he sawe, he thither ranne, as if he had bene mad, So fast he ranne, as (running) then, nor strength nor breath he had. Downe falls he sounding for pure griefe, vpon the linelesse corse, So long, as he did seeme indeed as dead, without remorse. At last (though long) he once more comes vnto himselfe againe, Calling his vitall spirits to him, although with grieuous paine.
Whilst for to vtter these fewe words (words grieuous) he do , Words such, so pittifull, as well both heauen and earth might moue. And art thou dead (faire natures worke) the Mirrour of thy time, Art thou disliu'de, whom all admirde as sacred and diuine? Art thou a prey to enuious Death, could Death thee thus annoy? Who whilst thou liu'dst, my comfort wast, my selace and my ioy? O Death vniust, damnd, ennious vnto my chiefest ease, Durst thou so much (ore insolent) my Flora faire displease? Woes mee th'art dead, and with thee dead, are those thine Eyes so bright: Thine Eyes, which men for to reuiue, had power, enough, and might. Ah thouart dead, where whilom lodg'd mine hart, and inward soule, Thou now art dead, whose onely lookes, the proudest did controule. But thou art dead, and can I liue, to see a sight so sore? Is Flora gone, and likely ist, that liue should Numidore? Prodigious Planets, me to make ore-liue my Ladie deare, Since shee, the Essence of my life was, whilst I tiued here. Heauens most vniust, to giue to mee, of life so long a scope, Since I behold (destroyed) her, in whom was all my hope. But yee mine eyes, why feare you not, so foule a sight to marke? And looking on it, afterwards, become not blinde and darke? Most cruelly destned as I was; thrice happie had I beene, If I had neuer had these eyes, and neuer could haue see. Thrice happie I, if some wilde beast, in pieces had me tore, So I this murther nere had spide, which I so much abhore. I was not (beautious Nymph) no way, to be compar'd to thee, If so, why then should any way, Death hinder be to mee Accursed soule of mine, and thou, mine euer restlesse hart, Canst thou abide to breath so long, to taste such vncoth smart? I am a Man, and of more strength, then she was; why then first Since I could (better) death endure, died I, not most accurst? Reason it was, and conscience, that I die before thee should, Since as my Faith, and dutie was, not saue thy life, I would. Cruell Lyon, that hast deuourd my ioy, come doe thy will On mee, who for to liue on earth, count it a haynous ill. Come, come, and from this miserie, let him I pray be rid, Who doth desire to end his dayes, as his poore Flora did. Doe vs this pleasure, for to kill vs both (at once) together, That dying so, thou both maist please (as well contenting either) Why com'st not (cruell) then; since that for thee I doe attend? And stay thy leisure, that thou mightst, my wretched bodie rend. I see thou art no Lyon right, but of a Bastard kinde, Else sooner mee, then Ladie mine (ere this time) thou wouldst finde. A Lyon, generous indeed, disdaineth for to prey, On silly Virgins, harmles Maides, but lets them goe their way. Hee onely seazeth on stout men, or such as be his Foes, And spoyleth them, that chaseth him, tearing in pieces those. Where, forth tyrannize vpon a Nymph, a murthers such, As neuer like was heard before and is detested much. But I perceiue thou dar'st not come, yet in despite of thee, Ile spoyle my selfe, that so I may, with my deare Mistris bee. Ile die, that I may follow, for to serue my Misteris, Who seckes his Lady to suruiue, of life not worthie is. (Faire) thee the heauens haue reft, to make themselues more faire to show, Whilst here, vpon the earth with vs, they nought haue left, but woe. Faire, they haue taken thee away, to beautifie more faire Themselues, whilst here (instead of thee) they leaue eternall care.
Meane time, I liue still languishing, thy heauy losse to rue, Vnworthy to haue bidden thee farewell, or once Adieu. Yet Flora, in despite of Death, thou flourish shalt for euer, Thy praise shall shew Acanthus like, still flowring, dying neuer. The sweet Cloue, Gilliflower, and Rose, of Spring, it shall put downe, Thy beautie was more beautifull, and of more fresh renowue. My daintie Flora being dead, shall be such kinde of Flower, As she shall be eternall (aye) and flourish euery hower. Death may our liues abridge (through Spite) bating our youthfull dayes, But Vertue it can nere subdue, nor subingate her praise. But why liue I? it may be sayd, that I in life remains. Who liuing, feele the torments of damn'd Ghosts, sternall point. No, no, I liue no more, my dayes are turn'd to darkest nights, Already I am registred, amongst the liuelesse Sprighs. That I should liue, and Flora dead, a thing's impossible, To stay bhinde her, she being gone, I loued her too well. (Sweet) I must satisfaction make, to thee for mine offence, Although I shame, when I doe thinke, on my vile negligence. Had I bene carefull ouer thee as (but my part) it was, Thou then hadst bene aliue as now, to ioy with me (alas.) I did deserue the punishment, for thou didst nere ffend, Ah woe is mee, thou not through Foes, hast died has through thy Friend. For which my respasse, I resigne my life most millingly, Neuer so much desiring life, as now I wish to die. But yet before I breathe my laft, let me obtaine thy grace, That I may kisse those Diamon eyes, that quondan beautions face. Which said, the Shepheard taketh vp, her lies so seatered, Whilst them embracing, floods of teares, vpon them (swife he shad) So much, and oft, so pittifull, he sobb'd, and sh'd o fast, Asruhlesse Rocks, seemd for to moane, and halfe inpieces brast. So wofully he wailde, as All. (except his Mistris deare, Who to a better world was gone) did seeme his  to heare. Yet though hee sighed, wept, and grieu'd, and did lant so fore, He could not nere-thelesse his Loue, to former liferestore. For Floras Spirits were flowen from hence, her soule it did uscend. To heauens, where her betrothed Spouse, with ioy she did attend. Which he perceiuing, gets him vp, and to a Mountaine goes, From top of which, on Mistris his, himselfe (he headlong) throwes. He falls vpon her breathlesse limmes, and as he dying fell, He calls on her, and still he cries, Flora, Adieu, Farewells. Thr murthered bodies massacred, within a while were found, Which were intomb'd together both, within one graue in ground. And that of this their loyall Loue, the Fame should neuer die, This wofull Story was engrauen, in plates of Iuonis. The Shepheard hauing made an ende of his Tragicall discourse, forced the eyes of his Auditors to stand full of water, whilst thev streamed downe so small teares, as it seemed to be the dribling golden shower, in which Iupiter descended downe, falling in∣to the faire lappe of louely Danae; Whilst Arcas sighed, remembring his deare Dia∣na. Coribant wept, thinking vpon his cruell Delia, and whilst the louely Nymph Ory∣thia, casting a looke (pleading for pittie) vpon Aroas, mourned in her heart, to see his more then fierce rigour towards her. Meane space, Delia arriued, whome no sooner Coribant espied, but that hee pre∣sently arose, going towards her, and after he had saluted her with great kindnesse, thus began to accost her.
Beautious Shepheardesse, euerie thing (excepting thy selfe onely) freely exercise their LOVE: what? is thy soule (alone) made of Ice, or thy heart framed of Steele? Which way can it hinder thee to loue mee, seeing I haue giuen thee so many proofes of my more then common fidelitie, and faithfull constancïe towards thee? Wilt thou be the onely Shee in the world, that shall liue without louing? Why, the sacred Muses themselues (haue loued,) and Caliope her selfe, did beare, and bring forth a childe. What God is there that can forbid and prohibite to Loue, when they themselues first gaue presidents vnto men, to follow the same? Hee is not to be blamed, that fol∣loweth the instructions of his Lord, and (to his power) doeth imitate his maister in what he doeth. Loue then, and if not, as a mortall creature, yet at the lest doe it, as the Gods haue done before thee. For he deserueth not to be tearmed a true and loyall seruant vnto his Maister, that taketh a quite contrarie course, vnto that which he teacheth him, as if he would oppose himselfe against him, for the very nonce. Is it possible thou shouldest (so long) hate him, who loueth thee so dearely? And wilt thou be longer in making me some recompence, then those two bretheren of He∣len were, who saued that Poet, which sung their praises all abroad? Speake then, and sa∣tisfie me, seeing the Gods, (although they be puissant and mightie) disdaine not to an∣swere men, by the mouth of their Oracles. What should I answere vnto thee Shepheard (replyed Delia) but that it is impossi∣ble for anie creature (LOVE onely excepted) to make one loue, against their owne mindes. Hippolitus (for all the prayers and intreating, which Phoedra vsed vnto him) could neuer be moued to fancie her: Neither could Daphne, for all Apollos perswasions, be induced to loue him. No, no, LOVE is a piercing dart, not throughly knowne of mortall men, which oftentimes without reason, vrgeth vs to affect that that is not wor∣thie of our Amitie. Be not there many Louers, that if one should demaund of them the cause of their Loue, they knowe not what to say, nor can alledge anie reasonable excuse for the same? I know there be. How manie Blowses be there, which are preferred before such as be beautifull in∣deed? And how many base and beastly fellows, before right braue and generous Spirits? What is the occasion of this disorder, none can tell: Onely they will say, it is the plea∣sure of Cupid, it should be so. Then thinkest thou with thy often speeches, to compell me to loue thee? and doest thou suppose, that without the power of Loue, I can be moued to beare thee any affection? If so thou doest, thou art in the wrong, and therefore trouble Lone no more, but rather let him take such course, as he shall thinke best: without seeking any more to constraine him, against his diuine pleasure. For if he be able to take downe the Gods, much more is he to conquere thee, by forcing thee to follow his will, and to condescend vnto what∣soeuer he shall commaund thee. Alas (answered Coribant) fewe diseased persons there be, that doe not complaine for griefe, (ingendred of sighes) they being his forerunners, and messengers, to manifest the same abroad. Doest thou imagine that I am able to support this sorrowe, which I feele in liking thee, and that I can conceale the same, without making thee acquainted with the tediousnes thereof? But I see for all I complaine, yet I find small comfort, (for mortall men cannot ob∣taine all they couet of the Gods:) Yet neuertheles, I will discharge my conscience vnto thee, which hath enioyned me to manifest this my so great euill, to the end I might see if I could finde any remedie, to make it whole againe. But (sayest thou) LOVE is not purchast with teares nor plaintes, neither with sighing nor sobbing, but must come of his owne proper minde, and when he pleaseth. What is this thou sayest, (vnkinde as thou art) wilt thou denie, that perseuerance in con∣stant liking, is the mother of LOVE? If small drops of water, by often falling, doe make hollowe the Stone; And if rough and rustie yron is made smoothe and bright, with often handling of the same; Why then, wilt thou not in like manner also con∣fesse, that vnfained, long prayers, vowes, plaints, and loyall offices of Fidelitie, are able to
make a breach in the heart of a Ladie, through which Loue may enter. Such hard-harted women, as neither the teares of their Louers can mollifie or appease, neither their complaints moue to pittie, neither their secret and faithfull seruice, perswade them to affection, nor their extreame miseries, reduce them to any compassion at all; are farre worse then Sauadge Beares, denouring Lions, or raue∣nous Wolues, that liue in barbarous desarts: many wilde Beastes, in steed of swallowing and deuouring of men, which haue falne into their pawes, to asswage their greedie hunger, in steed of praying vpon them, haue cherished and made much of them, and shall a woman (by natute gentle and mild) be accounted lesse pittifull then bruite Beastes? Doest thou thinke that it is an offerice to loue? If all such Ladies which Iupiter loued, had giuen him the repulse as thou doest me, the world should yet be full of Monsters, spoyled with Tyrants, and ouerthrowne with bad and wicked per∣sons. But these courteous women, entertaining that great God, with all kindnesse that might be, brought forth many Demigods, and heroicall Spirits, who most brauely purged the world from these hatefull and damned Monsters. Olympia, the mother of that great Alexander, receiued into her bosome that mightie Iupiter, conceiuing by him that glorious Sonne, and that great Monarch of the earth. Rbea, the mother of Remus, and Romulus, refused not the kissings of God Mars, being big with child, of those two worthy Princesse, which built Rome, afterward, she comming to be Mistris ouer all the world. Away then with these fond conceits, and remember, to be fauourable vnto me, as these courteous dames haue bene heretofore. Shepheard, Shepheard (aunswered Delia) neuer dreame of any such thing, be∣tweene thee and me, for those women yeelded vnto the Gods, because they might bring forth children worthy of such Fathers, which might be as profitable vnto the publike God, as they themselues had bene before. But such a commoditie, cannot happen of our Loue (and say it might chaunce to be so) yet my opinion is (according vnto the common saying) that we ought not doe Euill, that good may come thereof: because the ill being once done, cannot be amen∣ded: whereas we we are not sure, whether that good, which we expect, will fall out ac∣cording vnto our hopes or no, and the rather, because many things happen betweene the cup and the lip. Therefore these presidents shall neuer perswade me to loue, for none are bound to follow that which is leaud or bad, neither are they commaunded to be wicked, after the examples of others. Then Shepheard, change thou thy minde, thine owne selfe, or else thou wilt force me to shun thy companie, for there is nothing that troubleth the eares of another more, then to repeate often that which is pleasing vnto him. Remember the torments of Ixion, for affecting the iealous Sister of Ioue, and thinke how poore Tamirus was plagued, for being amorous of the Muses: neither goe about to debash a chaste minde to cast liking vnto thee, for feare least the heauens, who punish all such wrongs as are done vnto Innocents, reuenge not this iniurie which thou offerest vnto me, seeing that he is in more fault, that perswadeth one to leaudnes, then he that doth the same, the first, inuenting that which (had not he bene had neuer bene done) whereas the other, doth but put in practise, what he neuer (of himselfe) had ment. Quench then and mortifie within thee thy foolish desires, and let me alone (I pray thee) to liue as I haue done, who haue bene offered but too much wrong alreadie, without hauing need of thee to buz such vaine toyes into my head, as thou doest con∣tinually. Coribant would haue aunswered, when he might perceiue hard at hand, the reuerend old man (protector of that Desart) hauing a staffe in one hand, and a booke in an other, with which, he controuled the Spirits, as well of the earth below, as of the aire aboue.
He came to finde melancolike Arcas, to the end he might follow and prosecute his amorous Historie, whom he no sooner espied with Orythia (who was all this while cour∣ting of him) but that he marched towards him: which the Nymph perceiuing, left him, when the (Magitian making a signe) poore Arcas followed him, he not daring to denie him, whereupon they went vnto their accustomed place, where being set downe, the old man thus began. Come on Shepheard, and now begin thy Tale, which the other day thou leftest vnperfect, for it is to no end to take a busines in hand, except we finish the same. Dispatch I pray thee, and let me heare what thou canst say more, as concerning thy chaste Loues, for sweete is the memorie of things commendable, the recitall of which, purgeth our soules from many faults, which otherwise we are likely to com∣mit. Happie are such, as haue had the friendship of good and excellent Poets, and so likewise, vnfortunate are they, that chaunce to fall into their hatred. For, of the first, they make the memorie and remembrance euerlasting, and eternall, asthey make the last to be counted hatefull and detestable; for so doe the writings of the auncient Poets shew vs. Homer, bringeth Achilles, and the Greekes to be victors, although it was the Troy∣ans that had the vpper hand, making Penelope to be the Mirrour of chastitie and wise∣dome, when indeed, she was no better then an infamous Curtezan: and Virgil commen∣deth the traitor Aeneas, when the very truth is, he like a disloyall wretch, sold Troy: and condemneth modest Dido, to make the world to hate her, she being as free from any such lascionsnes, as Maro was, from telling what was true. Happie therefore are such, as learned Poets fauour with their pennes, but aboue all, most fortunate are those, whom thou hast taken in hand to praise, because thy Muse is veritable and not a liar, or vntrue. Blessed are those, thy beautious Ladies, whose worthie vertues thou hast blazed forth, with so great respect and reuerence; since the memorie of them, shall neuer perish, by reason of deuouring time, or be drowned in the pitchy Riner of forgetfull Lethes. Goe forward then, for the soule that is dallied withall, deferred from hope, is grie∣uously afflicted with sorrow, and the hinderance of that thing which one desireth, ma∣keth the conceit of the ioy, to be farre lesse, than otherwise it would be. Great is the charge thou laiest vpon me (replied Arcas) and hardly would I take such a peece of worke in hand for any other, but the law willeth, that he that receiueth, must render againe: neither is it sufficient for one to be beholding vnto another, vn∣lesse he make some satisfaction for the same: and therefore, seeing I am in this predica∣ment, it is but reason, that I should endeuour to acquit my selfe towards thee, in satisfy∣ing thy desire, because I am so much bound vnto thee. And yet (before I goe any further) I beseech thee (graue Father) and all such as shall come after thee, vnto whom this worke by fortune shall happen, to beleeue, that I haue not declined from the truth, in any one word, in describring the rare perfections of IVLIETTA, and of DIANA, they being such as I haue painted forth, or rather farre more excellent then I am able to display. And therefore let the Posterities hereafter beleeue (as we at this day doe) that as there was a braue and valiant Harpalice, that as Thomaris, sometimes raigned, who dis∣comfited the vanquisher of Kings; that as Pentisilea, gaue succour and assistance vnto the Troyans, that as Sage and couragious Zenobia liued, with thousands of other peerlesse women: So was their flourishing IVLIETTA and DIANA, two Ladies and Vir∣gins, of so excellent and exquisit qualities, as well of the bodie as the minde, as neuer any of their Sex, in the old time, are to be compared vnto them. But to come to the purpose: If you remember, I presented certaine verses vnto my sugred Saint (for so I told you) and she accepting of them, went with the other Nymphs towards the Temple of Diana. Follow her I durst not, for those secret ceremonies were forbidden to be solemnized by men; whilst she in the meane space carried away my hart with her, to stand her in steed of a sacrifice, which she might offer vnto her Goddesse.
Long did I expect her comming back againe; and grieuous was it vnto me, to stay so long her returne: but there was no other remedie; wherefore I laid me downe vn∣der a broade Beech Tree; where, if I had heard neuer so small a noyse, I presently started vp, thinking I should haue beheld the sweet face, and comely countenance of my glorious Sunne. If but a small leafe had moued, I thought straightwayes she was come. Then would I count in my minde, how many paces it was from that place vnto the Temple, and me thought that now she was comming from thence, & that (by my account) she was so farre onward of the way, and and yet I was deceiued in my conceit. For I reckoned (as they say) without mine Hoast. One while I doubted least she had altered her iourney, and that she determined to walke some other way. Another while, I feared least she stayed the longer, because she was loth to come where I was. O most weetched is the condition and estate of Louers, from whome, doubtfull feare, and fearefull doubt, can neuer be abandoned. Although men owe reuerence vn∣to the Gods, and that they ought to respect that Seruice, as they should their owne proper liues: Yet neuerthelesse, I could (as then) haue bene very well contented that Diaxa, had bene spared from doing that Sacrifice. O miserable lawe of LOVE, which spoyleth all other, and which (so that itselfe may restaliue, and goe for currant) careth not although all other considerations be made voyde and disanulled, how iust soeuer they be. The Louer, so hee may enioy what he coueteth, he forgetteth all that is to come, not so much as once thinking of the dutie which is due vnto the Gods, nor regarding the feare of men, nor respecting sacred Religion at all. Great is the Furie (no doubt) that haunteth them: else would not amorous Phoe∣dra, haue sought the death of innocent Hyppolitus, neither the wife of Putiphar, gone a∣bout to haue made the vertuous Ioseph endure so great miserie. Now, whilst I expected her, whom I could not see: I might heare (not farre from mee (a certaine voyce, singing this Dittie following. Lucklesse, and luckie, (both at once) am I, With feare and hope, I trembled as a Reed: Lucklesse, by Beautie thine, by Destinie, Luckie, because I am thy slaue indeed. For (then thy face) there nothing is more faire: Then thy sweet Eyes, nought more diuine or rare. One while I hope, another while I feare, Nor can there any thing my fancie please: It greeues me for to see the heauens, though cleare, So much I doubt thy fauour to displease. Then thy faire face, there nothing is more faire: Then thy sweet Eyes, nought more diuine or rare. Then (sweet sower Foe) vonchsafe me for to loue, Or once for all, abridge my time of life: Nor suffer me, such torments more to pr, Since I must die, lest thou appease this strife. For then thy face, there nothing is more faire. Than thy sweet Eyes, nought more diuine or rare. Although thine Eyes, my paines encreaseth more, Yet (more I see them) more I them admire: Thy beautious feature, I so much adore, As for to die for it, I still desire. For then thy Face there nothing is more faire: Then thy sweet Eyes, nought more diuine or rare. For louing thee, my greefes I happie deeme, Though cruell and vnsuffrable they bee:
Whilst at the same (as enuioue) I doe seeme, Though for thy sake, how I still die I see. Then thy faire face, there nothing is more faire: Than thy sweet eies, nought more diuine and rare. Then whether death, my life shall take away, Or whether I shall laid be in my graue, Yet will I loue, and honour thee for aie, Both dead, and liue my seruice thou shalt haue. For then thy face, there nothing is more faire: Than thy sweet eies, nought more diuine or rare. This Song was dolefull enough, and yet more dolorous was the voice of him that sung it, which was small remedie vnto my sorrowes, but rather a fresh beginning vnto them, whilst I lanquished, being oppressed with a double martyr, and my griefe, encrea∣sed more and more, the first was, because I loued: and the other was, because I perceiued that I was seconded in my louing. So violent was the affection which I bare vnto my Ladie, as it began to breed in me, a certaine kind of iealousie, I beginning to imagine, that this other my companion in Loue, because he was better liked of, then I was, might be as an ouerthwart barre, to crosse my happie successe, making Diana, more hard-harted vnto me, then she would haue bene, if she had had no more Sutors then my selfe onely. This second wound gauled me more than the first, I maruailing much, how it was possible for me to resist so sharpe an assault. This was the cause I could not take any rest quietly, my minde still running, that I was not so much fauoured, nor affected, as this new commer was: Not vnlike vnto him, who lying in a wood, cannot sleepe all that night long, as well because he feareth the rauenous teeth of the wild beastes, as also, the cruell spoyling of fierce and murthering theeues. Neuerthelesse, I began to comfort me at the last, thinking that if this new come guest had bene so well entertained by my Saint, he would not then haue lamented so much as he did; for one cheerfull looke, one louely glaunce, or one pleasant word pro∣ceeding from his Mistris, is enough to make a Louer reuiue againe, although he were before at deaths doore. This then, was the reason, that for a while, I was pacified and contented; but then by and by, I began to doubt againe, remembring, that it was an ordinarie course of Louers, to complaine without cause; whether it is, because still they haue one thing or another in their heads, that maketh the alwaies feare the worse, or whether it be, for that they take a kind of pleasure in complaining and lamenting, after they haue glutted themselues with delight, no otherwise than such as (being extreame and hot) fling themselues into cold water, or as vnto staruen and famisht men, victuals and food are most sweet and delecta∣ble. This was the perplexitie in which I was in, I being so troubled in my minde, as I was halfe out of my wits, yet in the end I resolued to drawe neere vnto this Shepheard, & to behold him wistly, hoping (that when I had throughly marked his contenance) I might quickly coniecture of his disgrace, or contentment, and whether he were in fauour with my Mistris or no. Whereupon I stole faire and softly vnto him (as with slowe and secret pace, Mirrha, approached the bed of her father) when being hard by him (who lay along at the foote of a shadowing Rocke) I might here him demaund his fortune of God Pan, who vsed to aunswere Louers, out of the mouth of certaine enchaunted Rocks. Thus then he began, vnto whom an Ecco replied, in this sort. Hard Rocks, Rocks cruell, insolent by nature and b dure, Will you no pittie take on me, for torments I endure? Is no compassion in you lodg'd, can nothing be offorce? Yet (at the last) though long to rew, and yeeld me some remorce? Ah, of my plagues cannot blaine, that they may cured be, At lest, yet daine, at my sad cries, with voice to answere me.
Ah speake, and say the truth, shall I be freed once of this paine? Or must I still endure therein, and languishing remaine? Languishing re maine. Ah say (alas) must this my paine (as thou assurd'st me hast,) (Immortall be, continuing still, and must it alwates last? Alwaies last. What comfort then may succour me, who scarcely draw my breath, What may my dying soule reuiue, which is so nigh to death? Death. Shall I then liue in sorrow thus? my life away that weares, And sighing, shall I nothing doe, but powre forth watrie teares? Watrie teares. But sighing thus, ist possible my more than mortall ill, (Which makes me peanemeale pine away) should thus continue still Still. Continuing in my passions thus, opprest with torments rife, What other things will they take hence, will they take hence my life? Life. To end my woes, in this sad plight, an end, how might I haue? Shall I finde my reliefe by Loue? or when I am in graue? In Graue. But after millions of these woes, being burnt with Loues hot Fewell, For to requite my paines, how shall I finde my Mistris cruell? Cruell. Why, then I see, no pittie she, willford me for my griefe, And since tis so, ile yeeld my selfe to death, without reliefe. With one selfe bloodie instrument, and with one selfesame blade, My wounded corpse shall healed be, my soude be well apaide. Since onely death, and none but death, some can comfort giue, What should me hinder (haplesse) that I should longer liue? I, I will die, yea I will die, and will a minde imbrace, To massacre that wretched state, that followeth me in chase. Well may you (reuerend Sir) imagine, if this aunswere was pleasing vnto me, or de∣lightfull vnto him, especially when he heard the Gods of the Forrests to be so contrarie vnto him in all his desires. Which was the cause, that the poore Shepheard lying groue∣ling vpon the ground, and bedeawing the greene grasse with his drerie teares, began to moane thus heauily. O death, wilt thou be still dease vnto my cries? and wilt thou neuer heare me, I cal∣ling so often and so much vpon thee? Hast thou not had time enough, to rid me of my troubles, and wilt thou (still) thus driue me off with delaies continually? Thinkest thou, he can liue, who pineth away piecemeale, whilest he is fettered with worse than Iton ma∣natles, in the ioy lesse dungeon of vnmercifull Loue? No, he cannot, for he liueth not at all; but rather, miserably consumeth away, who seeth himselfe, not onely depriued of his desire, but also is quite debarred of all hope, euer to obtaine the same. Ah deare Loue, if euer thou (heretofore) hast loued, empoysoning thine owne soule, with thine owne proper venome, and if thy Mother likewise, hath often plaid the selfesame part, why then doest not thou take pittie vpon those, who haue endured the same Martyrdome? and since thou knowest their disease (by thine owne experience) why doest thou so long defer to bring them remedies for the same? Well, cruell Cupid, well, I see thou art blind indeed, nor hast thou any regard at all to helpe me. The better thou art attended on, the worse thou shewest thy selfe, as one who by na∣ture is borne to doe hurt, but not good vnto any. Woe is me, I liue without hope of any helpe, more disconsolate, than that Pilot, who though he saileth in a thicke and gloomie storme, yet doth he hope (the same being past) to see the Sunne shine againe, trusting in
the end safely to arriue within the wished Hauen. But in my darke tempest, and in my stinging corsiues and bitter crosses, I see no hope of any signe of comfort to shine, or smile vpon me. Eternall is my shipwracke, and my trauaile is without all end. O faire Diana, although thou art vnkind vnto me, yet doe I take no small pride, to call my selfe thy slaue, for nothing can come neere thee in beau∣tie, neither can I belieue, that the heauens thēselues can create a beautie, able to parago∣nise thine. Happie is that Bull, that is chosen to be offered vp as an oblation or sacrifice vnto the Gods, although his blood be there shed, and so most fortunate should I account my selfe,  for thy sake, I might be thought worthy to finish my daies, seeing that for thee, I should suffer death, and be sactificed by Loue, vpon the Altar of thine extreame rigor and fiercenes. Thus wailed the Shepheard, his eies sending downe whole streames of salt teares, which watered his face and cheekes all ouer; I seeing this, came neerer vnto him, and whilest (he not perceiuing me) I began to marke, & behold his countenance, which I saw quite colourlesse, and the very Anatomie of an inward afflicted minde, whereby I gathe∣red, that he had found no more fauour then I had, at his Mistris hands, neither that his fortune was any way better then mine. This was the reason, my second doubt died, but not my first, which still increased more and more, because I sawe she was sued and sought vnto by many, although I could not find any, to be more in her bookes then I was, which God knoweth was little or nothing at all. As I was thinking hereupon, a suddaine desire came into my minde, to returne vnto the place from whence I came, and there attend my fairest Saint, for me thought still, she should be come thither alreadie, and that (she not finding me there) was gone home againe, iudging my Loue, not to be ouerhot, seeing I had so small patience to stay a little for her. Being come to mine old place, as fast as I could, I began there to condemne mine owne follie, in that I would not take time whilest I might, but rather so foolishly loose so fitan occasion, as I had offered vnto me; and this new accident ingendred another trou∣ble in me. Loue is an Orchard wherein are planted thousands of Trees, in which Louers walke, gathering continually diuers sorts of fruits, of griefe and sorrow, and it is a liuely spring of miserie, from whence doe flow, millions of little Riuers, of pensiue care, and sad woe. Long had I not kept my stand, but that one of the Nymphs came by, who was one of the play-fellowes of my Ladie, of whom I enquired if Diana were comming from the Temple or no. Offentimes, the ouer great curiousnes we haue to vnderstand newes, bringeth vs much dollor, and sadnes. As then, I found the same to be true, for the Nymph told me, that Diana would stay all that night in the Temple, and that Phoebus, being amorous of her, had intreated his Sister Phoebe, that she might remaine there vntill the next day, to the end he might enioy her company. This vnwelcome newes, vtterly ouerthrew me, I seeing my selfe to be bearded with such a companion in my Loue, as no doubt would put my nose out of ioynt, and chase away that small hope, that I had before to creepe into some little credit with her. Although (some might thinke) that I had had great reason to haue reioyced, that I had so great a God (vnto my Riuall) in my Loue, yet neuerthelesse, I bare so proud a nunde, as (like another Marsius) I could willingly haue hazarded my skinne against him, so I might haue hindered him from enioying my Ladie. But they that are bound must needs obey, the weakest must vnto the wall, and such as are inferiours, must yeeld vnto the will of their superiours and betters. This speech of the foresaid Virgin, made me almost besides my selfe, for I iudged (and not without reason) that so faire a dame (after she had enioyed the Amitie of so mightre a God) would neuer vouchsafe to stoo pe so low, as daigne to thinke vpon a sil∣ly Shepheard; and this was the cause I counted my selfe as vtterly vndone, and with this heauie resolution I withdrew my selfe vnto my poore cottage, where I gaue my selfe o∣uer to weepe and waile at my pleasure. But whether it were, that the Nymph had false intelligence, or whether she ment to
be merrie with me or no, I know not, for my Diana staied not that night in the Temple, but presently after I was gone, returned vnto the selfesame place, where I (so long) had expected her coming: which when I vnderstood, I was more vexed & grieued, then I had bene before, thinking my selfe to be forsaken of all good fortune: and thereupon as one mad for very anger, I tore my hire most grieuously, bit my fingers for despite, and cur∣sed my selfe more then ten thousand times, thinking that this iust punishment was ligh∣ted vpon me, in that I presumed to imagine, that my Ladie, who was the very tipe and patterne of all chastitie, would be so vaine, as to consent vnto such a monstrous immo∣dest motion, although neuer so great a God had required her: for the greatnes of Prin∣ces, doth not diminish the offence of a woman, that yeeldeth herselfe vnto them, but ra∣ther (if she be wise) she ought to close her eies against such puisant Royalnes, remembring that her honour is as well rauished by a great potentate, as by a meane person, and one of lowe estate: meane time, whilest I was absent, the other Shepheard (my companion in lowe estate: meane time, whilest I was absent, the other Shepheard (my companion in loue) amorous of Diana, lost neither time nor place, but finding a fit occasion, he ven∣tureth to approach her presence, vsing this short speech vnto her, & presenting her with these two Sonnets following. Receiue gratious and louely Nymph, receiue (after the custome of the Gods) this leane and bare present, which as a Sacrifice, I offer vnto thy rich beaurie, excuse the weak∣nes, and vnworthines thereof, esteeming as much, of the loyall good will of the giuer, as if he had bene able to haue bestowed a farre more pretious treasure vpon thee: she hearing him say so, with a smiling grace tooke the paper, which when she had vnsolded, she read (aloud) as followeth. The first Sonnet. Thy beautie tis, which (cause, immert all it deth showe,) So many proud harts it doth curb, and bring downe lowe. It is thy dauntlesse spirit, that all as wonderous deeme, Which thy faire face, and Thees, more fairer maketh seeme. Ah doe not suffer then are cruellte appeare, Whilst they, their honours due (due vnto them) doe heare. Sacred, he is held with Gods, and sweet to Louers such, Who faithfully doth thee adore, and reuerence so much. (Faire honour) neuer doe, this mischiefe foule permit, But let milde pittie in the looke, of this mine enemis sit. In my sweet enemies eies, where writ is beauties storie, And let not Surquedrie eclips, with hate such seld seens glorie. At lest yet come to me: so, if the worst doe come, I shall haue honour, though by death I be vndone. Whilst she the beauens shall see, her (sharpely) to rebuke, And mestfull mourne, that she such wrong course gainst me tooke. The second Sonnet. I liue no more, or if (as yet I liue, Tis thee to please (thou enemie to my life:) No greater ill, then nourish what doth grieue, Maintaining quenehlesse fire to burne vs rife. What hates me, I most greedily desire, What helpe me may, that helpe to me deniese Alas of whom then shall I aide require, A happie Louer's he (bewaild) that dies. Cruell mishap to force vs for to lone, What vs doth follow with a deadly hate: And that, as sacred to account and prone, Which spoyles, and shortneth our chiefe quiet state.
Thrise trebble blest, that neuer knoweth this ill, For better tis disloyall to be thought: Then (for a dismall Ladie) suffer still, Who better lost is, then for to be sought. The faire Nymph, most gratiously accepted these verses. But I (who had no other way to growe in fauour with her, but onely by this selfesame meanes) perceiuing, that I was seconded by another, who tooke the selfesame course (and perhaps with better suc∣cesse then I had therein) was not a little sad, fearing least I should be hindered very much through the same; yet was I not sorie, that many did haroldise the praises of my Ladie, neither was I enuious at all, that she was so much commended: for a constant Lo∣uer indeed, will alwaies preferre the honour and credit of his Mistris, before his owne, or all the pleasures which he hepeth to enioy of her: because that Loue that onely expec∣teth pleasure, is no true Loue, but rather a filthy desire of Lucre and gaine, whereas right Loue indeed, esteemeth more of the honour & renowme of his Ladie, then of his owne particular commoditie, and profit. For that Louer cannot iustly say, he hath done any worthy thing in the behalfe of his sweet Saint, who aimeth at his owne contentment alone, studying out how to benefit himselfe. But he may be said to haue made a proofe of faithfull Amitie indeed, who hath la∣boured, not for his owne good, but for his Ladies, whose reputation, good name and same, is more deare vnto him, then his owne proper life. This then was the cause, that I was not sorrie, although my Diana had neuer so many worthy Poets at her command; onely, I was exceedingly afraid, lest she should (therefore) make the lesse account of me, when she had others that could doe as well, & as much as my selfe: and yet neuerthelesse (I protest I speake not this to flatter my selfe) she shewed not so good a countenance vnto this fresh water Souldiour in the campe of Cupid, as she did vnto me. For these were the speeches she vsed vnto him, after she had red his Sonnets. Certainely, sweet is that verse, and daintie is the vaine of that Muse, that taketh a wor∣thy Subiect to exercise her diuine power with all, as braue and goodly, seemeth the swift courser, which runneth in a faire and spatious plaine, being guided by a very expert and excellent Horseman. But as it is not easie, to make him that is crooked, straight, and as he that goeth al∣waies stooping, can hardly walke bolt vpright: Euen so, although one haue neuer so rare a vaine to endite, yet if he haue no worthie matter, whereon to be employed, he can hardly write learnedly. Homer thought to haue made Achilles more valiant and strong then Hoctor, but yet he could not; & Maro did what she was able, to perswade vs, that Aeneas, was a man, iust, religious, and a great friend vnto his Citie of Troy. But, it was vnto no end; for he can∣not leaue any worthy commendation behind him, that taketh vpon him to commend a coward, or one that bath bene a Traitor vnto his owne countrie. I speake this (Shepheard) vnto this end, I well perceiue thy Muse is wonderfull de∣sirous to paint me forth most brauely: but yet neuerthelesse, I must needs tell thee, that when thou hast done all thou canst, it is to no purpose, because thou shalt neuer be able to make the world beleeue otherwise, then that I am a poore sillie soule, simple and plaine, and one that haue not, as much as one good qualitie in me. Take then some other better theame to declaime vpon, for if thou relyest vpon my praise (which is too weake a stay) thou wilt quickly fall, and thy inuention cease, as hauing not, whereupon to write. Leaue me, poore Nymph as I am, with my imperfecti∣ons, least thou be the occasion, that where thou seekest to magnifie me, I shall be moc∣ked for the same: for farre better were it for a man, to haue his bodie and the remem∣brance of himselfe to be buried both together, then to be renownred as Thersites was, and so to be infamous, by reason of his memorie. Leaue then I pray thee, to poetise thus vpon me, and rather bestow it vpon some other, that doth better deserue it, for too sim∣ple am I, to be a Subiect for thy Muse.
To refuse the gift of another, is as much as not to wish him well, or to seeke not to be beholding vnto him, for feare lest we should be constrained to make him some a∣mends: for as the giuer, in bestowing a present, doth shew his good will, so he that recei∣ueth the gift (in accepting thereof) doth make manifest his good minde vnto him: Euen so, my Mistris in refusing the fruits of the new Louers Muse, gaue sufficient testi∣monie she did not much affect him, of which thing when I heard, I was not a little plea∣sed. And yet (God he knoweth) how much I was at that time gaulled with afflictions, seeing so many contrarie windes (and all in one day) to tosse and tumble my weather beaten Barke. All that long night could I not sleepe, as much as one winke, as often as I remembred the inestimable pleasure which that great God enioyed (as I foolishly ima∣gined) with my Diana. Besides, I began to grow exceeding iealous, doubting lest, she being now come to haue so glorious a Deitie, vnto her Paramour, would disdaine the Loue of any other mortall creature, yea, and that now she onely doated vpon him. I dreamed of the great delight Apolle tooke, to haue in his armes so rare a Paragon, but I neuer (all this while) thought vpon that which most of all concerned me, which was the chaste and pure vertues of my Ladie: for although I did beleeue verily, that (as that night) she lay betweene the armes of that God, yet could I not chuse but loue her, as much as I had done before; such great force hath Loue ouer vs, as he maketh vs loue our Mistrisses (although they be bad and vitious) as well as if they were well giuen and vertuous; nay I was so farre wide from reason, as I thought she was to be excused in satis∣fying the request of so mightie a God, not thinking this to be any blemish vnto her cre∣dit at all. Thus euery Bird, supposeth her owne neast to be most fairest, and euery mother her owne child, pretiest, although it be mishapen, and deformed. But when I was assured (of a certaine truth) that my Ladie had not onely, not laine that night in the Temple, but rather like another Daphne, or a new Cassandra, had most vertuously refused this great God, reiected his promises, disdained his gifts, shamed and hated his presence; ah then, two contrarie doubts, began a fresh to combat in my heart, the one was, of contentment, seeing my Diana so wise, so modest, and so vertuous: the other was of dispaire, imagining (and not without cause) that if she had refused the amitie of so great a God, much lesse would she make any reckoning or account of me. And thus was I still troubled in my minde, although so much was the affection which I bare vnto her, as I had rather to haue ene quite void of all hope euer after, then that she should haue committed so foule an offence. For the rare constancie which she had shewed, against the sollicitings, and inticement of that God, made me to looke more cranestly into the greatnes of the fault (which she should haue committed) then I had done before: like vnto him, that flinging himselfe into a large Riuer, the more he wadeth in the water, the more he thinketh of the danger he is in, not dreaming of the same before. This made me to admire her more then euer I had done in times past, although I perceiued, I was out of all hope, to be affected of her. Strange is the puissance and force, that vertue hath ouer our soules, we chusing, rather to loue her without reward or re∣compence, then to follow vice, although we should be richly guerdoned for the same. Most sacred is this diuine Goddesse, we choosing rather to be afflicted for her sake, then to cast our liking vpon vgly and deformed vice. This then was the cause, I loued my Mistris more, then if she had tainted her honour with Apoo, and that afterward she should haue giuen me loue, to haue enioyed my plea∣sure with her. This made the Duke of Ithaca, to esteeme more of the modest and bashfull cares of his chaste Spouse, then of the voluptuous pleasures of wanton Circes. With my soule did I reuerence my Diana, being of conceit, that I could not suffer too much, for so ad∣mirable a creature: for sweet is the trauile of braue and haughtie enterprises, a vertuous man chusing rather to endure labour, and gaine notorious praise, then to be quiet and at case, without any honour or commendation at all.
And thus spent I the tedious night, (which before I spake of) thinking one while that my Mistrisse discoursed with me, in most kinde manner, shewing mee many excuses, that shee had done no such hainous fact, but that I had greatly wronged her, to suppose she had committed the same. An other while I imagined, that that great God, being iealous of mee, threatned to flea me aliue, (as hee did Marsius) if I presumed to prosecute my suite anie further. And then againe me thought my faire Saint, thrust mee from her most disdainefully: shee being grow proud, as an other Olympia, or Rhea, because of the companie of so glo∣rious a Deitie. To be short, many dreames troubled mee in my rest, abused me in my minde, and caused me to be maruellously sorrowfull, as I did (now and then) slumber. Alwayes the thought of such things as we haue desired and sought for in the day time, presenteth it selfe, (through Fancie) vnto our eyes, in the night. Beautious Aurora, was scarce risen from her olde husband, and the Sunne was yet sleeping in his coolie bedde, when I got me out of doores, trudging as fast as I could, vnto the same place, from whence, but the night before I parted. Not being altered in affection, or thorough griefe, anie thing at all, both which, I still entertained. All the night long before I could not rest, which was the cause I composed this Ode following: when being as then, come vnto mine olde place, and seeing my selie a∣lone, I began to sing the same with many a heauy sigh, hauing it written faire in a paper, as thou seest. AN ODE. Since that thou hast Victorie Ore my dearest Libertie. Why (with blacke Robe) beautie thine, Doest thou cloathe, sorich and fine? If thou wear'st it for to witnesse, (As a friend) my sadde distresse. Happie I, since for my sake, Thou the Colours sadde doest take. (Sweete my life) content be thou, That this blacke Weede, I beare now, Haplesse was my life, and so, Sad my life, in th'end shall show. (Tomee) these sadde cloathes alone, Appertaine, as signes of mone. Nature in one bodie (nere) Blacke and White, (at once) doth beare. From my Blacke, all hate be wide, With which I my Crosses hide. Hee that in dispaire doeth rest, Black doeth beare (for colour) best. (Cruell) this, not Colour's thine. Since thine eyes, bright and dinine. (Sacred as the hallowed day) Chase the gloomie Night away. One, that (or'e All's) Victor braue, Cannot rightly, this Blacke haue. Our barts wounded, thou deest make, Then (of Conquerour) habite take. And let mee alone with this, Since my fitting colour t'is. Liue thou in eternall glorie, Whilst I die, (at desperate) seric.
Whilst this Dye, thou putst on thee, Thou depriu'st (of comfort) mee. For I doubt that thouart sad, And thy griefe, Death's (tome) bad. Change then, this same weede of Dule, Fit for dead folks, (O thou Cruell.) Why, through it wouldst thou impaire, Beautie thine, farre more then rare? Leaue it, for I thee assure, This, my sight cannot endure. Giue to mee my Colour blacke, Or with Ghostes, I goe to wracke. If, my Colour thou doest take, For to ende my Crosses, make Thou wilt not; for whilst I liue, More thou daylie wilt mee grieue. That blinde Goddesse Fortune, (constant onely, in vnconstancie) hauing the day before vsde me so hardlie, thought now to flatter mee a little, in making me some amends, for the great wrongs she had done vnto mee. For my Mistris, (who with the other Nymphes) had the night before fulfilled certaine vowes vnto the Goddesse Dia∣na, (who then shined most gloriously vppon the face of the heauens) was nigher vnto mee, then I had thought, and (in a luckie houre for me) heard me thus heauily lament vnto my selfe, after I had made an ende of my Song. (Alas, said I) into what a maze of wretchednesse am I fallen? how wofull is my Destinie, and how haplesse my misfortune? Of all worldlings liuing, some are but too too Fortunate, and some, but too too miserable; but I am neither in the one, nor in the other, of these two extremities. For to say that I am Fortunate, I cannot: and to tearme my selfe miserable, I may not: in as much as LOVE, although it ouerthroweth mee, syet making me affect so dinine a Dame as I do) is sufficient enough to he the vpon me all good Fortunes that may be. This is the reason I am neither content, nor altogether quite displeased, whilst I walke in the middest of these two extremities, as those base Cowardes, who through faintnesse of heart, runne from one Enemie vnto another and so serue neither of them rightly. And yet (alas) I finde, that the Ballance in which my misfortunes are placed in, weigh more then that wherein my good Fortunes be. And I feele the burthen of griese, more heauy and hard vpon my shoulders then that of ioy and pleasure. For what ioy can hee haue, that hath not hope of anie thing? Most sweete is the sweate, that expecteth some fruite to come thereof. As that Husbandman laboureth with delight, when he soweth his ground, because he hopeth to reape some gaine of the same: whereas that trauell that is voyd of all hope, so displeasing vnto vs, as the ve∣rie thought thereof alone, maketh a man miserable. Such is mine estate, for how can I (being so wretabed a Caitiffe as I am) attend or looke for any fauour from her, whom the Gods themselves secke vnto and honour? It is not likely, that shee will leaue the friendship of so high a Deitie, to like of so poore a Shepheard as I, in whom there is nothing worthie of commending. O beautious Diana, enioy, enioy (I say) most happily thy Loue, with that great God, the father of all Lightsomnes, (as one whom thou art) worthie of) and suffer me to pine away in griefe, or at the least permit me to sgrisee my hart vpon your common Aultar, to the end, that this oblation may content him offred vp by a true Louer, like himselfe. Thrice blessed thou, to be adored and reuerenced of so great a God, and most accur∣sed I, since that I dying, am not able to render any sufficient testimonie of the faithfull seruice, which I haue alwayes vowed vnto thee. But (alas) what need hast thou of my helpe? or which way can I stand thee in stead, when thou mayst commaund so mightie and diuine a power at all times?
Truely thou art right Fortunate, and heauens I pray, that (so) thou mavest still continue: whilst I, as one that languisheth piece-meale away, will (for thy ske) goe and inclose my selfe within the bottome of some gloomy Rocke, where I will so long bewaile my hard chaunce, as at the last, what with Famine, and what with sorrow, I will resigne this wretched life, tormented with a number of calamities, onely because I could no way pleasure thee, my sacred Goddesse. Thus did I say, sighing and sobbing, as one resolued to die; when my faire Mis∣tris, (who with uch patience had heard this mine amorus complaint) vppon the sud∣daine appeared vnto me: not vnlike a newe Sunne, breaking through the thicke gloo∣mie Cloudes, when they couer the Skies all ouer. That wife that beholdeth her husband aliue, whome she lamented for dead, is not halfe so much astonisht and amazed as I was, when I saw my Diana, whome I supposed to haue bene (as then) with the God of the Day. Pale was my colour at that instant, my tongue was tyed within my mouth, and I stood as one confounded with feare: and although her presence was the onely preserua∣uation of my life, and that I had no other felicitie then to looke vpon her faire face: yet was I maruellously heauie and sadde, because she (as then) did shewe her selfe vnto mee, for I sore doubted, least she had heard what I had spoken: and that she had bene angrie with mee, (as indeed she was) for the same. I confessing (in my soule) my fault, and acknowledging my selfe worthie of no small punishment, to haue conceiued so sinisterly of her, as I had done. Neuerthelesse, I was wonderfully glad, that I was deceiued in my expectation, thinking within my selfe, how farre more vertuous (then mine owneselfe) Diana was; who for want of wit, iudged her by mine owne conceit, thinking she would haue done that, which I would haue bene willing to performe, if I had bene in her case. Shame made me hold downe my head, remorse of conscience forced me to shut mine eyes, and feare seazed vpon my senses. I knew I was but a dead man, if shee had vnderstood me, when I lamented, and therefore I plaide as the young Scholler, when (his Maister hauing taken him tardie) expecteth e∣uery houre to be corrected for his fault. Or as the Criminall, who dareth not looke the Iudge in the face, his aduersary being present, whom he hath so hainously offended. I curse my tongue, and hate my selfe, for my ouer-rash beliefe, I die with inward griefe, knowing and acknowledging no torments (were they neuer so terrible) to be suf∣ficient to expiate this my hainous sinne, which I had committed against her, whome I accounted of, more then of my life. Faine would I haue washed eleane this foule spotte, with my dearest blood, but as then it was not possiblé, for I saw there was no other remedie, but I must attend the iust iudgement of my Ladie pronounced against me, who with a little Chollor, and yet smi∣ling therewithall, beganne thus to expostulate the matter with me. What is the reason (Shepheard) that thou thus iudgest ill of mee? and what proofe hast thou seene of mine incontinencie, to thinke that I would so quicklie suffer my selfe to be abused by Loue? what haue I done (euer) vnto thee, that thou shouldst suspect mine honor? and what outrage hast thou receiued of mee, who neuer offended thee, to thinke me an enemie vnto mine owne credit. Ah Shepheard, let vs not iudge other men, vnlesse we would be iudged againe: and let vs not seeke the defamation of an other, lest wee our selues be tryed by the same in∣iurious order. Doest thou think, that I esteem not more mine honor, then I do the Empire of the Gods, the one of which, being destroyed, may be repaired againe: but the other once lost and gone, can neuer be recouered anie more. It is possible for miserable wretches to chaunge their bad Fortunes, and of Beggars, to become mighty Kings and Monarks, as was Cyrus, Romulus, Denis of Siracusa, Tra∣tane, Tambarlaine, and diuers others: who from poore sillie Shepheards, haue come through the fauour of Fortune, to be Soueraigne Princes. But that woman, that hath once lost her honor, can neuer attaine vnto the same againe, by anie manner of meanes, what force or violence so euer shee pretendeth, or alleadgeth for her excuse. This spotte beeing so blacke, as it (neuer) can be brought to be white anie more. For to
make that thing which hath bene, not to haue bene at all, exceedeth the power of mor∣tall men, onely God alone can doe it. Tell me then, doest thou suppose, that I will change mine honour, for the king∣dome of the Gods? No, for Iupiter (although hee be the maister of the Gods) yet is not he quite exempted from blame: and great personages oftentimes, erre sooner then meaner persons, whereas the vertuous woman is alwayes commended, and entertained by the wiser sort. Yea, farre more then such a one as is foolish, for all her byrth and greatnes. Little be those Countries accounted of, where honour is not in request, and such Princes smallie deserue to be magnified, who make no esteeme of Vertue. Better is it for a man to be poore, and well giuen, then to be rich, and full of vices. What good did the Signorie of Cicill, vnto Denis the younger? but onely to make him the more miserable: yea, farre more then the meanest of his owne subiects, and all because hee was wicked. But vertue, quite contrarie to the other, stood Dion in great stead, who being but a sillie fugitiue, and a forsaken bannished man (through her) got forces sufficient to driue away the Tyrant, to set his Countrey at libertie, and to make him famous throughout the wide world. More highly prisd was Octania, the cliaste wife of Marke Antony, beeing in pouer∣tie, then the shamelesse Cleopatra, for all her Realmes and riches: in as much as the one was modest and vertuous, whereas the other, was common and infamous. What renowme or credit followeth (now at this day) the infamous memorie of Semiramis, Messalina, of Faustina, and diuers such other Empresses? only this, that they are registred for their immodest liues, in the blacke booke of reproachfull shame, for e∣uer. My life shall first ende, before I will beginne to liue in this bad order, so farre from all good order. No, no, neuer will I strike my Shippe against such a Rocke, neither will I suffer shipwracke, in so ignominious a Sea, what Dietie soeuer shall intreat mee therevnto: For pouertie ioyned with Vertue, may be counted great riches, where Noblenesse and wealth, being lincked with vice, cannot anie way be said to be other, then extreame and wretched miserie. Well (Shepheard well) thou hast accused me, before I haue done a fault, and thou hast laide a vice vnto my charge, of which my foule is innocent. Then, what punish∣ment were due (of right) vnto thee, if I should measure this thy grosse errour, accor∣ding vnto the rigour of vnpartiall Iustice? and if (as Arachne) was plagued, I should make thee beare the heauie burthen of thine owne offence? Long time agone, (amongst the Auncients) this was a Lawe, that hee (who cause∣lesse, had accused the guiltlesse) should haue suffered the selfe-same punishment, which the person accused, should haue endured, if hee had bene culpable of the same offence, whereof he accused the other. Thinkest thou, I value not my credit at as high a rate as Daphne, Cassandra, and such others, who could neuer be brought to veelde vnto the vnhonest appetites of the Gods? Too pretious and rate, is this inestimable Iewell, to make so light account thereof: rather belieue thou, that I will sooner loofe my life, then let goe mine honour vnto anie. Chaunge then thy speech, and seeke not (hereafter) anie more to defame so rich a Treasor, as the honour of a woman is, vnlesse thou haue better proofes then thou hast had of mine: for more hurtfull and pernitious is a slaunderer and a false accuser, then a most mortall and deadly enemie, because the first seeketh to take away that, which the Gods themselues are not able to render backe againe: whereas the other, bereaueth vs, but of life onely, which is subiect vnto death continually. Wretched are those persons that doe ill, and yet reape no commoditie thereby, for what good commeth vnto the backbiter by speaking ill of anie, but onely that in the ende, hee himselfe is hated of euery bodie? Play not thou this part, neither stumble thou into this foule ditch, especially, doe not blame her, whome thou makest a shewe to loue so much. But thy speeches discouer (sufficiently enough) what thy affection is, for if thou
hadst supposed mee to be such a one, I cannot beleue that euer thou couldest haue lo∣ued mee, because commonly wee ought to hate vice, and respect and preferre vertue. For such as make the world beleeue that they beare affection vnto foolish women, doe not loue them indeed, but onely seeke to enioy part of those pleasures, as they partici∣pate vnto others. So as it is impossible, that a vertuous and a constant Loue, can haue any other foundation, then Vertue it selfe. Therefore it is but meere follie for thee, to make me belieue (hereafter) through thy fained teares, and dissembling speeches, that thou louest mee: For is it likely, that one can loue an other, whom hee himselfe blameth, and whom hee thinketh worthie of reprehension and shame? If thou hast loued mee for my Vertue, which thou imaginest I haue now lost: for what wilt thou loue me hereafter? The cause being taken away, the effect dieth, and the foundation of a Building, being ruinated, the house whereon it standeth, must needs fall, because nothing can be without his cause or subiect. If the cause ceaseth in mee, which was the motiue of thy Loue: then needes thy former affection must cease like∣wise. And therefore (I pray thee) make me belieue no more, that thou bearest any good liking vnto me; for I neuer can, nor will giue credit vnto thee, nor will belieue therein. Or if thou did dest loue me, then I must needs thinke, thou didst it to betray me, and so to corrupt mine honor. I say therefore, that so farre off, is thy loue from being Amitie, as (rather quite contrarie)  esteeme it to be deadly hatred, and most furious rage. So as these bad conditions being in thee, I can haue no occasion to loue thee, but rather haue more reason to loath and detest thee, as the most mortall aduersary that I haue, vnto that thing, which is far dearer vnto me, then is my dearest life, that is, my pretious honour. Thus said the Chollorike Diana, and to confesse but truth, she had good reason so to say. For there is no guilelesse soule, that (without being somewhat moued) can heare herselfe ill spoken off, neither can the most vertuous person that is, endure to be falslie slaundered, but that he must needs growe a little in Choller. As that child, who being already forth of the Schoole doore (thinking he is alrea∣die in the fields, and that hee is playing amongst his companions abroad) looketh very sadly, and is wonderfully amazed, when vpon the suddaine, his Tutor taketh him by the chollar of his doublet, and bringeth him againe, correcting him with the rodde, for his ouerbold and foolish hardines. Euen so found I my selfe to be confounded, with silent heauines, and being wonderfully afflicted, with inward anguish and sorrow. Great is that Corsie and sharpe which a man feeleth, when through ouermuch headdie rashnes, he offen deth that thing which hee esteemeth most of all in this world. Euen so, vnsupportable is that griefe, when a man falsly accuseth his friend, whose credit he would seeke to preferre, before his owne dearest hart blood. Ah, why (then) did not the earth open, to swallow mee vp? and why (at that time) did not the Sunne obscure it selfe, as when he was three daies without appearing abroad, disdaining to behold so horrible a crueltie of an vnnaturall father, committed by him, against his owne young and prettie children. These speeches of mine innocent Lady (iustly incensed against mee) was as a poyso∣ned darte, piercing quite through my poore soule. A chilly cold ranne through all my bones, a deepe despite (against my selfe) seized vpon my veines, and my voyce lay, as if i had bene stopped within the pallate of my mouth, my colour looked as dead Ashes, my tongue remained dumbe, and my mouelesse eies were closed, bowing downe toward the earth. As then, no other answere could I giue vnto my Mistris, then salt teares, trickling downe along my cheekes, whilst from my breast (as from a Furnace) issued forth great store of scalding sighes. O how happie had I beene at that time, if some one courte∣ous God or other, would haue transformed me into some rocke, some stone, or else, into some Tree. Neuerthelesse although I spake not all, well might she gather, that my ex∣ceeding griefe was the cause thereof. It is an old saide Sawe; One mischiefe neuer commeth alone, but that it hath an other attending vppon it. And so (by misfortune) it happened vnto mee.
For my new companion in Loue (of whom long since I told you) commeth in amongst vs; who hauing more witte in his head then I, in stead of blaming my Ladie, (most wrongfullie) as I (very foolishly had done) presented her with these Verses following. The heauens (for honours theirs) thee faire haue made, The heauens (for my mishap) mee kinde haue framde: Ioue, (for his praise) infanted Vertue thine, Gods, heauen, and earth, reape honour, through thy glorie. I onely am accurst, but victorie T'is. to wage Combat with a Deitie. I loue that sweet band, which enchaines my soule, Liuing, I burne, yet honour I thee flame: Loe, how rich Beautie can vsurpe ore me, Medusa like, my Nature thou dost channge. But hee his Time spends not, but gaineth honor, Who branely fights, vnder a Goddesse Banner. O happie I, when I thy face behold, More rare and perfect, than was Venus faire: When I thine Eyes, see shining, like two Starres, Gazing I die, whilst death brings life to mee. He happie dieth, that his best life doth end, In loyall seruice of his beautious friend. More happie I, my selfe iudge so to die, Than Adon liu'd, whilst hee the daintie Corpse Of Venus ioyde, who wailde his death most sadde, Hee blessed was, but I, celestiall. Since Fortune mine, with his may well compare, And beare away the prize, for ouer-Faire. Beautious, if onely for to see thy stainelesse Feature, More happie t'is, than Gods, by many wayes: What should I be, wouldst thou (to loue mee) dame, But so great good, vnworthie I, to haue. The Gods would iealous grow, that one poore wretch, Ingratious fauor (boue themselues) should stretch. Yet (in despite of them) my ioyfull life, Liueth in contemplation of thy Thewes: Whilst they like rolling Spheares, the Skies adorne, Happie that Lambe, offered in Sacrifice, To burne vpon thy Aultars, Grace to gaine, Whose Tombe, and Ashes, winnes vnto him, Fame. Most gratiously did shee accept of this Present, and the rather, because shee would anger me the more, hauing read them, she thus came vpon me. Thou onely (and none but thou alone) with thy rash conceit, taxest such of blame, who be most cleare and in∣nocent of the same, whilst other extoll and commend, what deserueth glorie: But thy tongue is no slander, neither can thine ill words, bring such, within the compasse of dis∣credit. If I hate thee, I doe but what in reason I may, for what occasion hast thou gi∣uen to mee, that I should thinke well of thee? That Lord most seuerely punisheth his Vassaile, who (like a periurde wretch) would offer villanie vnto the honour of his wife, (Law and Iustice) both depriuing him of all his Lands and goods, whatsoeuer.
Euen so, what can hinder me, to  lague thee, who terming thy selfe to be my louing seruant, seekest to take that from me by force, which I prefer, before all the wealth of the world? Hardly can I forbeare, from forbidding thee my presence (for worse thou hast deserued) and yet because thou shalt perceiue, that I am more readie to forgiue (then thou art quit, in forging false slaunders) I will defer this my punishment vntill another time, meane space, change thou thy minde, amend what thou hast done amisse, and be∣come a new man; otherwise, it will be the worse for thee. And hauing so said, away she goeth suddainly, leauing me all alone. As that passenger (who comming to the shore to refresh himselfe for his trauailes past, and to take the aire a little) is very heauie, much astonisht, and in a manner halfe dead, when he seeth the Boate which should carrie him backe againe, to be laun∣ched farre into the Seas, and tossed too and fro, by the Tempest that ouer maistereth him. Euen so, sad and pensiue did I become, when I found my selfe alone, and when I sawe my Ladie was fled from me. More sorrowfull was not Ariadne, perceiuing her selfe to be left on the Sea cost all alone, by her periured Spouse Theseus More doleful was not Olym∣pia, vewing her selfe forsaken, and sitting vpon a cold Rocke, by her disloyall Birre∣us: Neither were those Phrigian women so wofull, when they found themselues to be left in a strange and vncoth Ile, by their dissembling husbands, then I was (then) at that time. Diuers passions tormented mine inward soule, one was, because I had offended my Ladie: another was, to see that she should grace my Corriuall so much: the third, to see her goe her waies, and I (yet) not to be reconciled vnto her, and the fourth, that I was not able to craue pardon of her, nor to excuse my fault. This made me seeme (for a pretie while) as one senselesse, and without motion, as if I had bene a stone, mine eies onely stared after my Mistris, but the other parts of my bodie, were in a manner dead, for faine would I haue followed after her, but that my legs had not power to sturre: for as a sicknes, taketh away the good will, the force, and the meanes from the sicke patient, that he is not able to doe any thing: Euen so, griefe hindered me from going after mine angrie Saint, to craue pardon of her. (O Father) the remembrance of this mortall miserie, depriueth me (as yet) of voice and sense, and therefore I pray thee, vrge me not, to passe any farther, but rather be con∣tent to haue knowne the commencements of my misfortunes, without being acquain∣ted with the rest. No answered (the Magitian) I must needs vrge thee to make an end, as thou hast begun; Not vnlike the good Physition, who forceth the sicke man to emptie the Goblet, and to drinke vp all the potion, the sooner to be healed. Forward then, and let me entreat thee, to doe so much; for thy Loues (resembling mine owne old ones) content me not a little. Courage (man,) and acquite thy selfe of thy promise, without giuing ouer so faire a ground, now thou hast begun thy race alreadie. Well then (replied the disconsolate Shepheard) seeing it is thy pleasure, I will vn∣tie my tongue, that it may speake againe, deliuering vnto thee, the rest of my Disasters, & (I hartily wish, that when I haue made an end thereof) I may giue vp my Ghost, as that Pilot (after he hath failed long vp and downe the swelling Seas) findeth his happie and comfortable Hauen, wherein he resteth. Knowe then, that (for a long while) after her departure, I wailed and wept, taking on like a madman, musing within my selfe what to doe, and yet not being able to resolue vpon any thing certaine. So much was my soule vexed and gaulled within mee, as it began to entertaine blacke dispaire, banishing all hope likely to come vnto him. Earnest was she to leaue this loathed prison of my bodie, crauing pardon to depart from thence, and so importunate was she with me, as (in the end) I graunted her request, and resolued to die. Thou shalt die (cried I out) yea, thou shalt die (accursed tongue of mine) that durst presume, and that most iniuriously, to abuse the good name and fame of the most chas∣test Virgin in the world. Thou shalt die (thou traiterous heart of mine) in that thou did∣dest
dare, to thinke that she (who is the very tipe of vertue it selfe) should become bad and vitious. Thou (wretched bodie of mine) shalt die, because thou hast forgot thy selfe so much, as to thinke, that, that comely corpse of my Mistris, was like vnto thine owne, and thou most wicked thought, returne shalt thou into the damned deepe of all hell, from whence thou (first) diddest proceed, because thou hast made me so miserable, as none can be the like. Come then, come let vs die, whilest with one, and the selfesame griefe, we will extin∣guish both our sault, and our sorrow, all at one time. And therewith being in a rage,  a∣rose, running from thence with great furie, vp vnto the top of a high Rocke, which lo∣ked into the Sea; where being, I beheld the frothy face of the mother of Achies. the surges whereof roared, and made a gastly noyse, by reason it was troubled with  Tempest. This did I thinke to be a fit way, for me to dispatch and drowne my selfe there∣in, for the more it did rage, the more I thought it sufficient to take my life from me. And now was I readie to leap downe into the same, I hauing closed mine eres, stretcht out my armes, and bowed my head, to make this dangerous leap, when I hard a voice that called me, it being a voice, that sounded like vnto that of my Diana. Whereupon I opened mine eies, I lifted vp my head, and looked backeward, to see if I could perceiue the partie that named my name; but I could find nothing but Trees, Stones, and Bushes. Wherupon I returned againe vnto my first course, offering my selfe most willingly vnto death, minding no more to defer, nor delay to put in practise my cruell exployt any longer, when the same voice (which I hard but a little before) put me off from my determination, I being very desirous to know who it was, that thus (twise) had called me. This made me to search (once more) vp and downe, although I could finde no∣thing (O foole said I vnto my selfe) am I so mad, to thinke that she, whom I haue so hainously abused, will vouchsafe to doe me good, and helpe me? Nay rather, what rea∣son hath shee to desire any thing (so much) as my destruction and ouerthrow, to the intent shee may be reuenged of so vile an outrage, as shee hath receiued at my hands. No no, it is meere follie to looke for any succour from her, when nought but death can rid me of mine anguish. This voice, which I heare is (no doubt) of some wicked Spirit, which would haue me turne backe into the world, to liue in continuall wretchednes, as I haue heretofore done. But I meane not to be so deluded, for die I will, and so rid my selfe from all mise∣ries, as are like (henceforward) to light vpon me; and with this minde, I went (once more) vp to the top of that Rocke, from whence (without all doubt, I had flung my selfe) but that I espied (a far of) a ship tossed and tumbled with a great Tempest, which withheld me (as then) from the same, for I tooke (mee thought) a kind of compassionate pleasure, to see how the winds, maistered the leaking vessell, causing it one while to reele one on side, and then vpon the other, tarning vp and downe, as a Barrell that is emptie; for the winds dryuing it with a contrarie blast, cast great Billowes of water into the same, touching the tops of Rocks, and making the shore side white and fomie, with a thicke froth, striking a great terror in the mindes of the Sailers. Meane space, a mightie waue came flowing ouer the ship, as if it would haue suncke it, which made the Sailers to bestirre themselues, plying the pumpe vntill they did sweat. And now the Sunne began to be darkened, the Cloudes to looke gloomie and blacke, and the storme to encrease more and more, whilest raigne and lightning fell from heauen, as fast as water falleth from the Mountaines. The Passengers within, lay all as if they had bene dead, whilest most pittious outcries, wofull complaints, and continu∣all exclaimings were heard amongst them, euery bodie calleth for succor, but none doth helpe, the noyse of the waters, and the roaring of the windes, hindering the Sailers so much, as they could not vnderstand one another. The Pilot, that held the sterne, and guided the ship, with a pale and dead colour, one while cried out, another while made signes with his hands, to make them vnderstand
what they should doe, but what with the pittious wailing within, and what with the terri∣ble noyse abroad, they could not know what he said. And (now) the sterne grew so violent, as euery one was appalled therewithall, they being driuen into such a feare, as they could neither heare, nor gather what the maister of the ship commanded, so as giuing ouer to looke vnto their ship, they (all) began to make a most dolefull outcrie, wringing their hands, and tearing the haire from off their heads, as if they had bene mad. Which the Pilot perceiuing, he likewise gaue ouer his charge, for to no purpose was it for him to hold the Sterne any longer, whilest some of them (not many of them all well knowing what they did) ran to the Rudder, some to the Mast, some set vp Sailes, o∣thersome pulled them downe, some ran vp to the Tackling, other tumbled downe from thence, one ran to doe one thing, and another went to doe another: and to be briefe, they (all) laboured so confusedly, as they rather did hurt then good any way. To conclude, churlish Boreus, blew more extreamly then he had done before, whilest Eolus, gaue leaue vnto the blustring windes, to play their parts. The Sea encreased in raging, and the Monsters thereof appeared aboue the water, the more to affright such as beheld them. The Sterne of the ship bursteth and falleth in peeces. The Sailes are all broken and rent, the Decke or forepart of the vessell, turneth vp and downe, the sides of the same are left bare, whilest the ship (being as quite without defence) & able any longer to resist the violence of the outragious flotings of the Sea, yeeldeth vnto the mercie thereof, suffe∣ring the whirling Billowes to winde themselues within her; which the Passengers per∣ceiuing, crie out aloud for mercie vnto the heauens, expecting euery minute of an houre, to be swallowed downe into the bottome of the Surges. At last the ship runneth against that Rocke, vpon the top of which I stood, hauing all this long while, beheld this wofull spectacle, with the teares streaming downe mine cies. The maister and the rest of the Sailers, doe what they can (poore soules) to hinder her from splitting asunder, but all in vaine, the furie of the storme is so cruell and out∣ragious, whereupon euery man seeketh to saue himselfe, a great number of them being gotten into the little Skiffe that was tied vnto the ship; but the same being ouer-charged with multitude, because euery one sought to get therein, sunke presently, drowning all those that were within her. Onely one young man escaped, sauing himselfe, through the strength of his armes and legs; he swimming so lustily, as at last he got vnto the foote of the Rocke, against which, the vessell ran, and so brake all in peeces. This youth being (all ouer) durtie and foule, looked pale for very feare, and (yet) seemed he to reioyce, in that he hath scaped the furie of Neptune. Great was the pleasure he tooke, to see himselfe deliuered from death, and yet by lit∣tle and little he began to growe heauie againe (seeing himselfe in such a place) as was vnhabited and like a wildernesse, shroadly doubting, least hunger would make an end of that which the Sea had not, and that he hardly could get pardon of the earth to liue, as he had (before) of Neptune. A new griefe, and a nouell terror of death assaileth him afresh, whilest being (thus) alone, he sigheth to thinke of his hard fortune. He casteth his eies here and there, and looketh round about, to see if any would come to helpe him. But he could not perceiue no such sight, and he listeneth with his care, to hearken if he could heare the sound of any voice, but all was in vaine, it would not be, he knoweth not whether the firme land will be more kind vnto him, then the vnstable Seas, and doubteth much the same. He is in dread, that he shall die, either through drinking too much, or for eating too little, lit∣tle doth he thanke the heauens, to haue saued him from shipwracke in the Sea, seeing he is likely to die through famine, on the land. Now whilest he thus sigheth and lamen∣teth, I (hearing his speech) straitwaies knew him by his tongue, to be the miscrable Fortumo sometimes companion in my for mer Loues. Whereupon, I holding vp my hands vnto the skies, thanked them, that it had plea∣sed them, to graunt me so much fauour, as I might be able to be a meanes to saue the
lire of mine old friend, honouring my latest end, with so charitable and compassionate a piece of worke. I blessed the voice, that before had hindered me from dying, being sorie that I had blamed it so much as I had done, seeing I might preserue one of my best acquaintance from death; not that I had altered my first determination, as if I had bene vnwilling to perish, but that I had not done (so) before I had brought to passe so good a deed. Thereupon I came running downe from where I was, as fast as I could, when the poore soule, who hard me comming a farre off, and yet had not seene me at all, thinking I had bene some wilde beast, that came to deuour him (chusing as the Blackebird vseth, rather to commit himselfe vnto the mercie of a man, then to endure the griping nailes of the Sparrow-hawke, that followeth him in flight) leapeth againe into the wide Oce∣an, striuing with all the force he could, and with the vtmost of his cunning he had in swimming, to get as farre as he might from the shore side, which but a little before, he with much adoe had attained vnto. I being come downe, and seeing him in the maine Sea, called him oftentimes by his name, but the surges thereof, made such a noyse, as he heard me not, carrying him still farther off from me, which when I perceiued, I then be∣gan to renew my plaints, grieuing as well at his misfortune, as mine owne, and the rather, because where I thought to haue saued him, I was his vtter ruine and ouer∣throw. Whilst he, in the meane space, tooke great paines in swimming, blowing & puffing through extreame wearines; and striuing vnto the vtmost of his strength to get vnto some other landing place. But Fortune, who in despite of himselfe, would needes saue him, or perhaps would shewe me so much fauour, in lieu of so much, and such hard dealing as she had vsed a∣gainst me, caused the Sea, who went about to drowne him, to be the onely meanes to saue him. Strange is the beliefe of men, for God (oftentimes) (that they may perceiue most plainely how he disposeth of euery thing) maketh them to finde succour, from such as they account their chiefe enemies, expecting no fauour nor curtesie at all from them: and so it fell out with Fortunio, for behold (vpon the suddaine, a Billowe of the Sea, droue him (although against his will) backe vnto the foote of the Rocke, from which he was of late parted, he being so ouertyred with labour, as he was in a manner without winde or force, whereupon I came vnto him, comforted him, reuiuing him a∣gaine, and putting life afresh into him. That great vnbeleeuing Prophet, was not more ioyfull when that huge Whale had cast him forth safe, and aliue, vpon the Sea coast (after he had lodged three daies and nights in the bellie of the same) as Fortunio was, when he then sawe me, and knewe me for Arcas. This made him to take heart a grace, and to plucke vp his former Spirits, and yet when he looked wistly vpon me, and sawe me looke with so pale and heauie a cheare, he could not chuse but be maruellous sorie to behold me, in that pittious plight, whilest he vrged me often, and that with great earnestnes, to bewray vnto him the occasion of my sorrowes, which I concealed from him. In the end, when he sawe there was no other re∣medie, and that I was loth to bewray my minde vnto him, he gaue ouer to inquisitiue therein any more, not a little comforting himselfe, in that he had so happily lighted vpon me, who was the cause, he had bene reserued from a dangerous kinde of death. But I perceiuing he had need of warme cloaths, and other comfortable necessaries, fit to nourish him, and to restore him vnto his former health, tooke him with me to walke homewards, towards my little cottage, demaunding of him (as we went) of all his Fortunes, since I last had seene him; which as he was about to satisfie me, behold, whom should I meete withall, but my sacred Diana, who with the other Nymphs (her compa∣nions) was walking abroad, to take the open aire. As that Shehpeard is frighted with a sudden feare, when he seeth to fall before his eies great flashes of lightning, which burneth, spoyleth, and blasteth some goodly huge Oke, that serued as a shadow for his wearie flocks, to rest themselues therein: Euen so was I astonisht, trembling through euery ioynt, when I called vnto remembrance
my former fault, and how hainous the crime was which I had done against her. Faine would I as then haue taken occasion by the haire of the head, that I might haue excused my selfe vnto her, and so haue pleaded for her gratious pardon: but alas, my speech fai∣leth me, and I was quite without heart or courage. The beautious Virgin, perceiuing in what a pittifull plight I was in (as one very wise) quickly gessed, the truth of the respect I bare vnto her, was the reason why I was so confounded, and void of all my sences. Which was the cause she now began to thinke the better of me, repenting (as it were) that she had taken me vp so roundly before, and therefore she thought it not amisse to put courage into me againe, by vsing some grati∣ous speeches vnto me, before she would leaue me. Whereupon she smiling, began thus to question with me. What is the matter She; heard, that now thou art thus tongue-tied, who before haddest thy voice at commaund, and couldest discourse so readily and well? Speake man, and feare not to answere: for more good doth he that speaketh, then another that holdeth his peace & saith nothing. Courage, and feare not any thing at all. It is not my nature to be angrie long, I knowing it to be a more commendable qualitie, to be curteous, then to be sorie and cruell. If thy tongue hath bene the cause, that mine hath spoken some sharpe speech or o∣ther, which perhaps may somewhat grieue thee, then blame thy selfe for the same, and not me, for that woman argueth her selfe to be culpable, that seeketh not to defend her honour, which she vnderstandeth, is readie to be defamed. This was the reason I ment not to take farther punishment of thee, I being well sa∣tisfied, with the first checke I gaue in words vnto thee. Why then, art thou thus moued? doest thou thinke thou shalt commit an absurdutie, and shalt not be told of the same? If so, thou then shouldest be in better taking then the Gods themselues, who are not ex∣empted from rebukes. Hereafter learne to be more wise, and consider well of the circumstance of the deed done, before thou iudgest thereof, for of the censure that is giuen in the worser part, against the good name & fame of women, euery one maketh a benefit (although it be false and scandalous) and the reason is, for that men are more readier to dispraise, then to commend, whether it be that they doe it of meere malice and dispight, or because they are desirous to haue many like vnto themselues, in their leaud and detestable kind of liuing. But what is good and well done, that quickly is forgotten, not any, as much as once reporting the same, because such as be ill giuen, will neuer commend any, except it be much against their minde. Feare not then to speake, so thou speake well, for so shalt thou please the best kind of people, and displease none, but such as are the worst; for the fruit of a good tree, is more commended, then that which is bad. Speake then man, and say one thing or another, otherwise I shall imagine, that ei∣ther disdaine doth shut vp thy voice, or else that hatred hindereth thee from spea∣king. As that Souldiour is not a little ioyfull, when being readie to haue his head struc∣ken off by the enemie, whose prisoner he is, he seeth his friends arriued and come to his aide, whereby he is rid from all danger: Euen so, not a little pleasant was I, when I hard so sweete a heauenly sound, proceeding from so faire an Angell; which was of such power, as it reuiued all my dying sences in me, it banished away all feare from me, it put new hope into me, and brought my former fresh colour into my cheekes againe. Whereup∣on I did prostrate my selfe in most humble wise, before the feete of my Ladie (for well did she deserue a greater reuerence at my hands) but she not willing I should doe so, tooke me vp by the hand, by that blessed hand, I say, which chased all dispaire from me. Whereupon I thus returned condigne thankes vnto him. Can you (most beautious Saint) raise, and reuiue him, who hath deserued so much vengeance at your hands? and can you haue pittie vpon his bodie, who would not take no compassion vpon your honour? No Ladie, no, rather let him die, as one vnworthie to receiue from you, the least fauour in the world: why should you vouchsafe to looke vpon him, with those heauenly
eyes of yours, not worthie of so great a grace: keepe those sweet and chaste glaunces for him, who shall deserue them better then my selfe, who merrit not, to see so much as the vsuall light of the heauen. Am I he (beautious Nymph) that haue so much abused thee, if so, why then shouldest thou vouchsafe me, to approach thy wonderous pre∣sence? Although thou of thy kind nature, shalt forget this foule fault of mine, yet shall mine owne plaine nurture, and bringing vp, teach me not to forgiue the same: for mine owne hand shall punish both my tongue and heart, the one for speaking ill of thee, and the other for conceiuing a sinister opinion against thee. Arcas, shall neuer surfer Arcas to goe scotfree, he hauing so hainously sinned against his sacred Saint. Trouble me not then, in mine owne busines, but let me execute what I haue alrea∣die determined to doe; onely I would entreate this Boone, that it would please you to pardon my rash crime before I die, for neuer did I willingly offend thee, onely, I was too too credulous, and ouer-light of beliefe. Too much credit did I giue, vnto that which one of thy companions reported vnto me, I thinking simplie, thou mightest full well count thy selfe happie, to be beloued of so great a God, but too sacred is thy vertue, & too modest thine honour, to be ouercome with any power of the Gods. Pardon then this foolish conceit of mine, which I will wash cleare with the dearest blood I haue, I thinking my selfe not a little happie in that I haue had the fortune to see thee before my death, and to haue acknowledged before thee, my more then grosse ig∣norance, and vaine follie. With great contentment shall I die, seeing I haue had the lei∣sure, to haue bewraied the secrets of my soule, & shewed how far I was fro doing thee any willing iniurie. Besides, I beseech thee (by thy vnspotted chastitie) to thinke, that no an∣cient Loue heretofore, is to be compared vnto that which wretched Arcas hath borne thee. Neuer could any faithfull affection equall his, no more then any beautious feature liuing, may be compared vnto thine. Then pardon (once more) I beg of thee, thy most wretched slaue, that he dying, may not die in the disgrace of his Mistris. I cannot denie, but that I haue erred, but yet not so much, of my selfe, as by reason of another, nothing so much grieuing me, as that I had so sinister an opinion of thy match∣lesse vertue, and therefore, for this fault onely, will I adiudge my selfe to die. Happie is he that dieth in thy seruice, and for thy sake: yea more happie then Piramus, that slew him∣selfe for his deare Thisbes; for he cannot finde fault with his death, that looseth his life, for a rare and worthy Subiect. The guiltie person, being drawne vnto the place of execution, is pardoned of the partie, who causeth him to die, contenting himselfe with his death, as a sufficient sat is fac∣tion for the fault he hath committed. Euen so let me intreate thee, to discharge me a Culpa, though not a Pena, to the end, my death may expiate the horriblenes of the offence, and that I may with ioy, des∣cend into the Elizian fields, amongst those blessed shadowes. Graunt me then, this my last request, otherewise, more wretched shall be my death, then that of good old Pria∣mus, who sawe his owne children massacred before his owne face. More would I haue said, but that curteous Diana interrupted me in my speech, who being more mercifull, then Iustice it selfe, thus replied. No, Shepheard no, I neuer will yeeld vnto thy request, because I will not haue thee die. The Gods, although they be mightie and immortall, yet doe they not demaund of such men (as haue offended them) to haue their liues in satisfaction of their fault, but are contented with some lesser punishment: and doest thou thinke, that I am more cruell then they? If so, thou doest me wrong. Liue then I say, and talke no more of death, I pardon thee of thy fault, perswading my selfe, that it was thy ouer rash beliefe, and not thy minde, which did commit so grose an ouersight. Be merrie then, and assure thy selfe, that Diana was neuer cruell, but rather, that she is as courteous, as she hath, and will be chaste.
Take heede onely, that thou hereafter doe not so offend againe, and let the danger from which thou hast (now escaped) make thee more wise against an other time. For sometimes an offence standeth in some good steed, when through remembrance of the same, it maketh others to be more warie and better aduised. As that Shepheard is ioyfull, who hath chased away the Wolfe, bringing backe a∣gaine his sheepe safe and aliue, which the deuouring beast was carrying away; Euen so, was I pleased and satisfied at full, with this her kinde counsaile. And yet notwithstan∣ding, the going away of my faire Diana, did somewhat abate the sweetnesse thereof: for shee presently left mee, eyther because shee would not haue the other Nymphes knowe that she had pardoned mee (who were hard at hand) or because shee would not (as then) heare my answere, as if she looked for thankes from mee. But howsoeuer it was, away she went, and left me. And thus we see, that the badde followeth vpon the necke of the good: and that no good chaunce can long continue in his first pride and force. Meane space, I beganne to cheare my selfe, and to comfort Fortunio, whom I had saued from drowning, and who being (all the while) not farre off from mee, protesting he neuer saw so exquisite a beautie: No, although his Cleomine had bene present, and there∣fore was not a little rauished therewithall. Thus talking and deuising from one matter vnto an other, at length we got home, where, after hee had bene shifted, and laide into his warme bedde, and that hee had (for a while) refreshed his wearie limmes, I desired him to report all his Fortunes vnto mee, in which he willingly yeelded vnto mee, deliuering vnto mee this pitious historie fol∣lowing, which I will now make thee partaker of. And hauing so said, he pawsed a while, to take his breath the better, beginning thus. Know then (my good Arcas) after cruell discord, meger enuie, and inexorable desti∣nie had forced vs to leaue our sweet abiding in Arcadia, we flying (as Melibeus did, from our owne Countrey) which was seazed vpon and enioyed, by a companie of cruell and barbarous men at Armes: I went and offered my seruice vnto a braue Spanish Knight, borne in the Kingdome of Arragon; hee being not inferiour (vnto anie of his time) for valour, or for Martiall stratagems belonging to the warres. Such Heroicall spirits as theirs, Fortune most commonly vseth to tryumph ouer (as it were) to meddle with base and ignominious people: because small conquest is gotten by conquering such a one, as hath neither force, nor power, to resist, and therefore yeeldeth presentlie. This Caualier was called Don Iohn of Toledo, being in yeares some fiue and twen∣tie, wealthie enough, and maruellous faire, and comely of personage. By manie braue deedes at Armes, hee had gotten to be, in the number of the best Souldiers of his time, and no doubt, hee hud growne to haue bene as famous, as that auncient Hector of Troy was heretofore: If cruell LOVE had not opposed himselfe, against his notable vic∣tories. There is no man that liueth, but hath his euill Angell attending vpon him, which darkeneth the faire weather of his good Fortunes, when he is likeliest to rise vnto great glorie and renowme. Needes must he taste of some miserie, for feare if hee should be glutted too much with pleasures, and neuer feele of aduersitie, hee would quickly forget his Creator, and so disdaine to be obedient vnto him. Not vnlike vnto that leaud seruant, who after he hath gotten enough in the seruice of his Maister, maketh no account of him, but leaueth him, and followeth his owne delights and pleasures. I then being retained, and following this young Knight, followed his humour so well, as he made more account of mee, then he did of anie of his other seruants, and the rather, because I would manie times report vnto him, some Accident or other, of our first loues and merriments of Arcadia, in which hee delighted wonderfullie. But had the poore Gentleman knowne (at that houre) what great hurt and damage hee was like to receiue by the selfe-same Loue, hee would haue stopped his eares against the discourse of his might, neither would hee (euer) haue opened the gate of his kinde heart vnto so bloudie and periurde a Thiefe. But what? men that are lustie and healthfull is bodie, many times feede vpon such
kinde of meates, as they thinke (because they please their tuste) to be good, and yet af∣terwards they surfet vpon the same, and often die thereof. But my maister, as he was a braue Soldiour, so was hee a gallant Courtier, follow∣ing the Court much, as many of our best Captaines vse. Now the King of Arragon had (as then) no more Children, then one goodly young Ladie, of the age of fifteene or sixteene yeares, called Maria, beautifull in fauour, gra∣tious in her behauiour, (but aboue all) passing vertuouslie well giuen. Not long time after, it pleased God to send the Queene a young Sonne, by his wife, which was the cause that great ioy was made, throughout all the Court and Countrey, and great Feasts and Tryumphs appointed for the same. The King himselfe, causing solemne Iustes and Tiltings to be proclaimed. The Prize being a meruailous rich and strong tempered Armour of proofe, with a daintie Courser of Naples, for the Victor, which should be deliuered him by the hands of his faire Daughter Maria: he knowing well, that a couragious Knight, would receiue such a reward, with a farre better minde, from such a goodly Princesse, then from anie o∣ther person whatsoeuer. And now the time being appointed, and the day come, the Listes were open, and the running at Tilt begun: where many worthy Knights were assembled, to giue liuely proofs of their wonderfull valour they not so much coueting the prizes, for the richnes thereof, as they did for to haue the honour of the victorie, before so Royall an assemblie. The King being placed, with all his Nobles round about him, the young Princesse his Daughter, sitting in a Throne of Maiestie higher then the rest, and euery thing being in ordes, fit for such a meeting; Behold, the Trumpets sounded, when the Challengers and the Defendants entred into the Listes, brauely mounted, and richly apparelled, eue∣rie one wearing the Fauour of his Mistris. Now after manie staues were broken, and diuers Runners ouerthrowne, Don Iohn commeth into the fielde, hauing a plaine white Armour vpon him: his Coate Armour being painted with the flames of Cupids fire, and in his Shield, a Phoenix, drawne in most liuely colours. His manlie countenance, his comely stature, his gallant Port, and his stately presence, drewe euerie mans eyes to behold him, marking him from the top of his head, vnto the sole of his foote: so as none could iustly finde anie fault in him, so excellently was hee proportioned in all parts. Like to Achilles, seem'd hee strong and braue, When hee, into their Towne, the Troyans draue. Great hope and expectation was there, of the worthines of this Champion, who (as then) came luckilie into the Lists. For all the Arragoneses, (who were the Challen∣gers) were ouerthrowne by the other strangers, Knights. But no sooner was hee entred in amongst them, but that (suddenlie) all of his side, beganne to take courage againe, hoping (by his valour) hee would make amends, for the foyle which they had taken. As Hector did, who beat the Orecians Back, That had (before) the Troyans put to wrack. Don Iohn, placing his Speare in his wrest, one ountred his Foes with such force, as ei∣ther he made them to giue back vpon their saddles, or else turned them out from thēce, vpon the bare ground. And so long did hee follow them in this chase, that in the ende the Arragonians got the maistrie, and he was adiudged to be victorious ouer all those that ranne at Tilt, which was the cause that he was highly commended of the King himselfe, and of all his Nobilitie, and of the Courtly Ladies, as his vertue well deserued: recei∣uing the Prize, from the daintie hands of that saite Princeise, who (wondering at his Chi∣ualrie) presenting the same vnto him, vsed these gratious speeches. Although this small reward is worthie of acceptance, in that it hath bene wonne and brought away from so many gallant Gentlemen, to stand in stead of a recompence
due vnto Vertue: yet is it nothing worth in respect of that, which your valour hath al∣readie wonne vnto you, which hath made you to be glorious, renowned, and famous, a∣mongst the worthiest personages of the world. This which I here present you withall, is but a trifle, and of no weight, and yet of great importance: in that you haue so braue∣ly purchaste it, by the vndoubted proofe of your dauntlesse courage, which maketh it worthy of commendation, and not otherwise. Receiue it then (braue Knight) from the hands of her, who wisheth all increase of glorie vnto you, and such worthie praise, as your vertue doth deserue and merit. This little speech was of greater force to conquer this stout Knight, then were all the Launces of his enemies, for hee was ouercome with the same. Whilst the bright eyes of the Princesse, serued for fire to kindle affection in his heart, and her speeches were as whirling darts, that pierced quite through the same. The exceeding great heate that hee had gotten with sweating on Horse-backe, and the bashfull colour that seized vpon him, to see himselfe so highly commended of this gratious Princesse, had painted his face with so pure a vermillion Dye, as he seemed farre more amiable & louely then before. In so much, as she held him to be no lesse faire then valiant, highly commending him within her secret minde, seeing him to haue both va∣lour and beautie, the more to make him in euerie part right beautifull. On the other side, Don Iohn, viewing the sweete countenance, and marking the su∣gred speeches of this young Ladie, was greatly troubled inwardly, not knowing how to answere her. Yet had it not bene, but that hee doubted he should be noted, how his co∣lour changed too and fro, he had replied on the suddaine. Neuerthelesse, hee thought (come what should of the matter) hee would make her an answere, which hee did, with a lowe and trembling voyce, in this sort. Madame, there is no wood so wette or greene, but fire will kindle it: So is there no heart so soft or fearefull, but your Vertue is able to make valiant & couragious. It was nei∣ther my owne proper strength or force, neither the desire to carrie away this Prize, that brought mee to be victorious, but it was the onely glorie which I promised (vnto my selfe) in receiuing it from your Princely hands: From your Princely hands I say, who are not inferiour vnto anie in the world, for perfect beautie. For this subiect onely, doe I make account of it, desiring to keep it, as an immortall treasure, and not because I haue wonne it from so manie couragious Knights, or that I highly esteeme of their valor, but onely, because I knewe that that glorie would be most pleasing vnto mee, when I might vaunt, that I had it bestowed vpon me, by the hands of the most rarest Princesse that li∣ueth, of whome (in lieu of so great a recompence) I doe, and will, account my selfe for euer, the most faithfull slaue and vassall, and her most loyall seruant. Thus spake the braue Don Iohn, (for more he could not as then speak, as he was most willing) because he was compassed round about with manie Gallants, all which, came to honour him, and to reioyce with him, of his good Fortune: so as hee was forced to leaue his Mistris for that time, and for that he was in great Triumph, conducted vnto the King, who caused him (onely to grace him the more) to sit by him, as if he had bene his com∣panion and equall. Meane space the Reuells and Dauncing beganne in the Court, in which sports my Maister would needs be one, where he shewed him selfe as dainty a Reueler, as he had (in the Lists) performed the part of a valiant Soldiour, whilst in these Courtly sportes, the young Princesse bare away the Prize, which so much pleased him, as after that time, the faire Infant of Spaine, was all his ioy. Achilles (nere so much) lou'd Briseis so faire, For whome, (to quarrell so) hee then, did dare. His eies were (still) fixed vpon hers, he delighting in nothing so much, as to gaze vp∣on her Angelicall face. And as the couetous mizer, can neuer turn his looks from his gold, but must aiwaies be staring vpon the same, so our knight did nothing but contēplate and behold his sweet Mistris. As that mā who being extreamly hot, & calling for drink, thin∣keth the same to be maruelous good & pleasing vnto his tast, althogh it proue afterward
to be full of deadly poyson: Euen so, this couragious follower of Mars, ouerheated with Loue, sore longing and thirsting after the heauenly feature of his Kings Daughter, swal∣lowed downe most mortall poyson sweetly, which by his eyes, slipt downe into his heart, and there impoysoned him. As the way-faring man perceiueth his force to faile, and his life to steale away, as soone as euer the venemous Basilisque hath looked vpon him. Euen so this poore Cap∣taine, found his heart and soule to be reft violently from him, through the dartes which were glaunced at him, from the sparkling eyes of the Princesse. Thus LOVE, hauing gotten the vpper hand ouer Mars, learned Don Iohn a new lesson; making him to submit himselfe vnto his lawes, changing in him, his former hu∣mor, his nature, and his complexion. As the Horscourser, in breaking a young Colt, brideleth him of his wonted liber∣tie, forcing him to carrie his head, to runne, to turne, and then to stand still againe, and all as he thinkes good, and at his owne pleasure: Euen so was my kind Maister brought vnder, to doe what Loue commaunded him. A sweet kinde of humor, that he supped vp, at his eyes, descended downe into his heart, a new desire or wish oppressed his soule, and straunge and vncoth passions conti∣nually tormented him: and yet he is so vnfortunate, as he findeth his sicknes to be pas∣sing sweete vnto him, whilst hee honoureth his enemie, and refuseth all helpe and reme∣die for the same. Night beeing come, euery one betaketh himselfe to his quiet rest. Onely Don Ihon who was both victor, and vanquished, was depriued of his sleepe. At too too high a rate, did hee buy the Prize, which he got in the Lastes, and happie had he bene, if he had bene ouercome in running; so he had not bene conquered by the beautious eyes of his Ladie. For so he might perhaps haue recouered his credit another time, hauing manie companions in his discomfiture: whereas now, hee was ouercome for euer, be∣cause his losse was vnrecouerable: and shee, that had conquered him, was not (againe) to be ouecome by his power or might any way at all. He finding his Prize to haue cost him too deere, in that he lost his former libertie, and the freedome of his heart for the same. He resembled that Pilot, who seeth his Shippe to leake, and full of holes, by which, the water entereth, and therefore dispaireth of life. And such a one, was our wretched Conquerour, who saw no remedie for him, to quench this fire, which burned his inward entrailes. Hee was in loue with a Princesse, the onely daughter of his King, and whome, the greatest Monarks of the world, would haue thought themselues fortunate, to haue had her for wise, and who was so vertuous and wise, as hardly could she be induced vnto Loue. Yet, his misfortunes take to them, a larger scope, Hee giues not ore to Loue, though he is without hope. But after he hath considered within himselfe (wisely) of the matter, he findeth, that it is but meere follie, to set vp his rest at that game anie longer, and therfore hee resol∣ueth to giue it ouer. But the more he thinketh to forget his Loue, the more Affection kindeleth within. Not vnlike the Byrd, who being taken in the lime-twigges, the more she striueth to get away, the more she is intangled. Wherevpon, one day he being alone, calleth for mee, and because he knewe I had some (experience in Loue) he demaunded my aduise therein, discouering his wound vn∣to mee, and crauing my best counsell. I ouing him dearely, perswaded him to chase away that venomous Adder, and that he play not as that husbandman of the Countrie did, who kept a Snake so long in his bo∣some, till at the last, hee stung him for his kindnes. Besides, I discoursed vnto him, of the bloody outragiousnes of Loue (often) sighing, as I reported the same vnto him, be∣cause (as then) I remembred mine olde loue in Arcadia. Hee hearing me say so, strait belieued me, determining with himselfe, not to follow his faire Mistris any longer in chase: and with that resolution (willing mee to depart) he layeth him downe vpon his bedde, thinking to take his rest for a while. But no sooner
were his eyes closed, but that Loue opened them againe, presenting the beau of  Ladie before him, so that presently he was chaunged in minde, minding (now) to lone her againe. As that Traueller, who being bound, by reason of some busines of great importance, to take Sea, no sooner arriueth at the shore, but that hee, fearing to enter the Spp be∣cause of drowning, retireth backe againe: but afterward (remembring the weightine of the matter, and how much it importeth him, for his profit, to goe onwards on his iour∣ney) marcheth backe againe vnto the water, hazardeth himselfe, and so in the end per∣formeth his voyage. Euen so, my perplexed Lord, after hee hath done what he can to subdue his passion, and yet cannot: at the last, seeing no other remedie, he resolueth to loue, and to submit himselfe, vnder the seruile yoake of cursed Cupid. Or as the bond∣slaue, hauing escaped in the night, determineth with himselfe to be followed after in the day time, chaungeth his aduise, and frighted with extreame feare, returneth home vn∣to his Maister. Euen so Don Iohn, hee is (in the ende) forced to acknowledge proud LOVE, for his soueraigne Lord, and is glad to yeeld vnto him. Wherevpon, he calleth mee againe vnto him, making me priuie vnto his resolu∣tion, discoursing still of Loue, (and flattering himselfe) he would needes perswade mee that Loue was courteous and gentle, when hee knew right well (in his owne conscience) that he did finde him otherwise. But I, on the other side, wish him not to belieue so, but rather aduise him to banish Loue from him, as one that is an aduersarie, both vnto his life and quietnes; deliuering vnto him many proofes of the crueltie of that blinde God, and of his villainous nature. All this he heareth, although hee knoweth not what to answere vnto the same, be∣cause I spake but reason, and yet for all this (such was his mishap) as like an obstinate and selfe-wild man) he standeth still in his blind error stiffely. As the robber by the high way side, beeing admonished by some faithfull friend of his, to giue ouer that leaud kinde of life, (telling him of the wretched and wicked end he is like to come vnto, if he continu∣eth still in the same) listneth vnto him very earnestly, and yet neuerthelesse, falleth vnto his old kinde of trade of robbing, is the same man still, and so continueth: Euen so this Gaualier, although he gaue good eare vnto my reasons and perswasions, yet did he per∣sist as one obdurate in former follie and selfe-wilfulnesse. But yet (to say truth) he was somewhat to be excused herein, seeing he was no more maister of his owne selfe, but ra∣ther Loue, vnder whose Banner he fought. Long lay he vpon his bed, and yet he could not sleepe, by reason of such strange vi∣sions as Loue presented vnto his eyes. Whose fashion it is, when he hath once conque∣red, he will seldom or neuer suffer him to be in quiet. Whervpon, Don Iohn ariseth from his loathed bed, taking his iourney towards the Kings Pallace, where (by the way) hee is saluted and commended of all men, but yet all these honors abated his paine little or no∣thing, because he found by experience, that he had lost more, then euer he was like to re∣couer againe. Besides, if he had but knowne the minde of his Mistrisse, he then could the sooner haue resolued what to doe, according vnto her answere: which was, either to die, or to followe his suite begunne. But not knowing her will, hee knewe not what to say, nor what to thinke of the matter. For Each Louer, that is burned with this amorous flame, In word and deed, dependeth on his louely Dame. Not long had hee stayed in the Court, but that it was his good Fortune, to haue a sight of his Mistrisse, whome he thought to be wonderfullie inereased in Beautie, since (last) hee saw her; so as if shee then deserued to be honored as a Ladie, why now, shee merited to be worshipped and adored, as if shee had bene some Goddesse indeed: And thus his affection increaseth more and more. On the other side, the young Princesse began to feele a kinde of alteration within her selfe, and found her heart to fancie Don Iohn, aboue all men liuing: Yea, and so much, as she thought he deserued to haue her
Loue, before anie other. And yet when she remembred her Royall birth, whose daugh∣ter she was, and the greatnes of her honour, shee beganne somewhat to forget him: so as her desire was no sooner lightned, but that it was quenched againe. Not vnlike vnto those children, borne before their time, who no sooner are brought into the world, but they straitway die. Meane time, the Knight, who was not so bad a scholler in Loues schoole, but that he had learned some lessons therein, beganne to gather, by the stealing glaunces which she cast vpon him, that shee did not altogether hate him, and therefore beganne to per∣swade himselfe, that he was likely to haue some good successe in his amorous busines. Wherevpon, hee thought to venture to speake vnto her. For (said he, vnto him selfe) what should hinder me that I should not bewray how much I affect her? What though shee be the Daughter of my King? is it reason therefore, that I should die for her, and yet not make her acquainied with my death, and the cause thereof? What know I, whether Loue hath infected her, as well as it hath poysoned mee? Fot as great Princes (as shee) haue felt his force, and haue bene brought vnder by him: which (if it were so) I would not then doubt, but that shee would be so gratious vnto me, as to take some pittie vpon mee. For Loue makes the hearts of great Monarks to stoope, as well as those of poore peasants: forcing as well the brauest minds to be subiect vnto his lawes, as such as are baser persons. Did not he make soft and gentle, the hart of proud and haughtie Achilles, compelling him to yeeld vnto his prisoner Briseis to like her so well, as hee quarrelled with all the Princes of Greece, to haue her good will? And the selfe same Loue, did it not take downe the stubborne stomacke of high minded Angelica, who although she were a Princesse, and sought vnto, by all the chie∣fest Paladines, and men of renowne in the world: yet did she cast her liking vpon sillie Medor, a simple Page or Lackey. Nothing can withstand his mightie power, neither King nor Queene, Royaltie nor Nobilitie, all are alike vnto him, and all must doe as he pleaseth. Onely, with surlie and proud mindes, doth he (most commonly) adorne his triumphant Chariot, disdaining (as it were) the spoyles of the meanest. Againe, did not Venus doate on a Shepheard? and Phoebus, vpon a plaine Coun∣trey Lasse? Yes, yes, and therefore nothing is impossible vnto Loue. And seeing it is so, I will endeuour to see, if I can learne, whether hee hath tamed the great heart of this louely Princesse: which if he hath done, I hope then, that it is strucken with a golden Dart, as mine is, and not with one of lead. Might I but once finde that she affecteth mee, I would doe well enough with the rest, hoping (in time) to bring euery thing to a most prosperous end, and happie issue. Thus said my Maister, being resolute to sound the depth of the Princesse thoughts, and yet hee thought it was hard to wade through such a Foord, much doubting the en∣trance therein, but farre more, how to get out (thereof) againe. And as a Generall of an Armie, after hee hath had manie parleyes with the Fort, which is enemie vnto him, pitcheth his Tentes round about the same: but seeing his Souldiers to be beatten backe againe, with losse of many of his men, dispaireth that he shall not be able to surprize it, doubting sore of some bad issue in this his enterprise. Euen so, many doubts ran into Don Iohns head, which much troubled him, as well, he knew not what to doe. One while he feareth lest he should offend his Mistris, and loth he is to displease her: yet in the end, Fortune, who fauoreth such as be venturous, egged him forward, making the way plain for him, that he might the better bewray his affection vn∣to his Ladie. For one day, the King being willing highly to grace him, commanded him to sit downe with him, at his owne Royall table, where his daughter fat, right ouer against him. Neuer can Vertue be honoured too much, whilst shee doeth credit vnto them, that thus seeke to doe her reuerence and dutie. I leaue vnto your aduised considerations, to iudge, whether (whilest the Princesse sate so nigh the Knight) he lost anie time or no? And whether hee tooke his occasion, finding the opportunitie so fitte: if hee had done otherwise, he had done fondlie. But hee, seeing his Saint so nigh (vnto him) watching fitte time, after many trou∣bled conceits running in his minde, with a blushing countenance, and a low trembling voyee, hee thus beganne to Court her.
What would you say (most excellent Princes) to heare, that your owne knight vpon the selfesame day, in which he receiued from your royall selfe, the prize for Tilting, be∣came both victorious, and vanquisht, and all at once? Victor ouer so many braue Caua∣liers, but vanquisht) through your most beautious eyes. And although euery Conquerour, is proud of his conquest, and he that is conque∣red, lamenteth for his losse: yet I (quite contrarie vnto them) esteeme lesse of my vic∣torie, then I doe to be ouercome: for, it is far more honourable to be ouerthrowne by a diuine puyssance, then to be Conquerour ouer a weeke and feeble force. And what greater renowme, or brauer fame, may so much beautifie and adorne my daies, as to be called the vassall, and slaue of her, and to be vanquisht by her, who by the same force, is able to ouercome, euen the Gods themselues. No other glorie will I seeke then this, which is, to be accounted your Captiue. I know (good Madame) you may count me ouer arragant, and without discretion, in that I dare presume, to vse such speeches vnto you, who are both my naturall Princes, and my Ladie, purchased through your too beautious eyes; yet though the Gods be sa∣cred and immortall, they for all that, refuse not the seruice of worldly men their crea∣tures, because nothing can hinder vertue from doing her duetie, inasmuch as she is with∣out fault: and the rather, in that she is of force, to make the fierce and wildest hearts that are to be in loue with her. I speake not this, that I would looke for any recompence for my paines of you, nei∣ther, that you should make any account of me at all: onely I would most humble entreat you, that you would vouchsafe to belieue, that all my desires, all my studies, and all my endeuours, are wholy vowed vnto your secret seruice, and that no person shall command ouer my soule, but onely your sweet selfe. Thinke not then gratious Princes, that I am ouer-rash, and too too bold, to deliuer such words, as these vnto you. For it is impossible that any right generous minde, or braue heroicall thought, should see so rare and matchlesse a beautie as yours is; but that he needs must be in loue therewith; and louing it, deuote himselfe vnto the honour of the same for euer. Did not so many diuine vertues abound within you, and were you, not euery way, indued with so rare and exquisite qualities as you are, we then should not so earnestly seeke to serue you: neither should we be so curious to follow you, with so great affection and respect as we doe. Sooner shall the Sunne be without light, and the earth, without verdure and greenes, for as the heauens (whether we will or no) giueth vnto vs light: Euen so, despite of your selfe, shall you be honoured and admired, as long as you are so excellent and per∣fect a creature. Then, if I place my selfe, in the order of such as reuerence your rare qualities, good Madam pardon me: neither thinke that any person, can bare more loyall seruice vnto you, then I my selfe doe: for might my death testifie the same any way, I protest I would more willingly die, then line. I crauing nor wishing any thing so much in this world, as your pleasure and contentment. Thus said Don Iohn, trembling for very feare: so as he whom the valour of the grea∣test enemie he had, could not so much as once daunt or terrifie, he not knowing what it was to feare a bloodie aduersarie) doth now quake and lookepale, sitting before a sillie Virgin, yea he standeth more in awe of her, then of a whole oast of armed men. The young Princes, who was alreadie perswaded by Loue, to entertaine him into her amorous seruice, to the end she might the better tast how sweet a pleasure it was, and what great credit, to be attended on, by noble Spirits (who most commonly are conquerours ouer such as be haughtie & proud) found her hart to be more mollified and softned, by reason of this Oration, which my Maister had made vnto her, whilest as the Bird is decei∣ued with the sweet pipe of the fowler, so was she ouercome, with the pleasing harmonie of his mellifluous tongue. But yet, as that Captaine, who rendereth vp his Sconce (to saue his honour) first suffereth the Cannon to be brought thither to batter the same, because he will not haue the world to thinke, that timerous feare, but rather default of succour, brought him
vnto this extremitie. Euen so, the Princes ment not to be wonne so soone, but rather re∣membring her royall birth and calling, and withall, her vertuous disposition and ho∣nourable bringing vp, thought (first) with some short speech to answere her Knight a∣gaine, as if she had bene angry with him. Great personages (for the most part) vse La∣conicall breuitie in their discourses, their words being farre more pretious, and of more worth, then those of the common sort of people are, and therfore ought to be the more accounted of. Thus then did the Princes Maria replie vnto him. That man worthily is denied of his desire, that demandeth a thing vniust, or what is contrarie vnto the lawes, being by the same lawe, condemned either to make some amends, or endure some kind of punish∣ment for the same. The haughtie minde, who like Phacton, would soare to high, is not lamented when he falleth, being plagued for his pride; seeing none should flie, that haue not wings, nei∣ther ought any to intermeddle with that which belongeth vnto Kings, except he be roy∣ally borne. Shouldest thou be chastised with so grieuous punishment, for this thy too much sawcie, and rash enterprise, thou wert but serued rightly: for I would haue thee to know, that one of mine estate, of my honour and reputation, is not so easie wonne, or changed, as euery winde changeth and moueth the waues of the Seas too and fro. Neither haddest thou any such neede, to make so long a preamble in thy speech, in offering of thy seruice vnto me, when in nature and dutie, thou art bound vnto me, to serue me, and this thou doest promise to doe, vpon hope (forsooth) that thou maiest bring me to yeeld vnto thy desire: but vpon this condition, I refuse both it, and thy selfe: for I will not onely hate vice, but all occasions, whereby I may be induced to be brought vnto the same. Henceforth, then learne to be more wise, and thinke thy selfe happie, that thou maiest this once escape scotfree, for this thy presumptuous boldnes. This was the choake peare, which the Princes gaue vnto Don Iohn to swallow, not∣withstanding, whatsoeuer she spake, she ment far otherwise, wishing vnto him, as well as to her owne selfe. Sage and prudent was that Phylosopher, who desired, that man might carrie a window in his brest, the better to know: what he thought, and what he ment in heart: which if it were so, there should not then be so many horrible treasons committed, neither such damned deeds perpetrated and put in practise as now they are. But here belowe is little or no perfection at all, the most part of men passing away their liues, without doing any commendable act at all. But now our knight, thinking his Mistris had ment as she spake (forgetting that it is the nature of women now and then to dissemble) thought her to be his mortall ene∣mie, and was so daunted withall, as he sat like a mouelesse Rocke, not able to answere her one word, so much had griefe seazed vpon his tongue, dispaire assailing his heart, and shame (for being denied) making him looke pale and bloodlesse in the face. As that maister of a ship, is amazed and sad, when he seeth the weather, on the sud∣daine to change, quite contrarie vnto the warrant, he had not long before giuen vnto his Passengers; whilest they in the meane time, cast in his teeth the smaller skill and knowledge he hath in his art, he not well knowing what to answere them againe: Euen so it fared with my maister, who was quite blanke, and knew not what to say vnto this matter. In so much, as had any at that table knowne of his loue, or but heard what she had said, they might easily haue gessed what the matter was, by his very countenance, but none knew it, neither would be discouer it vnto any, but onely vnto me alone. But the Princes, who doubted that either her lookes, which she forced to shew frow∣ning, and discontent, or else the sharpe speech she gaue vnto him, would (perhaps) make him to doe somewhat, which afterward might cause her to beshrow her selfe, chiefely be∣cause of the secret good will she bare him in her soule (which was of more efficacie and force, then all other considerations whatsoeuer) began now to repent her, that she had taken him vp so short, and therefore, determined with her selfe to make him amends with another, far more cur teous then the first, when (as she beginning) the cloth was taken vp, and the feast done, so that she was constrained (though much against her will) to rise, and leaue her Knight.
As that woman, who being taken tardie in some fault by her husband, standeth hea∣uie and sad, in some corner of one chamber or other, whilest the rest of the houshold are merrie and pleasant together: Euen so, mine vnfortunate Lord, whilest all the other Gallants of the Court, were dauncing, speaking, and discoursing pleasantly one with ano∣ther, he stood most heauily, lamenting his hard fortune vnto himselfe alone. No maruaile then, although euery one was astomsht, and wondered to see so sudden an alteration in him, looking so pittifully, especially, when there was nothing wanting vnto him, but that he might be rather more blyth and pleasant then others, he hauing receiued so many honours (by reason of the prize he had gotten) both of the King and all the Court. But (to this) he might haue answered them, as that noble Romane did, who (hauing put his wife away) could giue no other reason vnto them, that although his shooe was fine, and well made for his foote, yet did not any knowe, whereabouts it wrung him, but onely himselfe. Euen so, Don Iohn, selt himselfe grieued, yet none could tell the nature of his disease, but onely she, who might if so she pleased, haue bene his Physition, and yet was it not so grieuous vnto him, but that it was farre worse to her selfe: she repenting her selfe ma∣ny times and often, for her froward and tart words, and seeking all meanes possible, to make amends for the same, although as then she could not. Alacke, how soone and quickly, doth speech passe from vs, and how terrible doe it sting oftentimes, when a word is so bitterly spoken, as it cutteth and pierceth more deeper, then a sharpe and keene sword? It was not for nothing, that the auncient Sages, had a certaine Goddesse, they called Silence, which alwaies held her finger vpon her mouth, to giue vs to vnderstand therby, that without long premeditating, and bethinking vs well of the matter, which we ment to deliuer, we should not speake at all, for feare least as the Poet saith, That thy rash speech make thee for to repent, Which at vnwares most fondly from thee went. That great Commander ouer the whole armie of the Gretians, who ouercame Troy repented him many a time and often of his too rash promise, for he hauing vowed most solemnly vnto the Goddesse Diana, to facrifice the fairest and goodliest thing in all his Realme, vpon condition she would beappeased, and plague the Gretian Campe no more, was constrained (for performance of what he had so religiously protested) to sa∣crifice his owne daughter, then who, there was none fairer. So likewise did those Fisher∣men, repent them of their words, who sold vnto that Phylosopher, the counterfait of a Virgin, in which they brought the Triuet of gold, which was placed in the Temple of Apollo. And so was that good Iudge Iepha, sorrie, in that he had so vnaduisedly, promised vnto God, to sacrifice the first thing which he should meete comming from his owne house, as he should returne homeward, if he should obtaine the conquest ouer his ene∣mies; for his onely child and daughter was she, of whom he first had a sight of, and there∣fore was she put to death. This was the reason our young Princes, being sorie that she had done amisse, sought to amend the same, when though faine she would, yet then she could not. And now the whole companie being readie to depart, beautious Maria cast a most louely looke vpon her Seruant, to giue him (in full fatisfaction of her former iniuries done vnto him) a certaine assurance, as well of her Loue towards him, as of her re∣pentance, for what she had vttered before. But he, that now had entertained blacke dis∣paire within his minde, and who dreamed vpon nothing, but on horror and death, neuer marked her, nor perceiued any such gratious signe, and therefore it did him no good at all: no more then a little weake potion, is able to counterchecke and encounter, with a deadly poyson, that is mortally entred into the stomacke, and euery part of a man. And as small and ordinarie remedies, are sufficient to helpe a man to his health, who being but newly fallen sicke, but are of no force nor vertue at all, when he is growne to
be dangerously diseased indeed. Eeuen so, these amorous gestures and signes of this La∣die, which before the mortall infirmitie of my maister, had bene comfortable vnto him, and had done him much good, comming (now too late) stood him in no steed, he be∣ing as then, like one that dispaired of his life. Night being come, he commeth home heauie and sad, none knowing the occasion thereof but my selfe: he himselfe, not being able, or at lestwise, somewhat vnwilling to deliuer his misfortune vnto me, but I hauing knowne the same, came (of mine owne accord) vnto him, seeking to comfort him, by all the deuises I could, therewithall tel∣ling him, that the first entring into Loue, was the hardest: and that if a braue Generall of a field, for one repulse or two, would neuer giue ouer his enterprise, but rather follow it harder, yea and that with so desperate a courage, as in the end he returned conquerour, then much lesse ought he to be daunted, or distrust his owne good hap, although at the first push, he had not made a breach into his Ladies heart. Besides, I told him, that what is easie obtained, is not worth the getting, whereas that, that is dearely bought, & hardly come by (as most commōly the affaires in loue be such) are not so quickly purchast, and therefore he must not thinke much, although he endure some paine, or labour, before he attaine his so much desired suite: for the fruits thereof, are so luscious & sweet, that if the Louer should gather them, without some dan∣ger, he would growe more proud then the Tans, and not sticke to compare (for good fortune) with the Gods themselues: of which Iupiter himselfe (although the mightiest of them all) could not enioy his loue without great trauaile, no though they were but mortall creatures, which he so much affected. Againe, say that women should loue vs, yet were it neither decent, nor iust, that they should suffer themselues to be intreated, at the first encounter; as well, because their ho∣nour is still before their eyes, which they hold as the dearest thing they haue, as also, because they doubt, they shall be the sooner disdained, and despised by vs, (as fooles and such as want discretion and gouernment) if they should (so soone) make a tender vnto vs of their friendly loue. Besides that, a woman is but courted and attended vpon by the man, but a small time, and whilest he woeth her, in the way of marriage; for no sooner are they become man and wife, but that then, she must attend, and serue him, and this is the reason they are so long before they will yeeld vnto these amorous pursuites & perswasions. Withall, we must consider the birth, the calling, and the qualitie of the person whom we seeke to obtaine, who the nobler she is, the longer (must we thinke) it will be before she be brought vnto our lures, especially, when she is our better farre; so, as if Briseus (although a seruant and Captiue) stood so much vpon her Pantophles, as she looked that she should be sued vnto by Achilles, her Lord and Maister: much more should not he thinke it straunge (and not wonder thereat, at all) although his Mistris being a Princes borne, would looke for farre more seruice at his hands; and therefore he had no reason but to be of courage, to plucke vp his spirits, and play as that wise Captaine doth, who seeing himselfe discomfited, presently gathereth new forces together againe, and once more ventureth his fortune. These and many other perswasions did I vse vnto him, but the vnfortunate Gentle∣man, thinking the (taske he had taken in hand) to be harder for to finish (then it was) would receiue no comfort at all, much lesse any hope to obtaine what he so much desi∣red; in so much as he resolued, to giue ouer the court for euer, and to goe and liue in a house he had in the countrie, where he ment to spend the remainder of his loathed life. And that the sooner he might die with care, Ioy banishing, he entertaines dispaire. Hauing this conceit in his head, the next morning he commeth vnto the Court, where he taketh his leaue (in humble wise) of the King, and that he might haue a co∣lour for his departure, and that none might suspect his heauie countenance, he maketh them beleeue, his mother was at the poynt of death, and therefore he being sent for, must
needs away vnto her. Hauing bene with the King, he commeth vnto the Queene, and to her faire daugh∣ter, vnto whom he telleth this sad newes, looking very sorrowfully, and so most humbly taketh his leaue of them; but the young Princes, gessing shroadly at the truth of the mat∣ter, and that there was no such thing, but onely a meere excuse, grieued mightily, to heare how she should lose his companie, the onely cause wherof she knew her selfe to be; for which, although she was hartily forie, yet knew she no way how to remedie as then the same. Meane space, Don Iohn, most pittifully consumed away, as well because he wanted his Mistris, as also for that he was neuer likely to see her any more, whilest he being re∣tired vnto his melancolike house resolued to die, and to giue ouer the world. O cruell madnes, O furious rage, O incomparable mischiefe, O miserie, none so great as Loue. What worser misfortune can happen vnto a man, then for want of reason, to suffer himselfe to fall into the mercilesse hands of his murthering foe? And what vnhappines (be it neuer so great) can ouerthrow a man so soone, as that which depriueth him of all sense, and vnderstanding? for the losse of our best friends, or chiefest goods, are easily to be borne, because seldome or neuer they make vs lose our right wits for them: but the torments we suffer in Loue, are insupportable and not to be endured; for it confoundeth our vertue and constancie, as was too well seene by Don Iohn, who would not take comfort in any thing, but onely in death: whilest lying thus dangerously sicke, of a secret disease of the minde, he was so much changed, as none could well haue knowne him; for his goodly and comely personage, was become pale, weake, and earthly: his haire long, wilde and feltred: his eyes, hollow and deepe, setled in his head: his face heauie and sad: his cheekes hollow and leane: his lips dead like ashes, and dried vp for want of moysture: his breasts lanke, and without flesh: his hands, but skinne and boane, and his armes brawne fallen, and without any force at all: to be briefe, he resembled rather a dead Anatomie, then a liuing creature. And although diuers haue bene of an opinion, that hardly or neuer any can die for Loue, because (as they say) this amorous sickenes, tainteth the soule onely (which is not subiect vnto death) and not the mortall bodie; yet neuerthelesse for all this, there is no doubt, but that many haue so died, and that the soule (as a companion of the bo∣die, in the selfesame functions) cannot feele any griefe, but that the bodie must feele his part thereof, and except he be partaker of the same, euen (as one day) both the one and the other shall be partners either of eternall glorie, or else of euerlasting fire, in that they haue bene companions in this world, either of good or else of euill. Such a life then was this which our poore Arragonian Gentleman endured, a life ordinarie and common vnto such, who depriued of all hopefull happines, pine away like one that is in a recure∣lesse consumption, for nothing maketh vs to liue, but onely ioyfull hope, which if it be deferred long, it maketh vs languish, but much more then will it plague vs, if we once growe in dispaire, neuer to obtaine the same. And therefore, there is none so wretched a life, as that which weareth away for want of hope: and so liued miserable Phedra, who seeing her deare Hyppolitus dead (for want of hope) slew her selfe. For as the Poet saith, Sweet hope, the life of euery one (what ere) doth cherish, And were it not for wisht for hope, all men would perish. This then was my Maisters resolution, which no man could dehort him frō. All his house, and chambers were painted with blacke, our Liueries being tawnie, and in the roome where he lay, he caused diuers melancholicke and sad sentences, to be drawne in great Characters, all which were the Infants of dispaire. One day, he being somewhat bet∣ter then his vsuall custome was, called for pen and Inke, and thereupon composed these sad verses following, which he would oftentimes sing vnto his Lute. My sighes, when giue you ore to sigh then forth my paine? Mine eyes, when haue you done to waile my griefe, though all in vaine?
Was ere seene such strange crueltie, where Loyaltie is found? Whilst (through th'vngratefull) for to die, remorselesse I am bound? I die, but in what sort, alas my woes so many be, As neuer any heretofore, hath suffered like to me. Happie is he that to his end by one sure stroke doth hie, To languish (dying) is far worse, then quickly for to die. My teares that in mine eyes doe stand (with sihges) my griefes doe showe, And yet ther's none that pittieth me, whilst worse I still doe growe. I cannot cured be, and she that's Author of my griefe, (To slay my selfe) she weapous giues vnto me (Sans reliefe.) Like Captiue am I led away, yet can I not behold Her face, to whom I prisoner am, and who my hart controld. He is no valiant Souldiour right, nor any Conquerour braue, Who to his prisoner dares not showe himselfe, when he doth craue. But heauens I see conspire gainst me, this life I finish must, Yet happie he, that in his loue diest loyally and iust. Sacred for euer, Faile shall it neuer, This my Monument, Since that Loue so true, Though none the same rewe Within it is spent. But (cruell) thou too late shalt finde, vntimely death of mine, My Loue was pure, my hart most iust, and bare thereof the signe. Yet ile not taxe thee for my death, thy rigor hard to proue, Ile say it was my destinie, and not thy nere gaind loue. But why (in vaine) seeke I in life, to haue a farther scope, He happie dieth, who in the would hath liued without hope. Then lets dispatch by sweetest end to rid vs of this paine, Lets shun this troublesome sea, the port with Ancor ours to gaine. His death is blessed, Of life disposessed, When by a sweet way, Ending of his life, He shuns care and strife, And in rest doth stay. This was the melancolicke Musicke, which my lucklesse Maister sung vnto his Lute, making all those heauie, that were hearers of the same. O male-contented sorrow, thou woundest our soules through sadnes, neuer suffering vs to rest quietly; thou driest vp the marrow in our bones, whereas ioy delighteth and comforteth the heart. Through thee, and through thy blacke sister dispaire, died constant Portia, Cato the Censors daughter, and modest Octauia, the patient wife of that luxurious Marke Anthonie. But to come to our former discourse, and leaue all digressions by the way, Don Iohn had no sooner left the Court, but that the young Princes Maria, was readie to leaue her life, taking on most pittifully, now she had loft the sight of him, whom she most affec∣ted. For as the fire put vnder a heape of wood (although greene) after it groweth to be drie & fit to burne, kindleth most strangely, casting forth huge flames, most dreadfull to behold: Euen so, the heart of Princely Maria, which Loue had not yet lighted but onely a little (because it began to resist somewhat at the first) after it was once throughly dried by desire, began to kindle so extremely within her afterward, as she was mightily burned with the same, insomuch, that she grewe so strongly enamored of her louing Seruant, as she could no longer liue without his presence. Great is the danger of that man, that openeth a gap vnto his aduersarie, whereby he may take aduantage of him, especially vnto that cruell tormentor Loue; who, worse then any barbarous Tyrant spoyleth vs, ouerthroweth vs, & treadeth vs vnder his feete: for so did this comfortlesse Ladie finde him, who now with teares from her eyes, and sighes from her heart, many a thousand times repented her of her ouerfond ouersight,
in being the Author of so much miserie, as well vnto her friend, as vnto her owne selfe. Faine would shee now redeeme the speeches which (before) she had spoken, but it was then too late, although she oftentimes cursed her tongue for the same. A bitter Pill of digestion is Repentance, and thrice happie is hee, that neuer hath had occasion to say (I Repent mee,) onely the ancient Sages, (fewe in number) might iustly speake the same. For that man needeth not to be sorrie at all, who doeth not a∣nie thing without mature aduise, and sound deliberation of iudgement. But as a storme neuer commeth without raine or haile, so neuer anie misfortune happeneth alone, but somewhat else commeth with it. For during the time that the Princesse so much bewailed the absence of my loyall Maister, it so fell out, that the Prince of Lions, demaunded her in marriage of the King her Father, who presentlie gaue his consent, so that there wanted nothing, but (onely this) that the Princesse should agree vnto this match her selfe. But shee, who could not dispose of her owne heart, because shee had bestowed it on another, and was fully minded, neuer to be wedded vnto anie, except vnto Don Iohn, thought within her selfe, rather to leaue the world, then to yeeld vnto any such matter. Neuerthelesse, her Father and Mother importuned her wonderfully; the amorous Prince himselfe, not loosing anie time or opportunitie to winne her, by all the deuises he could. As in the middest of a terrible fight vpon the Sea, the Admirall seeing his Shippe set on fire, his enemies got therein, and his people slaine, knoweth not well what to doe, or what to resolue vpon: whether it were best to die by the rd of his Foe, or to suffer himselfe to be burnt, or else to leape into the Sea, and there venture drowning, and in the end, imagining the water to be farre sweeter then the other twaine, with desperate courage leapeth therein. Euen so, and in such perplexitie, (if not worse) was royall Maria. Counsell and aduise shee wanted, what to say or doe shee knewe not, and which way to turne her, she was ignorant; shee waileth and weepeth, wisheth to die, and calleth for death, and yet findeth nothing to helpe her. Hecuba, neuer bewailed her bondage so much, nor the murthering of her Chil∣dren, neither did Niobe mone so rufullie, for her misso: tune, as this poore Virgin sighed and tooke on for her hard happe: whilst LOVE, one while counselleth her one thing, another while, wisheth her to doe another; and yet in the ende doeth not permit her to resolue vpon any matter throughly. Shee in the meane time standing doubtfull, and wauering what to doe, like a vessell that is tossed too and fro with a Tempest. O how of∣ten did she wish and desire within her selfe, to see (but once before shee died) her dearest friend, that she might craue pardon of him, for her fault. Nothing doth she couet so much as death, and (yet such was her ill hap) as she knew not how to die. In the ende, after she had bebated the matter within her selfe, and beate her braines too and fro therein, she found no better meanes, then to haue recourse vnto Don Iohn, and to intreat him to haue compassion on her: but then she was (almost) at her wittes end, to thinke how she might make him acquainted with her purpose: When flat∣tering Fortune, (for her ill luck) shewed her, how she might bring this her busines about well, and as she her selfe would desire. For the young Prince of Lions, who was in the prime of his youth, and in the heate of his chiefe blood, seeing he could not by faire meanes obtaine the King of Arragons daughter, thought to trie what hee could doe by force: and therevpon, sent an Embas∣sador vnto the King, that if he would not willingly yeeld his daughter vnto his wife, he (then) would haue her from him perforce, and by bloodie warres. The King hearing this proud Message, as one that was loth to force his onely daugh∣ter, or compell her to marrie against her will, & yet withall, fearing (somewhat) the power of his arrogant Foe, thought to make as sure worke as hee could in this matter; and therevpon, sen pursiuants, for all his brauest Soldiours, and best men at Armes, amongst which, he accounted Don Iohn as the chiefe. The Princesse hauing espied so fitte an occasion, sent a trustie Page of her owne vnto him, with (her inclosed Letter) in great secret, but before he had receiued the same,
the Kings Officers had posted vnto him where he lay, certifying him of the Kings com∣maundement; But hee that had vowed vnto himselfe, neuer to returne into the world more: and finding himselfe so feeble and weake, as hee was quite without all force or strength, denied the Princesses request, minding to excuse himselfe by reason of his sicknes, and so to send them away: which hee had no sooner done, but behold his Mis∣tris Page came presentlie, to enter into his Chamber, and to deliuer her Letter vnto him. As that man (who thinking himselfe to be healthfull and strong in bodie) is daun∣ted with feare, when suddenly (and in the best of his time) a straunge kinde of Qualme, commeth ouer his stomack, and an vncoth trembling is found to runne through all his ioyntes and members: Euen so, was this sicke Knight, wonderfullie amazed, to see his Ladies Letter, in the middest of his miserie, and when hee was depriued of all such hope, dispairing euer to haue found such kindnesse to come from her. In the ende he receiueth them, as a Cordiall, to his heauie heart; and (after hee had kissed, and rekissed them often) hee openeth them, wherein he found this written, which followeth. IF there be no greater Corsiue vnto the minde of one then that which forceth vs (despite of our selues) to seeke vnto those whom wee before haue (and that without iust cause) notoriouslie offended; then (certainely) am I the most wretchedst Creature liuing. For (as now) there is no meanes left for mee, to escape from daunger, but onely by thy helpe (sweete Knight) alone, who hast more reason to wish mine ouerthrow, then my good Fortune or health, a∣nie way at all: in that thou hast found such extreame and barbarous dis∣courtesie in mee. Yet neuerthelesse, if thy right generous and gentle minde, cannot feele this in∣iurie (done vnto thee, by a sillie Maiden) then, I beseech thee, thinke no more vpon mine offence, but burying it deepe vnder thy feete, doe that for my sake, which the bearer heere of shall make thee priuie vnto. And then shalt thou quickly perceiue, what great satisfaction I will make thee, for my fault committed, graunting vnto thee, that, which thou shalt most desire. Giue credite then vnto this Messenger, assuring thy selfe that I am. Thine most obliged, Maria. As that Prince who being pensiue and sadde, (attending for newes of the fortune of the Battaile, which his Lieutenant hath giuen vnto his enemie, seeing a Messenger comming a farre off (is amazed and confounded with feare) one while hoping of the vic∣torie, and then another while, doubting least hee hath lost the day, and so is vtterly o∣uerthrowne. Euen so it fared with our Arragonign Knight, for hee knoweth not, what his Ladie would haue with him, and say, that shee would employ him in her seruice, (yet thinketh hee) that it is not for anie good will shee beareth him, but onely because she would serue her owne turne: and that she had great need of him. Wherevpon, hee commaundeth the Chamber to be voyded, when being all alone, (except the Page) hee demaundeth of him what the Princesse pleasure was; who told him, that her earnest request was, that he would doe her so much fauour, as to challenge the Prince of Lions, to Combat: and to maintaine in quarrell against him, that he ought not, against the oath and deuoire of a true Knight, goe about to seeke to haue her vnto his wife, against her will, which victorie (if it please God that he obtaine) he then should soone finde, how thankfull she would be vnto him for the same. My maister hearing this, was readie to leape out of his skinne for verie ioy, driuing away all sadnesse, and becomming merrie, as he was at the first, seeing he had (now) some meanes to shewe himselfe, some way worthie of the good will of his Mistris. Wherevpon he answered the Page, that (his humble dutie first remembred vnto the Princesse) hee would be at the Court within tenne dayes after, and so willed him to signifie, (and to assure her thereof: where, in his blacke Armour) spread all ouer with
burning flames, and drerie leaues, hee would meete his hote and importunate Louer, not doubting, but quicklie to coole his heate and courage: and so, bestowing a rich Iewell vpon the Page, he sent him backe againe vnto the Princesse, who was maruellous glad to heare this newes from him. But there is an olde Sawe, Haste makes waste; And Soft Fire maketh sweet Mauls: Euen so, if this Traytour LOVE, had not blinded the eyes of my Maister (so much) as he could not see his owne weaknesse, and if he had not bene so forward, but had stayed, and taken a longer time, to cherish and recouer his health (more throughlie) then hee did (by reason that he was brought wonderfull lowe, and almost vnto deaths doore, with verie faintnesse and sorrow of minde) no doubt, but it had hapned better for him then it did: and he had bene one of the most fortunatest men liuing. But alas, who euer hath seene a Louer, that hath not bene halfe foolish? and that would not thinke, but that hee were able to performe things that were impossible, for the Loue of his Mistrisse? For as the Poet saith: Nothing is hard vnto a Louers minde, When hee doth seeke to please his Mistrisse kinde. For it was verie straunge, that Don Iohn, hauing bene so long sicke, and without beeing recouered, aboue three or foure dayes, should be able to encounter with one of the most brauest, lustiest, and strongest Gallants in the world, and not to be the occa∣sion of the losse of his owne life, as afterwards it was. Neuerthelesse, hee thought nothing was impossible vnto him, as long as it was in the seruice of his Ladie, hee beeing of the minde, that in such a cause, he was able to conquer all the world. Meane time, the Kings Pursiuants returned backe againe vnto the Court, certify∣ing his Maiestie, how that Don Iohn was deadlie sicke, and for that cause, craued pardon of him to be excused, since he was farre likelier to die then to liue. Which when the King had heard, hee was wonderfully sorie, but on the other side, the Page warranted the Princesse, that (what newes so euer hee had sent vnto the King her Father, because hee would not as then, be knowne of the sime) that (yet neuerthe∣lesse) hee would keepe his word, and not faile of his promise: and so hee did indeed. Although LOVE himselfe, doeth but mocke at the Oathes and protestations of Lo∣uers, they beeing for the most part, false, deceitfull, and oftentimes broken. And yet I say, That Louertrue, which to his Mistrisse makes an Oath, Will die before (to her) hee'le breake his vowed Troath. This was the reason that Don Iohn, (according vnto his word) kept his day, not missing to be there, at the time appointed, and in such an Armour as hee told the Page of, although he was verie weake and sickly, which if his faire Maria had knowne, shee would not haue so lightly employed him in so weightie a businesse, as concerned as well his life, as her owne, and the wel-fare of them both; but rather would haue caused him, to take some longer time to recouer him selfe, and some good Physicke to make him strong againe. And now the day being come, Don Iohn, (as a Knight errant and vnknowne) Armed (and disguised, as I told you before) presented himselfe before the King, and hauing done reuerence vnto him, demaundeth for the Prince of Lims. The King hearing him say so, asked what hee would haue with him, and the occa∣sion why hee enquired for him: (my reason is, answered the Knight, to prooue against him, (if so it shall stand with your Highnes good liking) that hee doeth against the ho∣nour and lawes of Chiualrie, to go about to obtaine (the Princesse your Daughters loue) rather by force, then by other good meanes: and therevpon, I denounce the Combat vnto him. which if hee refuse, I will account him no better then a base Coward, voyd of all valour, and as as one that is vnworthy of that thrice Noble order of Knighthood.
Heerevpon the Prince was called, (for hee was come but the day before vnto the Court, hee hauing bene sent for thither, by a traine that the Princesse laide, who knewe her faithfull Seruant would not misse his day,) before whome the straunge Knight re∣peated the former wordes: Which the other hearing, was so incenst with rage and fu∣rie, as presently hee called for his Horse and Armour, beeing readie in a trice, and so went into the Listes to meete with his enemie. The King was wonderfullie astonished at this straunge aduenture, and yet reioy∣ced much in his minde, wishing in his heart, and praying vnto God, that this new come Knight might haue the vpper hand, of his proud and insolent aduersarie. But if hee so much reioyced, then must you thinke that the Princesse his Daughter, was much more pleased and contented, seeing her valiant Knight to be so true of his word, and so readie to aduenture his life for her sake: & therefore thought him most worthy to be beloued. And now euerie thing beeing in a readinesse, the two Combattants entered the field, both of them prouoked, with one and the selfe-same desire, and both forced there∣vnto, through extreame Loue. The Trumpets sounding, they set spurres to their horses, meeting with such a terri∣ble encounter, as their Speares flewe all into shiuers, and both of them fell vppon the ground: but quicklie got they vp againe, drawing their naked swords, and the one most desperately seeking to assaile the other. As the Cyclops in Aetna, beating continuallie vppon the Iron Forge, fill all the bordering mountaines thereabouts, with Thundering noyse; Euen so, the blowes that fell vpon the Armours of these two Champions, made such frightfull noyse, as the sound thereof was heard farre and neere. Don Iohn is minded there to die, or to ouercome, since hee fighteth in the houour of his Ladie, so great is his courage: And yet, thee that was the occasion of the weake∣ning of his forces, cannot restore the same vnto him againe, when hee hath most need of them for her sake. On the other side, the young Prince madde for anger, that one should take his Mis∣tris away from him (and against his will) whome he beheld to be in place, redoubled his strength and courage in this Combat. But yet it had stood him in small stead, and to little or no purpose at all, if his enemie had bene as strong and lustie in bodie as he was, before LOVE had so much weakened and taken him downe. Little oddes seemed there to be betwixt these two Caualiers, so valiantly did both of them carry themselues, as euery one wondred at them. No running tricks in their fighting was forgotten, no Stockado, nor Reuerschio, no giuing place for aduantage, nor no fast following, to serue their owne purpose was missing: each of them striuing (as now) to shewe the vemost skill they had, in this their dangerous play. Don Iohn hurt the Prince in the shoulder, and the Prince wounded him in the thigh, which was the cause that the Battaile began to beginne a newe betweene them: whilst the lookers on, were euen wearie to behold them, onely they which fought, were so fresh and liuely, as if they had (but as then) entred into the field. The Lists (with their trauersing vp and downe the ground) are made deepe like fur∣rowes, and strewed all along, with the splinters & pieces of their Armours. Vpon part of which, Don Iohn (by ill fortune stumbling) fell downe, & the Prince presently vpon him, ready to haue stabde him, with his dagger into his throte, which he put in practise to the vtmost of his force, but his Corslet was of so good proofe, as he could not doe him much hurt. Thus as they tumbled one vpon an other, my Maister plaide his part so well, as at length he got vp againe on his legges, when as then, he began to find & feele, how much his former sorrow & griefe of mind had weakned him: besides, calling to mind his fault, (of which he was so ashamed) hee with such a fresh courage, assailed his furious Foe, that he made amends for his fault before, although the Prince had the aduantage of him. For where he was but hurt in the shoulder only, our Arragonian Knight was wounded, both in the Thigh, & in his inward minde too: and yet neuertheles, he stood stoutly to his tack∣ling, grieued at the heart, that he could not rid his enemy out of the way, (in so long time) especiallie fighting for his Ladie, and now (although too late) often wishing hee had ta∣ken
a longer time, to recouer his former health. In the end, the blood ran so fast downe from Don Iohns thigh, as euery one iudged he would be ouercome. For which all the As∣semblie were maruellously sorie. When vpon the sudden (and contrarie to all their ex∣pectations) he began so furiously to follow the Prince, as with the often blowes which he doubled, and redoubled vpon him, hee made him kneele vpon the ground, where (when he had him at the aduantage, he lost no time at all. For perceiuing that his enemie was in a manner astonisht with the manie strokes he had giuen him, without suffering him to haue any leisure or time to breath, he aimed so rightly at his head, and that with so migh∣tie a violence, as at one blow, he cleft it quite asunder: the sencelesse bodie falling downe vpon the ground, and quite bereft of soule, of pride, and of valour. At what time also, and with him (iust at that instant) fell Don Iohn himselfe likewise, by reason he was won∣derfully weakened through the losse of his blood, which issued forth from his wounds. Wherevpon euerie one supposed that hee was dead, as well as the other, which the Prin∣cesse imagining to be true, and (heauie aboue all the rest) for the same: returned home vnto her Chamber, to bewaile his hard fortune, with her owne. To tell you what pittifull mone this poore Ladie made, and what bitter teares shee shead, being retired into her priuie Closet, would but moue you to greater remorse. No comfort would she receiue any way: neither would she now reioyce, although she had seen her enemie slaine, considering her valiant Knight had run the same course. She is de∣termined not to liue after him any longer, since she had bin the occasion of his vndoing. Neither cared shee, although euery one had seene her thus to lament, because she hoped Death would ridde her from all such doubts. Neuerthelesse, her Gentlewomen much wondred thereat, maruelling what the cause should be; most of them thinking it was for the death of the Prince of Lions, whom it was supposed she should haue married, and not for the blacke Knight, although they were all deceiued that thought so. Thus lay shee mourning vnto her selfe, neither would shee take ioy at any thing, vntill at the last, newes was brought vnto the Court, that Don Iohn was found to bee that black Knight, that had bene her Champion, who was not (as it was before iudged) dead. Wherevpon she began to giue ouer her lamenting, but yet in such wise, and so cun∣ningly, as none of all her Attendants could perceiue it was for his sake, that shee had ta∣ken on so before, although (God he knoweth) not anie in all the whole world was more ioyfull then shee, to heare of so comfortable tidings and newes. Wherevpon, shee called for her Coach, and went vnto the Knight to visite him, where, when she was come, she found a number of Ladies and Gentlewomen in the cham∣ber, who were comforting of him, and reioycing with him, for his happie victorie. No sooner was shee entred into the Chamber where he lay, but all the other giuing place, she drew towards his beddes side: when he (poore soule) no sooner had spied her, but that he forthwith sounded: the companie imagining that it was his wounds, and not her sight, that was the cause thereof: whilst she in the mean space, was not a little amazed, to see him so mightily chaunged, and to looke so meger, pale, and hollow, whome not long before, she had knowne to be the goodliest and properest man liuing. But this misfortune and sicknes (hapned vnto him) shee laide no bodie in fault of, but her owneselfe, confessing in her conscience, that she was the onely cause thereof: and therefore resolued within her selfe, to make him amends with the losse of her owne life, if he should hap to miscarrie, or doe otherwise then well. And now my sadde Maister being come vnto himselfe againe, and seeing his Mistris to looke so heauily vpon him, and sighing, he held downe his countenance, not daring to behold her, whilst the (Chyrurgians that had him in Cure, and others,) thought that it was the paine of his woundes, that made him so ill: And therefore, desired eue∣rie one to withdrawe themselues from thence (for a while) that he might the better take his rest. Wherevpon, faire Maria was forced, (though sore against her will) to leaue him: vowing vnto her selfe (if it should please God, that her Knight might recouer his for∣mer health) to marrie with none but him: Thinking shee could not be anie mans (so rightly) as his, seeing he had (so brauely) reuenged her quarrell, vpon her hatefull ene∣mie, and had engaged his life, for her deare seruice.
Alas, how shall I be able to make an ende of this pittious historie? I knowe not I, and therefore (good Arcas,) let this suffice, which I haue alreadie reported vnto thee. Heere the wretched Fortunio, powred forth whole fountaines of teares, it being a long time, before hee could speake as much as one word more: but I pressed him so much, and vrged him so often, that in the ende, hee went forward with his former dis∣course in this manner. Don Ihon my Maister, had all the cunning Physitions and Chyrurgions that could be gotten, to looke vnto him, whereby hee might recouer his former health, and haue his wounds healed. But all was in vaine, for there was no Medicine or Balme, that could doe him any good, by reason of the great sorrow, which hee had (before) conceiued in his minde: And because the small vertue and strength of his radicall humour within him, which griefe had ouermuch weakened, was not of power sufficient to nourish his grieuous wounds, and therefore they became both weaker and worser, euerie day then other. They were not ouer mortall or deadlie, and yet (because of diuers accidents) and what through the badde disposition of his bodie, they became incurable: which they that looked vnto him perceiuing, and finding that there was no way but one with him, certified his friendes thereof; who tooke on most pittrouslie, when they heard such hea∣uie newes. And now the last day was come, in which (most happily) hee must leaue this world, at what time (although as then too late) his Mistrisse shewed her selfe most kinde vnto him. For, shee hauing vnderstood (by her trustie Page, of whome I talked of before) that he was drawing towards his latest ende, determined with her selfe, not (long) to liue after him: wherevpon, she tooke a fitte time, to steale secretly vnto his Chamber, where (being alone with him) and causing the doore to be boulted, she came vnto his beddes head. But alas (Father) I am not able to proceed any further, for verie anguish of minde; my hart will burst, if without weeping, I goe onward with my Tale. But yet I will doe what I can to make an ende thereof, although for euerie word I speake, I shall be for∣ced to shead a teare. The kinde Knight, perceiuing the young Princesse to stand by him: whose eyes were turned into springs of teares, whose heart was turned into another Montgibell, with scalding sighes: and whose amorous locks lay all rent and torne about her shoulders, with a hollow voyce, and throatling in his throate, spake thus vnto her. If it be (sweete Mistrisse) for mee, your faithfull and wretched seruant, that you la∣ment so much, then I beseech you giue ouer the same, and reserue it for a better pur∣pose, and lessen not the glorie which hee feeleth, for dying in your Royall seruice. But (alas) what is this I say? Is it likely that you can bewaile the losse of him, who, (when hee was liuing) you depriued of life, through your too extreame ri∣gour? No, no, I know it is not for mee that you thus take on: (for I confesse) I am not worthie thereof; but it is for the Prince of Lyons, who is slaine, that you torment your selfe, whome (perhaps) you made account of, to haue had for your husband. If so, then (cruell Lady) know this, that it was thy onely commaundement caused me to kill him: and had it not bene thy will, he had bene yet aliue. Neuerthelesse, if in this I haue done amisse, I craue pardon of thee before I die, as well for that, as for anie errour else, that I haue most vnwillingly done against thee. I die (beautious virgin) yea I must die, onely because I loue thee: accounting my selfe most vnfortunate, in that I haue not receiued one small fauour at thy hands before my death. Neither am I willing to liue, seeing it is contrarie vnto thy will and pleasure. My dying lippes had neuer that blessed happe, to touch those thy vermillion checkes: No, not so much as to kisse those thy Princely handes; and all because I was thereof vnworthie. Notwithstanding, if thou (most gratious Mistris,) doest thinke that this my death, (for louing thee) deserueth anie recompence, then I most humblie beseech you, that
you pardon all that is past, graunting me to kisse, not your louely lips, but onely that your most victorious hand. O my soule, my soule, how insupportable is your anguish, not to loue this my bodie, but to abandon the companie of my sweet Princes: I die happily, being rid from all my griefe, and yet most miserably, in that I lose thee, whom I loue, farre more then my owne selfe. O fairest creature of all, that euer were faire, remember, remember, thy deare Don Iohn, after he is dead and gone, who now taketh his last farewell of thee. Hauing so said, he sinketh downe into his bed, his faire Mistris falling hard by his side in a sound, but in the end, comming vnto her selfe againe, she shed so many teares vpon the bloodlesse visage of the knight, as at length, life began to come in him once more, that he might yet a little longer enioy the presence of her. O what a pittifull sight was this to behold? These two faithfull Louers, who neuer had receiued any solace, or comfort, the one of the other, in all the time of their life, now at the last (houre of their deaths) begin to embrace and kisse one another, sucking that sweet poyson, which forced them to die, mingling their teares vpon their checkes, whi∣lest they drowne themselues in the Seas of their owne laments and wailings. O happie Knight, to carrie with thee the soule of thy Mistris, which with thy chaste kisses, thou diddest sucke from forth her bodie: and O blessed Princes, to haue receiued so faithfull a proofe of thy Loyall Louer, whilest thou doest comfort him, he lying at the point of death. The one was whole, and without hurt, the other at deaths doore, and wounded mor∣tally, and yet was she that was whole, no more able to speake, then the other that was so fore diseased. Mute and dumb were both of them, they two hauing (as it were but one bo∣die) (is but one will and minde was betwixt them) yet, this slight pleasure which they drew with their sole breath lasted not long, for so great was their inward griefes, as if they should not haue spoken, their hearts must (then) needs burst in sunder. As the beautie of the Rose that is gathered, soone vadeth away, because it quickly withereth by reason of the heate of the Suune: Euen so, as suddely were those ioyes which they conceiued, gon from them, whilest the young Ladie weepeth, and weeping drieth vp the teares of ner faithfull Seruant, she kisseth his closed eyes, and with her tongue wipeth away the drops, as they fall vpon his cheekes, but (alas) in steed of those which she drieth vp, his owne distilleth and lighteth vpon the same place, whilest heauie sighes make him to groane, and thousand passions, interrupt and breake the passage of his speech. He crieth out, and taketh on most bitterly, to see her thus to lament, he curseth his hard fortune, and calleth her cruell, in that she seemeth to enuie, at this his glorie, which he conceiueth in his minde to enioy by dying, and at the last forceth himselfe to vse these fewe speeches vnto her. Alas sweet Mistris, what haue I done vnto you? what haue I done vnto you (I pray you) that you should so much malice the small remainder of this my hatefull life? Let me alone, I beseech you, and suffer me to part out of this world quietly, without trou∣bling of me, now I am going away from hence. Are you not content that mine owne teares haue (so often) drowned me, but that I must needs be ouerwhelmed with yours also? O vnkinde and discourteous, euen vntill my latest end. If thou louest me (as thou wouldest make me beleeue) then shew some signe thereof, in appeasing thy sorrowes, for my loue sake. Wilt thou make me so mise∣rable, as that (now I am dying) I shall finde my selfe to be the Author of all thy care and sorrow. Alacke doe not me that great wrong, and let it not be said, that I haue receiued so vniust an iniurie from thee. Goe in peace, I pray you, and suffer me to die according vn∣to mine owne wish. O wretched carkasse of mine, why diddest not thou breathe thy last, with the corpse of thine enemie, when thou soughtest the other day in the lists, without procuring (as now) vnto thy selfe a worse then double death? Well (Ladie) well, I see thou wilt not cease from weeping, I see thou wilt still be sighing and sobbing, and I plainely perceiue
thou wilt not giue ouer to lament for the losse of him, who is not worthy, that thou shouldest let fall one teare in his behalfe. Most gratious Princes, if my praiers cannot preuaile for me, and although thou wilt doe nothing in respect of me, ah yet at least, haue some regard vnto thine owne ho∣nour: for what would strangers thinke, if they should finde, that thou thus takest on and mourne for me? Wilt thou make me so wretched, as to cause me to be thought to be the occasion both of thy woe, and of thy discredit, which (although wrongfully) shall be a blemish vnto thy former renowme? Doe not, O doe not offer me, such monstrous iniurie, but rather (if thou thinkest that euer I haue done any thing that hath bene pleasing vnto thee, or that I did fight against thine enemie in thy behalfe) recompence me, with this one good turne, which is, that thou bewaile not the losse of him, who whilest he liued, was thy most religious Vo∣tarie, to the end none may reproach or defame thee (hereafter) in giuing out, that thou diddest Loue me. But I perceiue it will not be, I see my suite will not be graunted, wherefore O death, most kinde and courteous death, make hast, come, come, and make hast to rid me out of this too too seruile thraldome, to the end, I may no longer behold her thus to waile and weepe, who is my chiefest ioy and felicitie in this world. Then (once more) gratious Mistris. But here, he was preuented by the wofull Prin∣ces, who not being able to heare him thus to vexe and torment himselfe, interrupted him (in his speech) after this manner. Now by that rare vertue, by that admirable valour, and by that comelines of perso∣nage, all which were lately thine, yea and by mine owne selfe, who will be none but thine, I entreate thee (my deare and faithfull Knight) and by that admirable loue which thou hast heretofore borne me, and as yet doest beare vnto me, I coniure thee, to pardon me, for this thy death, for I onely haue forced thee to die: it is I haue bene thy vtter destruction, and I onely haue brought the (vntimely) vnto thy graue. Ah let me but heare that sweete and comfortable word once pronounced by thee, before I discouer vnto thee, the secrets of my heart, and that I bewray any more of mine inward minde vnto thee. Louely Ladie (replied my Maister) I pardon thee with all my heart: but why doest thou thus iest at my haplesse miseries, requesting that of me, which I (first) did beg of thee, because it belonged vnto me, and for that it is I, and not thou, that art (herein) culpable: neuerthelesse, if those words shall please thee, for whom I liued onely to serue and obey, and whom (now I am dying) I would be loth to offend, I am content to speake them, saying; Fairest and loueliest Ladie, I most hartily pardon you. The mestfull Ladie, hearing him to say so, began to drie her eyes, whilest flinging the haire of her head vpon her shoulders, which before hindered her tongue from spea∣king, she thus began to bewray her minde vnto him. I cannot denie (my deare heart) but that I was much too blame, when I first of all refused thy chaste seruice offered vnto me: but alas, did I thinke, that for one onely deni∣all, thou wouldest haue giuen ouer thy enterprise, and betaken thy selfe to liue solitarily, as melancolicke person in a wildernes, and neuer more to moue me in this matter? God knoweth how often (afterward) I cursed my tongue, and wished ill vnto my mouth for the same: for I will confesse the truth, that euen then, and before that time (as euer since I haue done) I loued thee most dearely. Full little did I thinke, but that I should haue heard from thee againe ere long, when thou (presently) diddest retire thy selfe from my presence, so that although I knew thou louedst me, and that I was willing to shew thee any honourable courtesie, yet could I not as faine I would, by reason I knew not how to send conueniently vnto thee, whilest thou in the meane time, wert almost dead for griefe, and I little better, because thou haddest forsaken me so suddenly. Now whilest we both liued thus in great discon∣tentment, the Prince of Lyons (as ill fortune would) came hither vnto my fathers Court, and would needs force me to be his wife. But I, who had vowed in my minde, neuer to haue any other vnto my husband, then thine owne sweet selfe, entreated thee, to trie the combat with him in my behalfe, not
thinking that thou haddest bene halfe so weake, as I perceiued afterward thou wert. At the length it was thy good fortune to be victor of the field, whereof I was not a little glad; I determining with my selfe, whatsoeuer should haue hapned, to haue bene married vnto thee. But woe is me, I now perceiue, death must cause vs to part in this world, although we will meete both together in another. And now seeing (at this verie instant) I am forced to behold thee, drawing thy latest breath, and that thine eyes are readie to be closed vp, with an euerlasting sleepe, thinkest thou that I either can or will, allay the heate of my griefes? or that I will reuoke my first word, which was to take part of such fortune as should be allotted vnto thee? Doest thou thinke I am so cruell, so hard harted, or so much voyd of remorse and pittie, that thou dying before me, onely for my cause, and in my quarrell, I would not so much as lament, and bewaile thy death? Ah my vnkind friend, great wrong is this thou doest vnto me. No no, one and the selfesame Tombe, shall enclose both cur bodies together, and that which Loue would not permit to be thine whilest thou liuedst, gentle death shall put thee in possession thereof, without any trouble at all. Thy commandement in this point, shall be of no force with me, thy prayers to no purpose, neither thy entreating of any power at all with me, but in any thing else, doe but bid me, and I will strait obey thee: onely in this I must denie thee, for (assuredly I will die, rather then liue, to thinke that thou wert ouerthrowne through me, and that I should liue continually to sigh and cry out, saying; Alas, where is (now) my worthie Knight? Can mine eyes shine, and giue light, when thine are dead and gon? Can I endure to see thee ca∣ried vnto thy graue, & I not be buried in the earth? And can I abide to liue, to say, Behold yonder, my sweet friends Tombe, and not be enclosed therein my selfe? Neuer demand so vniust a request at my hands, neither be so hard harted vnto me, as to wish me to sur∣uiue thee, to the end I may be the more miserable. But perhaps, thou thinkest because I haue bene cruell vnto thee, therefore thou mai∣est repay me with the like recompence againe. To which I thus answere. First, the heauens know how much it was against my will, and haddest thou not bene too farewell and timerous, thou haddest saued both thine owne life and mine also. Besides, I challenge the pardon which euen now, thou diddest graunt vnto me for this mine offence: and therefore (sweet friend) be content and pleased; for with thee will I die, whilest our coarses shall lie one by another in one selfe Vault, which when they were liuing, was not permitted vnto vs; and for this I hope, mine honour cannot be cal∣led in question, seeing all ages haue allowed young Ladies, to loue honestie, braue and valiant Knights, and such was my loue, and not otherwise, as God himselfe can witnes. Who then can iustly taxe mine honour? (None my deare Knight) none, and seeing it is so; receiue this last kisse, from the most wofull woman liuing: receiue her heauie plaints, and her lamenting grones, and doe not oppose thy selfe against that small remainder of contentment, which is behind for her, in dying with thee, which she will take as a requitall, for so many miseries which haue bene afflicted vpon her. Needes must I tell thee, that I doe enuie at that glorie thou hast to die before me, but (long) shall it not be, for I will follow thee, as fast as may be: meane while, and when thou shalt be in the heauens, remember I pray thee, thy deare and faithfull Maria. More would she haue spoken, but that her heart was so ouerpressed with griefe, as she fell downe dead vpon my dying Maister: who seeing so pittifull a spectacle, knew not what to doe, for helpe her any way, he could not, so extreame and faint he was. At the last, she came vnto her selfe, when with a lowe and fumbling voice, he spake these fewe words (the last as euer he pronounced) vnto her. My gratious Ladie, now I beseech thee, harbor no such vnkinde conceit within thee, more good maiest thou doe vnto me (with thy honourable speeches) whilest thou art liuing, then when thou shalt be dead, or if thou shouldest die with me. No sweet Princes, no, liue, yea liue still, and happily, seeing nothing fairer then thy selfe can liue. For else what discredit would it be vnto me, if it should be obiected against
me, that I had darkned and extinguisht the brightest Sonne of this world: let not so foule a blot staine my memorie, after I shall be departed from hence aliue, & seeke not to shor∣ten thy time, before the will of God, cutting off thy selfe before he doth appoint thee, and disposing of thy bodie, not according vnto his, but thine owne pleasure. An doe not so, for so you may not doe. Mortall creatures must be ruled by the di∣uine ordinance aboue, and expect their leisure, not doing any thing, but as they shall ap∣point them. Liue then (I say once more) and close these my dying eyes, which whilest they liued, were thine: this Boone, if thou shalt graunt me, I then shall thinke my selfe happie: but if not, then shall I account my selfe as most miserable. And now I feele that welcome death doth approach towards me, through which all my cares and troubles end. I my time is now come, my sences faile, and my tongue be∣ginneth to be speechlesse. No more haue I now to say to thee (my deare Princes) but onely to recommend my memorie and thine owne life, vnto thee, of which two things I desire thee (as euer thou louedst me) to haue an especiall regard. Farewell, I can no longer speake: farewell the beautie of this world: farewell the faire Sunne of my soule: farewell my ioy and onely comfort, and if euer thou thoughtest me worthy of any fauour, embrace me once before I die. And thou sweet Iesu, mine onely Sauiour, haue mercie vpon me. Scarce were these words forth of his mouth, when the most disconsolate Ladie, embracing her breathlesse Knight, laied her mouth so close vnto his, as his soule seemed to part out of his corpse into hers, which with a sweet (yet scalding sigh) she drew in her owne. And now, he being without life, and cold as any stone, the Princes knew not what to doe, faine would she haue murthered her selfe, but that she had no weapon wherewithall to doe the deed: besides, she durst not stay alone in the chamber, least she might (per∣haps) be espied by one or other, and yet againe, she was most loth of all, to leaue the coarse of her kinde friend so soone. But in the end, reason tooke place, which perswaded her, to conuey her selfe as se∣cretly from thence, as when she came thither: which she did so cunningly, through helpe of her old trustie and assured Page, as she was not perceiued by any, vntill such time as she recouered her owne lodging, where after she had bene setled a while, she loc∣ked the doore vnto her: and so, laying her selfe vpon her bed (after she had for a certaine space, wailed and lamented for the death of my Maister) she held her breath so long within her bodie, and closed her mouth so hard, as (at the length) she stifled her selfe for want of taking winde, and so was found dead, not any doubting of any such matter, nor any knowing what the cause should be of her death, but onely my selfe, and her foresaid trustie Page. No sooner was she found thus dead, and the bruite thereof noysed abroad, but there was a generall lamentation and crying out throughout all the court: not vnlike that which was heard in Troy, the same night the Citie was set on fire (vpon the sud∣daine) by the subtill Greekes. What great moane the King and the Queene made for their daughter the young Princes, and how grieuously the friends of Don Iohn tooke the death of him, being held to be one of the most valiants and brauest Knights of Spaine, I hope I need not to report vnto you. It shall suffice, their Funerall obsequies were performed, and set out, in the most sumptuous and costliest manner that could be deuised: which being past and done, I tooke my leaue of that countrie, minding to trie my fortune in some other place: and so taking with me some fewe Iewels, and certaine gold (which my late Maister had bestow∣ed vpon me) I went my waies, when (as I trauailed) on my iournie, some of the foresaid Prince of Lions men (by ill fortune met with me) who knowing me to be a follower of Don Iohn, that had ouerthrowne him in combat, laid violent hands vpon me, meaning to carrie me with them by sea into their countrie, and there to put me vnto some cruell kinde of death. But God knowing me to be innocent, tooke compassion vpon me, so as after I was shipped with them, a suddaine Tempest arose, in which our vessell was sunke, all the passengers within her drowned, and I onely escaped, and was saued.
This (reuerend sir) was the wofull Tragedie, which Fortunio, reported vnto me of his hard aduentures. But it now beginneth to waxe darke, let vs be gon, then (said the old man) and to morrow againe, thou shalt begin where thou hast now left. Agreed (quoth Arcas) and therewithall walked along with him, to bring him on his way towards his lodging, which (as they were going, they might see this riddle to be ingrauen within the barke of an auncient old Elme. My fortun's strange, the whle world holds me deare, And though I nothing am, of nothing made, Yet I so spotlesse shew, so faire and cleare, As noblest states, of me are well apaid. What ere passeth by me, I see the same, Yet I no eyes haue, and am formed so: As smallest force doth bring to me my bane, Breaking me peece-meale, with a little blow. My propertie most true is, what doth breath, I liuely that present, in face and beautie: And (which is more) I creature (nere) deceiue, Great personages to me bowe, as t'were of dutie. Yet I them faithfull serue, whilst loth they are To leaue me, so well they my companie Doe like Say then, who rightly can me barre, From honour such, as all giue vnto mee? What thinke you of this Riddle (said the olde man vnto Areas) and how would you expound the same? Marrie thus answered the Shepheard. This Enigma, signifieth nothing else, but a right christall Mirrour which is a ettall of little or none account, and is little or nothing accounted of, in that they are common and subiect to breaking, with euery small little fillip or touch of hand. And yet neuerthelesse, they are set by in euery place of the world, especially, by the better and nobler sort, who lightly neuer passe by any of them, but they looke and be∣hold themselues in the same. Not any one goeth by them, but (if he please) he may view and discerne his owne liuely shape, whilest the looking glasse it selfe, seeth euery thing that passeth before it, although it haue no eyes at all. So brittle is it of Nature, that (as I said before) it breaketh with any light fall, all in peeces. It sheweth the true counter∣fait of euery one that looketh in the same, dwithout eceiuing any, which is the reason, they are in no small request amongst great states, especially faire Ladies, and Gentlewo∣men, who (therefore) prise them very highly. Well hast thou said (quoth the old Magitian) and thou hast hit the very naile vpon the head. I commending thy sharpe conceit for the exposition thereof. But now let vs be walking vnto our lodgings, seeing the skie beginneth to waxe darke, and the Sunne is readie to repose himselfe, vpon his wet and deway coach. And herewithall they departed, euery one vnto their seuerall houses, where we will leaue them, vntill the next morning, yet not leauing to conceale from your conceits, an Ode, which a certaine Nymph, sung vnto them, as they were going homewards. And this it was. Since that Loue is worse then death, And suruies, when coarse wants breath: I will chase away the same, Leust I vext be with that paine. For she is fond that liues by Loue, And many plagues is like to prone. What would euery one report, If I liue should in such sort? Hope in vaine and to no end, Marre myselfe, rather then mend.
Since she is fond that liues by loue, And many plagues is like to proue. Yet I here protest, though I, Meane to leaue Loues crueltie. Yet I Cupid honour still, Whilst he worketh me none ill. For she is fond that liues by loue, And many plagues &c. I confesse, ther's passions sweete In Loue, for true Louers meete. Such as doth them gently warme, And their harts most sweetly charme. Though she is fond that liues, And many plagues &c. But when tis ore violent, Then the soule with griefe is rent. Whilst it reaues vs of our sence, Therefore ile wish such dispence. For she is fond that liues by loue, And many plagues is like to proue. The end of the forth daies meeting of Iuliettaes Shepheards.
THE FIFTH AND LAST DAYES MEETING OF IVLIET∣TAES SHEPHEARDS. THrice blessed is the Man, that (without hauing bene allu∣red with the vaine pleasures of vnconstant Fortune,)A Sentence. hath neuer chaunged his estate; but being borne poore, re∣maineth so, all the terme of his life. For the continu∣ance of a miserable estate, is not grieuous vnto a man, but the alteration and change of good, vnto that which is wretched and badde, is that which maketh him sadde and heauie. Hee that hath nothing to loose, is not tormented at all, hee weepeth not, neither lanenteth his losse, not knowing what it is to be vndone: but that disastred wight, that seeth himselfe, through the iniurie of the heauons, depriued of that Iewell which be held most dearest in this world: cannot chuse but lament and bewaile his hard misfortunes. He that (neuer) hath had any faire Mistris, (the chiefe Nurse and nourisher of his life) maketh not so pittifull moane, as that poore, louing seruant, who findeth himselfe banished from so sweete a Saint, through the ma∣lice of the despitefull starres. A most liuely patterne whereof, was the miserable Arcas. For what need had hee, (so often) to haue sighed, and so much condoled the absence of his beautious Diana, (ha∣uing lost her deare presence) if hee had neuer bene acquainted with her, or neuer loued her before? The griefe whereof, neuer parted from his soule, being as greene Iuie, that wreathed about him, as a Serpent that intangled him, or as a chaine that befettered him, and bound him round about, in so much as hee consumed away, as well by day, as by night. Early in the morning doth he rise, and getteth him forth of his lodging, trotting a∣pace, vnto the wonted Caue, where he thought to finde the olde Magitian. As he walked onwards on his way, hee might discerne the Skie to waxe redder and redder in the East, perceiuing such a flaming fire, as the pure brightnes thereof, brought a cleare light vnto the whole world; he wistly looking full against the same, though he could not long continue so. For his eies were not ableo abide the glimmering beames thereof, as the sicke mans sight, that faleth, when he falleth in a sownd. No maruell then, although our Shepheard had not power to behold the maiestie of the glorious Sunne it selfe, when he was daunted and amazed, with the onely shadow of the same. And the rather, because he was troubled with other conceits that ranne in his braine: For there can be no right contemplation of the heauenlie workes of the Al∣mightie, where the minde is distraught, or carryed away, but onely at such times, as our spirits are not troubled or hindered, with the imagination of anie thing else. Arcas (therefore) could not ruminate vpon this high and diuine matter, being with∣drawen from them, by other subiects: Yea, so much was he ententiue, and giuen to muse vpon other things, as he (scarce) could call to remembrance what he was, and where hee then walked. Free (therefore) must his minde bee, and quite secluded from all other cares, and worldlie thoughts, that meaneth to addict and deuote himselfe,
vnto the contemplating of the admirable works of the eternall God, they giuing suffi∣cient tetimonie, as well of his great puissance, as of his wisedome and prudencie. Of the one, because of their wonderfull creation: and of the other, by reason of their sa∣cred and wise gouernment. And now the pensiue Shepheard, beginning to consider the rare beauty of the han∣diworke of the Creator of all creatures, gaue oer all such ousie thoughts, running in his minde (being as then, disburthened of other troubles) to the intent hee might the better meditate vpon this newe and worthie subiect onely. So doeth the more violent poyson expell the lesser;A Similie. and the bigger naile (strucken with mightier force)  it the other. After he had bene rauished (a while, in his soule) wondering at the straunnesse of these excellent things, hee could not chuse, but must needes breake silence, dous to make manifest by speech, what he thought in his conceit. The voyce is the messenger of the will of the mind, both which ought to concurre and agree together:A Sentence. but if they be contrarie, then cannot man doe anie thing, that is either easie or iust. Our Pilgrime Arcas, walking faire and softly, (his gate being rather the pace of sorrow, then of pleasure) fixing his eyes low vpon the ground, as one being in an Extrasie, beganne to discourse vnto himselfe, after this fashion. If this thy glorious creature, ô immortall LORD, this (beautious Sonne) is ado∣red of the people which are called Aatipodes: how much more worthilie then, art thou to be worshipped of vs, who art the onely Father and Creator, both of this resplendent, and all-seeing Lampe, and of all other things else whatsoeuer? If anie workemanship, may be accounted admirable in the eies of mortall wights, how much more then shall he be, that is the Architect, and framer of the same? And if a Table or Picture be found worthy of commendation amongst men, how much more, and what greater praise doth the Painter himselfe merit, that hath so liuely drawen it? Wonderfull are thou, (ô GOD) in thy workes? and nothing proceedeth from thee, but what is of that condition and number. Of nothing hast thou made man, thou hast formed Woman out of man, without woman: and men, of men and women; thou (thy selfe) being borne of a Virgin, without the helpe of man. Who therefore can com∣prehend these thine excellent effects? Thou sufferedst man to sinne, to the ende, hee might be made more perfect; Afterward, thy selfe becomming man, as he is (sin excepted) it being thy will, that sinne should come, the more to increase thy glorie, and to make manifest thy Mercie and Iustice. Thou (sometimes) hast permitted euill, that a greater and a more wholsomer good, may arise of the same: not onely for their sakes, who haue committed it, but also for o∣thers, that were strangers in the same. As may be seene, by the offence which was done, against the inuocent and chaste Ioseph,An Example. by his hard-harted and malitious Bretheren: and as wee may finde by that horrible and inexpiable Treason, which that damned Iudas wrought against his deare Lord and Maister. To be briefe, wonderfull art thou, in all thy doings. Neither can anie comprehend thy diuine Actions, no more then thy first beeing and beginning can be knowne. For as wee finde and perceiue,A Similie. the liuely heate of the fire, to come from forth the Stoue or Hot-house, and (yet) see no flame nor fire at all: So, although wee haue not beheld o∣uer manie of thy scred works; yet haue wee found them to be most certaine and true, by reason of the fruites that haue come vnto vs through the same. Neuer hath any man visiblie viewed the admirable coniunction of thy Deitie,A Sentence. with humanitie; and yet neuerthelesse, wee ought to belieue it, because of the profite that it hath brought vnto vs, which is, the Saluation and soules health of vs all. Then, if thy workes be so diuine, so religious, and so farre surpassing the naturall conceits of man: it is no maruell, although thou (after thine owne imitation and like∣nesse) desirest, that that which man doeth, should likewise be perfect, (hee being of thy making) to the end he may be found worthy of thy heauenly Kingdome. Thou hast charged thine Apostles (most strictly) to be perfect, as thy Father, who liueth in heauen: and although they can neuer attaine vnto that good, so much desired, yet (at the least) thy will is, that they make an assay and proofe thereof, seeking (as much
as in them lyeth) to doe vnto the vtmost of their power. Neither doeth this perfection (of which I speake) consist in any thing so much, as in thy works. For by the worke, the cunning and skill of the workman is found: as by the sweetnes and daintinesse of the verse, the learning and deepe conceit of the Poet is knowne: And euen so, those that will passe for maisters, in any Art or Handicraft whatso∣euer, giue testimonie of their skill, by some rare piece of worke deuised by them, which is accounted the excellencie of their cunning: whereby wee may perceiue, either their sufficiencie, or their follie: their deepe knowledge, or grosse errours therein. So that we find the perfection of eternall IEHOVAH, in nothing so much, as by his works, which are euery way right sacred, and most excellent; Our Sauiour himselfe commaun∣ding vs, that wee should not seeke to endeuour to approach vnto his perfectnes, in anie thing so much, as by doing such excellent and heauenly deeds, as hee hath done before vs. The Prentice that endeuoreth to learne some exquisite kinde of Trade, or Occupa∣tion, of his cunning Maister, is he not properly said to imitate him, as long as he is wor∣king some piece of worke, that commeth nigh vnto that of his Maisters? If so, why then, by this perfection, is vnderstood as well (good works, as Faith.) For it is an easie matter to be brought to belieue. And had Christ meant (onely of Faith) by those words, his doctrine (then) had bene superfluous, and to small purpose. For without Faith, his Disciples (vnto whome he spake) could not haue bene his followers, because euerie Infi∣dell is already damned: and they all abounded in Faith, seeing that through the same, they shewed so many rare miracles, but not such good works, as the Sonne of God com∣manded them, which approched and drew neere vnto the perfection of such, as his hea∣uenly Father had done before. That great Apostle of his, Saint Paul, said he not afterwards vnto his Companions, Be yee my followers, as I am the follower of Iesus Christ: and this hee meant, not alone by Faith, but as well, by good workes also. For that godly Disciple did somewhat more then belieue, giuing testimony of millions of admirable good deeds, as when he raised some from death to life, healed other some of their infirmities, Preached, and wrote manie comfortable Epistles, and ministred reliefe vnto the poore, whome hee calleth Saintes. Yea, hee did more then this, for hee laboured with his owne hands, to get and purchase his owne liuing. If then we will imitate this man of God, we must doe as hee did, who was not onely contented to belieue, but also hath giuen vs great proofes, of many godlie workes, and worthy Actions, meriting no little glorie and praise. This word (Follower,) is properlie spoken of him that attempteth to doe what his Maister hath done before, as a young Scholler, that composeth an oration, after the imi∣tation of Cicero, (the father of eloquence) although he cannot frame it so exquisitely, nor so eloquently, as his Author hath done, yet doth he studie, to doe it as well as he can, stri∣uing to come as nigh vnto his Phrase, as possible he may. And so must wee doe, labouring, trauelling, and doing what good wee are able, to giue testimonies of our selues, that wee are followers of his Sonne, and of his Apostles. For, our Sauiour him selfe, liuing (heere) vppon the earth amongst vs, did not be∣lieue onely, but did most religious workes also: so as, if wee will follow his Commande∣ment, wee must imitate him, not in his Faith alone, but as well in his good deeds, as the Apostles haue done before vs, who were dutifull and iust, doing (as their Maister did) thousands of good deeds, vnto the reliefe and comfort, of the soules and bodies of ma∣nie a one. Faith then cannot be sufficient for our saluation, without good works. For, were it good Iustice, that such a one as had done millions of of cruelties, cutting the throtes of the godlie, and robbing, spoyling, and tytannizing, vpon the Common-wealth, both by sword and fire, should be saued, because (as a Christian) hee belieueth that there is a God? Why? so to doe, were to make God to be without Iustice; and so consequently, to take it from him: For take away the properties of the subiect, & you take away the sub∣iect it selfe; dismember a man, and you seuer his bodie from him: Euen so, depriue God
Iustice, and you denie him to be GOD, for he can be no God without Iustice. That man, who (because hee shall tearme himselfe the neere seruant, and follower of his Prince) shall, vpon that securitie, exercise manie massacres, notable murthers, and egregious villanies, shall not escape, but (for all that) be punished by the Iudge, be∣cause (as we hope) we are to receiue good for doing good, and not if we doe what is bad and forbidden. Now, if the recompence for doing good deedes, and the punishment for com∣mitting euill Actions, are both taken away, to what ende (then) should wee talke of Iu∣stice? and Iustice being cashierde and banished from hence (vpon which the veriy Lawe it selfe is founded) all Religion, and Faith, all humane societie, and Commonwealths, must needs be ruinated, and quite ouerthrowne for euer. Should euery one be permitted to execute wickednes without daunger, to answere for the same; What then should wee doe with Iustice? for then euerie one would giue himselfe vnto euill and badnesse, seeing it is more sweet, and fuller of profite then goodnesse: and the rather, because that men are more prone by nature, to put in prac∣tise the same. Besides, if the guerdon and reward of well dooing were taken away, who would en∣dure any paine or labour, toyling and turmoyling his bodie, and sweating day and night, when hee shall finde his trauaile to be without recompence; and that his merit shall be no more, nor better, then his, which hath done wickedly? But let vs rather say, that there is a reward for doing good, of the good: and a punishment for the vngodly, by such as are wicked. For are there not Christians that shalbe damned? No doubt there are. But wherefore are they so condemned? Is it because they beleeue not rightly? or for that they had no Faith at all, neither for the one, nor for the other? For there is no Christan, be he neuer so leaud or badde, but doth belieue, otherwise hee should be tearmed a Turke, and not a Christian: why then are they adiudged vnto such an accur∣sed sentence? Euen for their badde deeds and vngodly actions. For be they not the verie wordes of the Almightie, when hee shall sit in his high Throne, at the last day in iudgement? Depart from mee, ye workers of iniquitie into Hell fire: and not, Away from me, yee faithlesse wretches, who haue not beleeued aright. What ouerthrewe Lucifer? onely his badde deeds. Hee presuming to dare to sit, in the place of his Soueraigne, and not his default of Faith. For he could nor belieue ill, seeeing that he visiblie saw, that which (Faith) commandeth vs to belieue. What droue our first father Adaw out of Paradise? what, but his badde dealings: for which he was chastised? What damned Iudas? euen that horrible and terrible wic∣kednes, which he committed against his owne conscience. That there is a recompence for liuing well, and a punishment for dooing ill: the Holie one, himselfe instructeth vs, when hee vsed this speech vnto Caine: If thou hast done iustly, shall thou not receiue thy reward? and if vngodlie, shall not sinne then stand knocking at thy gate? Hee vsing heere this word (Reward) which cannot be, without deseruing of the same. For vppon what occasion should such a one be remunerated with a rich reward, who hath done nothing worthie of anie recompence? And yet neuerthelesse, seeing God doth promise a guerdon vnto him that doeth well: we must needs conclude, that good workes deserues it, and that without them, faith is dead. The onely Sonne of the euerlasting Father, vsed the same words, when speaking of the Scribes and Pharisies, (who made a shewe to doe good workes) he said thus) Verilie, verilie, I say vnto you, these people haue receiued the reward of their works alreadie in this world. By which we may conclude, that there is an other world to come, in which, these wicked Hypocritas had bene recompenced for their works: If, they had not had their due, whilst they liued here vpon the earth. And hereby we learne, that there is a reward due vnto good workes, and that therefore, they are not vnprofitable (but (I say) not meri∣torious) although there haue bene such as haue denied this doctrine, because they might liue without discipline, to haue the raine of liberty in their own hands, and not to be sub∣iect vnto Iustice: to compasse which, they haue denied the commendations of good workes; to the ende, that euerie bodie might doe euill, without feare of punishment,
seeing that doing well, should be no more requited, then if they had committed euill. But ô yee hellish spirited, what wicked vices, what Tyrannous crueltie, what open robberies, and what base villanies, haue your fond and beastly errours brought into this world? For (before these your grosse opinions) were set abroach, no disordinate leaud∣nes raigned amongst vs, all Murther, Robbing, Treason, Cosenage, & deceit, being quite banisht from vs: whereas (now) such wicked minds, as you haue seduced, couet, rather to doe ill then well, because they feared no punishment for the same, and that their good workes were not (as they thought) recompenced at all. But many Authorities shewe you to Lye, yea, and naturall Iustice it selfe, doth tell you that you are in the wrong. For wherefore did that Maister command his bad seruant to be punished, who had not employed his Talent well, that was giuen vnto him at his departure: but that such as are workers of iniquitie, shall one day be punished? And that those, who like other good seruants, haue taken grrat paines, and laboured well, shall be rewarded most boun∣tifully, as they were of their Maister. Daniel the Prophet teacheth vs the very same doctrine, when he aduised Nabuche∣donozer, not alone to belieue, (to the intent hee may be pardoned for his fault) but to shewe the fruites of good workes: as to giue Almes vnto the poore, and to doe manie o∣ther deeds of Charitie, (which as the Apostle saith) is the most goodliest and holiest of all the other vertues. For this shall neuer die, but alwayes remaine fresh and aliue: whereas Faith shall cease, at what time we shall behold that great GOD, face to face, in whom we haue belieued; the hope whereof shall faile, when we enioy that diuine glorie, which wee expect and looke for. But diuine Charitie shall still flourish, because wee shall neuer giue ouer to remember (our acquaintance and friends, with whome wee haue liued heere vpon the earth, although we liue in heauen, praising God for them. This was the reason that the Apostle said, Although I were able (through Faith) to re∣moue Rockes, from one place into an other: yet, if I be without Charitie, I am like vnto on emptie Cimball, which can doe nothing but make a confused noyse. Small good then doth Faith without good works. Ananias and Saphira did belieue, nor were they voyde of Faith: and yet behold, how they were plagued with death, by Saint Peter, because they had done a most wicked and dissembling deed. For onely Charitie and not Faith, couereth the loathsomenesse, and the multitude of sinnes, as a garment doth the priuie parts of man. And as that King at the Marriage, commaunded that fellow to be cast into a dun∣gion of darknesse, where was nothing, but wailing and gnashing of teeth, because hee presumed to come vnto the Feast, without his wedding garment. Euen so, he that will not attire him selfe with the comely roabe of Charitie, shall be deliuered into the power of the Diuell, as one vnworthy to be admitted to come vnto the Banquet of Angells. Of small force then is Faith, without Good works: which our Sauiour witnesseth to be true, when hee attributeth the remission of Marie Magdalens sinnes, vnto the good worke which she had done for him, she hauing vsed such Charitie vnto her Maister: and therefore he said, Many sinnes are forgiuen her, because she loued much. Now Loue and Charitie, are, as it were Twinnes, and but one bodie; for hee that loueth not, cannot be kinde vnto his aduersarie: and therefore, the foresaid Marie, by reason that she had loued, and had shewed her selfe dutifull vnto our Sauiour, gained full forgiuenes of her sinnes: of whose kindnesse, Christ had spoken thereof (vnto his Dis∣ciples saying; Wherefore are you angrie with this Woman? shee hath done a good worke for me, and therefore deserueth well of mee. I see then, by these examples, that thou (most gratious Lord) expectest good works to come from man, because thine are so admirable: thou hauing taught vs, by the example of that Prince, that put to death those wicked Labourers, in his Vineyard, how thou wilt recompence such godly persons, as haue done well, and wilt punish the wicked, whom thou shalt finde to haue done euill. Let vs then endeuour by our vertuous liuing, to be made partakers of that im∣mortall glorie, which followeth well dooing, the sweetnesse of which, the very Painims
themselues found, in former time. For, how famous is Hercules become in the world, onely for dooing well, and for putting in practise many notable and braue enterprises? Where if he had done other∣wise, blacke shame, and perpetuall infamie, had for euer attended vpon him. Thus did the melancholike Shepheard discourse vnto himselfe, walking faire and softly towards the Caue, whilst as he went onwards on his way, hee might heare the me∣lodious harmonie of diuers sortes of Birds, to welcome the rising of the Sunne, which although they troubled him somewhat (considering his former deepe conceits) yet no doubt hee tooke delight at the same, if it be possible for wretched Louers to take anie pleasure, when they are exiled from the presence of their beaution? Ladies, as I feare me, they doe not. Besides, hee might behold a number of louely Flowers, to shewe their vermillion faces, at the first appearance of this glorious Lampe, all which, were causes to comfort himselfe. This iourney being no more weary vnto him, then it is vnto such Trauellers, who when they walke abroad (deuise of such things onely, as may inuite them to solace and ioy) whilst he thought the heauens had changed their nature, willing to yeeld him some recteation and contentment, considering the great number of afflictions that hee had suffered before. But he was not long of this opinion, but that hee quickly chaunged his minde, fin∣ding it to be quite contrarie, assoone as LOVE awaked him out of this pleasant dreame, and when he (once) bethought him of the absence of his froward Mistris. Hee that is troubled with a burning Feuer, hath manie daungerous fittes. One while, hee is vexed with a hote sweate, and another while, with a colde. One day it lea∣ueth him, and an other day it seazeth vpon him againe. So that still the strength of the disease, doeth dominiere ouer his bodie. Euen so, this our wretched Swaine, falleth a fresh into the Sea of his sorrowes, suffe∣ring shipwracke (oftentimes) in this Charibdis, of his deepe griefes, all which proceeded through the want of his Dianas companie. And had it not bene, but that hee had heard the sound of a straunge voyce, that droue away this sadde thought from him, hee had bene farre more oppressed with hea∣uie passions then before. But hee, (with an attentiue eare) hearing this Song, (sung not farre off from him) tooke a Truce for a while, with his dolefull wailings, and listened well vnto the same, as followeth. What but pale Death can serue as remedie, To ease my more then cruell paine? The Pilot that safe in the Hauen doth lie, To feare the Seas tempestuous rage doth shame. She happie is, that in this wretched earth, Can ridde be from all woes, through gentle death. But shee that cannot die, (liuing displeasde) Forc't without aide, for to endure her smart: Can no way haue her endlesse torments easde, But by her cries and sighes, sent forth from heart. But who can make a Sauadge minde ore-wilde, For to become calms, pittifull, and milde? The Mother faire, of Cupid's, blinded Boy, Could not her Corpse from soule see separate: Yet for Adonis, shee was full of noy, Seeing him slaine, by too vntimely Fate. Immortall powers, though freed from Death they bee, Yet (being grieu'd) they mourne as well as wee.
Apollo that same faithfull Louer true, When he sawe Daphne metamorphosed: Died not, yet he her chaunce long time did rewe, For Loue makes Gods to waile, and teares to shed. Death endeth euery amorous mortall warre, Yet in such wise to die, they happie are. I am a Nymph, therefore (as Phoebus was) From death exempt, so am I, yet am bound: My time and yeares in sighes and groanes to passe, Whilst ouermuch I gainst my selfe am found. To honour him, who is my deadliest fee, But where Loue is, there euer bideth woe. Yet doth that cruell wretch (who me doth scorne) Not altogether liue withouten griefe: Though for my loue to waile he was not borne, Whilst my hope's vaine, and his without reliefe. A Loyall Louer right is neuer seene, Well of two Ladies, at one time to deeme. Thus doe the heauens, reuengement (for me) take, And yet alas, this doth increase my cares: For (me) his torments worser farre doe make, And I am ill, because not well he feares. She that loues faithfull, maketh farre more mons For her friends hard mishap, then for her owne. A beautie more then earthly sacred right, The Subiect's of my euerlasting dule: Whilst I confesse, I, like a mortall wight, And yet the heauens, who all our actions rule, Nothing more perfect then the same ere sawe, The bad, as well as good, to fancie doth vs drawe. Arcas, presently knew by the voice, that it was the mestfull Orythia, and fearing least her importunate praiers might make him to giue ouer his former determination, he left her, turning by another way vnto the Rocke. In the meane time, the Nymph perceiuing him to flie from her presence, crieth out vpon him, exclaiming against his stubborne minde, & calling him vngratefull and vn∣kinde. Where we will leaue her (as now) cursing her hard fortune, and come againe vnto Arcas, (who being entered into the stonie Caue, and the old man (not as yet arriued there) began afresh to muse vpon the sweet graces of his Mistris, swimming with great delight in the Seas of her perfections, and not a little wondering how it were possible, that one creature alone should be possessed of so many fauours as she was, and yet know∣eth he not well whether he dreameth or waketh, whilest he standing (thus) in a browne studie, his tongue is silent, his eyes shut, his bodie mouelesse, and his soule as it were in a traunce. Now if he was so much rauished, in the onely contemptation of his Ladie, in what a taking had he bene then, if he had bene before the true presence, and liuely face of her indeed, when the onely bare conceit thereof, had so great power ouer him? He deuiseth within his heart of the beauties of her, and with a dumb pen, writeth them downe in the of role of his remembrance. One while he thinketh, he beholdeth those faire, long, and flaxen haires, she combi∣ning them, with a fine combe of Iuorie, and curling them in knots, making the heauens themselues to blush for very shame thereat, although they haue bene in steed of strong cordes, wherewith his libertie was bound, yet had he not the power to hate them, but
(rather) honoured and adored them, imagining that Venus her selfe, neuer ware any so goodly, and that not any Goddesse whatsoeuer she were, could haue the like, these Lo∣uers being of this humour, that there is no other deities but their Ladies. Another while he is busie, looking vpon her faire forhead (the right tipe of Maicstie) perswading him∣selfe, that Iupiter (although he be Soueraigne ouer all the Gods) had neuer one so stately, whilest he marketh how it is large, and without wrinkle, as being the enemie of all sor∣row, crueltie, and dishonour. Then he admireth her eye-browes, thin, louely browne, and hating all care, suppo∣sing verily that the Goddesse Diana, had neuer any so prettie. Belike then, this Nymph had berest all the Gods, and Goddesses of their best beauties? No doubt in his conceit they had, so much did he doate on her Loue. This done, he commeth downe somewhat lower vnto her eyes, apprehending the brightnes of them, although they were farre off from him. As that Captaine that is ouercome, knoweth well the valour of him that did vanquish him, or as the Shepheard remembreth the lightning which flashed vpon his flocke as they fed in the Meadow, euen so did he suppose he (still) felt newe darts, which she whirled at him: for grieuous is the thought of sad and heauie things, they being the Pa∣rents of all our disasters. Ah (said he vnto himselfe) how beautifull are her eyes? and yet not so beautifull, as piercing and terrible, resembling those of Circes, faire to see, and beautifull to behold, and yet, who looked vpon them, was changed from a man, into a beast. They are both faire and cruell, faire to view, shining as the Sunne doth in the springtime, that driueth away all bitter weather: and cruell as the Basiliske, whose onely sight, killeth such as doth but behold her. There is the lodge of Loue, with whom disdaine and fiercenes soiourne, and there sometimes doth pleasure abide, but it is, when the other twaine be abroad, they hauing more interest in them, then she hath. Hated they are, and yet loued, as the young Schol∣ler doth his Maister. O sacred Loue, that take religious feare with him, for his companion: and O how iust and goodly a thing is Amitie, when it is married vnto awfull respect, although (farre from them) the flame is neuerthelesse felt, as those who stand behind the foremost at a fire, perceiue the heate thereof also, as well as they that stand before. So doth the traitor Ixion throwne downe with lightning into hell, feare and suspect the flashy lightning of Iupiter. Hauing left her eyes, he commeth vnto her nose, neither too big, nor too little, but comely, and of a most excellent proportion, in the making thereof. The eyes, nor nose of Pallace, the Goddesse of battaile, are not more amiable, nor more angrie, although she be fierce and couragious in martiall exploits. From thence he commeth vnto her lips, where he is drowned in a poole of sweetnes, when he doth but thinke of the daintie colour, and the rare softnes thereof, whilest desiring in his minde, but to touch them, through ioy and feare, he falleth into a sownd. The more sweet and soft he iudgeth them to be, the more he findeth his griefe to be bitter, because he cannot touch them. A man careth not to enioy a matter of sinall waight or valew, but to be hindered from the possession of a rich treasure, gaulleth him at the very heart. Neuer were the Cloue Gilliflowers in Iune, halfe so daintie, neither the Damaske Ro∣ses of the spring, a quarter so beautifull as these, yet were they ruddie like the Roses, but farre more dangerous to be touched: for her pure honour, and her chaste thoughts, were the pricking thornes, which would not permit any to approach nere vnto that peerlesse muske tree. More soft and supple were they then the lips of Iuno, when Iupiter did kisse them, and more tender, and louely, then those of bashfull Europa, or blushing Alcest. Now he remembreth that goodly ranke of orient Pearle, emprisoned betweene two Rocks of right Currall, from which issued forth such hunnie words, as rauished his soule, not vnlike vnto Orphens, who forced sencelesse creatures to follow him, with the sound of his well tuned Harpe.
Neuer did Mercurie talke more grauely or more eloquently then she, although he was appointed to be Ambassador for the Gods: great was his griefe, when he found him∣selfe depriued from so happie a place, from whence (sometimes) he had heard so many wise and admirable speeches, to proceed from his Ladie, he being with the onely re∣membrance thereof, so much enchanted, as his soule was not willing to returne backe into his bodie againe, not hauing power to leaue her, no more then the dumb stones and budding Trees were of force to retire from the entising Musicke of the Thracian Poet. From thence he came, vnto her smiling and well formed cheeke, no Queene Ap∣ple drawne red, with the pensill of Phoebus, in the mouth of September, hauing so louely and naturall a colour. There was no need of cunning painting, nor deceitfull varnish, to abuse the eye, making the faces of women in time, farre more foule, then before: for what need hath subtill Art (when curteous nature hath done her part) to finde any deuise, see∣king to better, what she rather maketh worse? The checke of Semele, neuer came neere in beautie, vnto her pure die: not vnlike that daintie morning, wherein the Sunne shineth in his pride; or like vnto a piece of faire white Alablaster, mixed with a little vermillion red. Her necke was slender and thinne, ri∣sing vp with state, like a curious small Turret in a Princely pallace. Her dimpled chinne was prettie and round. But her beautious brests exceeded all the rest. There lay the mountaine snowe which could neuer be dissolued with the heate of any Sunne. There was the priuie chamber and closet royall, of honour and chastitie. And there was that christall Riuer of pure milke, where Cupid (being wearie of playing the wanton) vsed to bath and refresh himselfe very often. And there, the same God was wont to repose him∣selfe, betwixt those two beautifull Apples, they being farre more pretious, then that golden fruite of the Hesperides: yet were they hard as Diamonds, although the chiefe glorie of that race present. Her hands pleased him much, seeing them so faire, so long and so supple, the fin∣gers whereof, were excellent Musitions, most diuinely playing vpon the siluer Lute, and well tuned Cytherne. To be briefe, neuer was there any creature so exquisite and excellent in all points as she was (in his conceit) he comparing her first vnto the three Goddesses, assembled vp∣on the mount Ida: then vnto the Nymphs: and lastly, vnto mortall women: accounting her to be farre more faire, then that great Lady so often rauished: or more beautious then the Loue of Demetrius, or Marke Antonies sweet Saint: yea, Flora and Angelica, were but homely pieces vnto her, nor all such gallant Lasses, as flourished heretofore, or should come hereafter. Thus was our Swaine rauished, with the rare feature of his worthie Mistris, and as the couetous wretch sigheth, when he commeth to count in small summes, the great trea∣sures he hath bene spoiled of, euen so did Arcas take on and lament, when he began to dreame deeply of the greatnes of his vnsupportable losse. Meane space, the Sunne began (openly) to appeare, waking men out of their drow∣sie sleepes, opening their eyes, and prying with his beames into their chambers, when the old manrising, and comming into the Rocke, found our Shepheard so busie (about musing of his Mistris) as he perceiued not, whē he was entered, & therfore he came neer vnto him, and saluted him, whilest the other stood stone still, like vnto a Rocke, resem∣bling that statue of salt, into which the wife of Lot was turned; which the old Magitian perceiuing, he came and pulled him by the sleeue, saying; How now (man) what cheare? where is your minde now? and why suffer you it so long, before it doe his ordinarie due∣tie? That dammage, which a sencelesse creature doth (ouer whom his Maister hath pow∣er) is laid vpon him, and not vpon the beast. We ought wisely to rule, what is commit∣ted vnto vs to gouerne: which if it be so, then why doest not thou looke vnto thy soule, but rather doest permit her to wander (thus) abroad, seeing that without her thou see-mest as a dead creature? Call home for shame, call home (I say) thy wits together, and resolue to submit thy selfe vnto the iudgement of the Gods, and to doe as they shall command thee: for our griefes moue not them, neither doe our teares, appease their
rigour towards vs. Ah Father answered the Shepheard, how can he who hath no more power ouer his slaue (because he hath past ouer his freedome vnto another) dispose of him and com∣mand him, as he was wont? and how wilt thou that I beare sway ouer my soule, hauing none within me, since I haue resigned it vnto my Ladie, who disposeth thereof, as she best pleaseth. And herein I resemble that miserable marchant, whose ship being driuen against a Rocke, scarce saueth his naked selfe, hauing before seene all his goods and seruants to be cast away and drowned: or rather, I am like vnto that haplesse Duke of Ithaca, who hauing but one poore leaking vessell, got a shore, through the helpe of the Sea Nymph. Can he whom the cruell Law hath subiected vnder the will of another (and being his poore drudge and slaue) doe as he faine would, and dispose of himselfe as he listeth? You know he cannot: neither can I doe as I would, but as I may, for I am my Mistris slaue, and although she is not with me, yet my heart (which serueth in steed of a Table vnto Loue, to draw her beautifull conceit) presenteth her euery minute before me, so as I seeme to see her liuely, the sight whereof doth take away my sences from me: for worthy things causeth vs to burne, in loue of them, and with a sweet kinde of force, drawe vs (of our owne accord) to come vnto them. Then maruaile no more, though thou findest me thus out of temper. If meere griefe, be of power to procure death, then what may Loue doe, which not onely seazeth vpon the bodie, but likewise vpon the soule? scarce had I wet the soales of my feete, en∣tring into this wide Ocean of sundrie conceits, when thou withdrewest me from the same, as that carefull father doth his harmelesse child from the brim of some pit, where∣in he might fall, and be drowned. But alas, what wouldest thou haue me to doe? Suffer me I pray thee, and let me alone in my musing, for there is nothing more pleasant vnto a wofull man, then to dreame of such delights as he hath once tasted, because (as then) he thinketh still to tast them. I was dreaming of that contentment which the companie of my Diana hath heretofore brought me, why then hast thou disturbed me in the same? when perhaps I shall not encounter with so sweet a thought I know not when againe, and the rather, for that a leuen houres and three quarters of a day, are destined for the mishap of man, and onely one poore quarter appointed for his contentment: of which small space of time, many haue bene depriued, in the number of which I am the chiefe. No no, replied the old man. Not to thinke of misfortunes, maketh a man as happie as if he had neuer bene afflicted with any: for he cannot be said to be sicke, that liueth without any feeling of griefe or disease: so he is not wretched, that neuer remem∣breth his former disasters, the thought whereof is the occasion that maketh vs so sad. Driue then these idle fancies out of thy braine. Hardly could courteous Dido entreate the wandring Prince of Troy, to repeate and report the ouerthrow of his countrie, although he was much beholding vnto her, for irkesome is the calling to minde of such matters. Away then with these toyes, and begin thy discourse, where thou last didst leaue, which will like thee better, and the rather, when thou shalt account thy happie for∣tunes. Ah good father (answered Arcas) neuer hath my tongue bene vsed to talke of any good fortune, that hath hapned vnto me heretofore (for few or none haue I had) but onely to sigh forth my strange and wofull losses. What Sunne haue these my drerie eyes euer beheld, without new floods of teares? and what darkesome night hath couered them with neuer so heauie a sleepe, but that fresh griefes haue growne before the breake of day within my soule? My wofull pilgri∣mage in this vnconstant world, hath alwaies bene vnluckie, dismall and vnfortunate, and therefore I would to God, that death had abridged the same. But why should you thinke that I could liue (and languish thus) without bethinking me of my losse? Nothing pincheth the heart more, then a mans ouerthrow, because it is long before he can recouer himselfe againe, and for that it will aske much labour and
paine: yea, it is so deeply inprinted within vs, that although we haue in time repaired and amended our selues, yet still there remaineth some one marke or another, that galleth vs, euen at the very quicke. Who euer sawe man (hauing endured great hinderance and mishaps) but that he sometimes thinketh thereon, yea and now and then bewaileth the same, although he haue neuer so great a courage? We are (all) good registers of such aduersities as happen vnto vs, but not of prosperitie: and sooner can we call to minde an iniurie done vnto vs, then remember a benefit or good turne, which we haue receiued: for this old sinne of our great grandlire Adam, draweth vs alwaies, rather vnto bad, then good. This is the reason, that men for the most part are naturally giuen sooner to slaunder, then to defend the good name and credit of their neighbous: and so likewise this is the cause, I so liuely feele and apprehend the remembrance of my calamities, not wishing a∣ny thing so much, as to be confined within some Rocke alone like a Recluse; to the end, I might the better meditate vpon them, and the more bitterly bewaile them. Now (quoth the old gray-beard) I see thou art in the wrong, for we must not haue our eyes alwaies vpon the earth, but sometimes we must as well looke vp towards hea∣uen. Wherefore serueth this diuine reason, which maketh vs Lords ouer all other crea∣tures, if by her aide we repulse not such mortall passions, as come into the world with vs? And to what end doth a father send his Sonne vnto the Vniuersitie, most willingly de∣fraving his charges, if he should not learne and enrich himselfe in knowledge? Euen so, why should we be counted reasonable? and wherfore hath our God done so much for vs, If we cannot through the aide and helpe of reason, wade through the depth of these hu∣mane miseries? To what purpose hath a Generall of an Armie Royall, hundreds of Captaines, and thousands of Souldiours, if he doth not employ them in the warres, but rather permit∣teth the enemie to ouerthrow them? As victualls, are set vpon the Table, whereon to feede, so is reason bestowed vpon vs, to vanquish our naturall passions, and most dead∣liest crosses. Neither can any iustly excuse themselues, when they shall confesse to haue bene o∣uercome, through these mortall impediments, seeing they were armed with weapons to resist them, which are discretion and reason. The bruite beastes, that haue lost their little ones (although they haue no wisedome) take not on more, neither shewe more tokens of follie and rage, then that man doth, who suffereth himselfe to be carried away with griefe, and yet in the meant time he is called their Lord and Maister, because of reason onely: but he is much vnworthie of this Soueraigntie, if he knoweth no better how to exercise his royall dignitie then they: as he is vnmeete and vnfit to haue the name of a King, who as a Tyrant doth most vniustly violate the Lawes of the Realme, ouerthrow∣ing all Iustice, and all good orders, belonging vnto the same. Either thou must be a man or a beast, if thou art a man, then carrie thy selfe like a man, rightly employing reason, which maketh thee one. If thou be a beast, neuer then steale away this qualitie belonging vnto man, conten∣ting thy selfe with that which is fit for a beast, and so shall thy fault be the lesse. For we wonder not so much at an offence done by a beast, neither condemne him vnto death for the same, because (as a beast) we know him to be without reason. But man we punish seuerely, for that he (being a man) ought not to commit any such hainous crime, but ra∣ther gouerning himselfe by reason, seeke to shun and auoid the danger thereof. We cannot deeme the opinion of an ignorant person, and one without knowledge, to be cruell or bad, especially when he iudgeth according vnto his small skill: but wicked and vniust, may we tearme the sentence of a wise and learned Iudge, if he shall giue his censure, contrarie to all reason and Lawe. Shew then thy selfe to be a man, and a right man indeed, chusing Reason for thy guide, by which meanes thou shalt tame thy sencelesse desires, and keepe vnder these more then extreame passions. Good, and of great force (reuerend sire) replied the Shepheard, were your perswasi∣ons, if you spake vnto a free man, who because he is not bound vnto another, might
easily through the helpe of reason vanquish his naturall imperfections. But although the slaue, may perhaps doe a thing worthie of commendation, yet, thinke you he dareth attempt it, without the good will of his Maister? Euen so, although Louers were fit to bring to passe, as much as you speake of, and to maister their mortall passions, through reason, yet are they so shroadly bound and tied vnto this hard Lawe, as they are not able to doe any commendable or good thing, vnlesse it please Loue, who forceth them to be slaues vnto their Ladies. The Beare, by nature is wild and strong, yet, when he is taken, bound, & made tame by a man, what great proofes of his strength can he shew? Euen so I will not denie, but man is wise, and furnisht with reason, and yet I say he cannot aide nor helpe himselfe, as long as he shall be subiect vnto Cupids Lawes. A King, that is a prisoner, is for all that a King still, his Realme is, where it was before, and so is his Crowne and Scepter, and yet notwithstanding all this, during his imprison∣ment, he can doe no act of a King, neither make proofe of his regall authoritie, because he is depriued of his libertie. So fareth it with men that are in loue, they (still) are men, and yet neuerthelesse, they cannot doe the office of men, because they are Bond-men, and subiect vnto the will of an other. Besides, if naturall maladies, which as thou saiest are subiect vnto the reason of man, oppresse and ouercome him many times, causing him to fall mad and franticke; how much more easily may Loue enforce the same, who not onely, is greater then these humane accidents, but also then the Gods themselues? Wonder not then, although you see many Louers without wit or discretion; for of two poysons, the lesse feeble, must yeeld vnto the stronger: and where two contrarie ene∣mies he, the field must needs remaine vnto him that is of most force: so where two such great powers as Loue and Reason meete together, the weaker, must needs yeeld vnto the other which is Loue, that maketh many Louers liue with small or no reason at all. To argue or dispute, that Loue is of lesse force then Reason, were but a grose error, (for the wisest next vnto the Gods) haue not onely with reason confuted this absurditie, but by experience it selfe, haue tried as much, in their owne proper persons. Let vs then excuse Louers in their vnreasonable actions, which appertaine onely vnto men, as Iupiter winketh at them, for breaking their Othes: and blame me no more, if I (as a wretched caitife and slaue) am forced (maugre my selfe) to giue ouer that, that is most excellent and rare in man, to follow the will of my Maister, at whose command I am. Well then (said the Magitian) I will vrge thee no more, for it is but reason that he that is in health, yeeld gently vnto the diseased in his conceit, and that the fortunate, iump in opinion with such as are miserable, making shew to know of nothing, but what the other is willing; because they are alreadie but too much afflicted with their misfortunes, without galling them afresh, crossing them in their speeches, and wrin∣ging out of them that, which they are loth to bewray vnto the world. Let vs therefore giue ouer this disputation, yet with this conclusion, that nothing can exceed the right wise man, & that no faults are to be excused (through what extre∣mities soeuer they shall proceed) in him, who will be counted reasonable and wise, yeel∣ding somewhat vnto Loue, in thy fauour: and therefore prosecute thine old Historie, comforting thy minde with the remembrance of such matters, as shall be more accep∣table and pleasing vnto thee. Content answered the Shepheard, if there be no other re∣medie, and thereupon after he had a while pawsed, he thus began. What can be more gratious, vnto a condemned person, then to heare of his par∣don? and what obligation is more deare vnto a man, then that which doth cancell his debts? Cruell and barbarous, vngodly and wicked were Brutus and Cassius accounted, in that they slew Caesar (although they shadowed their fault vnder the colour of doing their common wealth good) because they had receiued their owne liues of him be∣fore, who might (if he so had pleased) haue put them both to death. So sweet was the pardon my Ladie gaue me, which quite changed my minde, resto∣red
mee to life, and draue away all desire of death from me. Straunge and extraordinarie are the meanes, by which the Heauens lend ayde and assistance vnto miserable men, especially, when they least expect any such succour to be at hand. Thousands of daungers did constant Marius escape, and in the ende, came to be chiefe Ruler in Rome. The Heauens are so curteous, as hardlie will they suffer, that anie man be ouer∣throwne or vndone, and fewe haue there bene, that haue offered to lay violent handes vpon themselues, which they haue not saued. Being as then both iocund and merrie, I feasted, and made much of poore For∣tunio, within my little Cabbin, who vppon a day, sitting at the Table with mee, began thus to talke. Certainely, I will neuer maruell more, to see thy face portrayed forth with griefe, seeing thou louest so faire a Ladie. For farre more daungerous and difficult is his Tra∣uaile who aduentureth beyond the Seas, to finde such curious marchandizes as be pre∣cious and rare, then the paines an other taketh, who is contented with such things as his owne Countrey affordeth. No more can thy enterprise be other then heauie and full of perill, thou louing no ordinarie Beautie, but such a one as is most peerlesse and admirable. And therefore is thy minde more haughtier then other Louers, who followe faces lesse faire then thine by oddes. But yet let this be thy comfort, that the more thou doest hazard thy selfe in this so dangerous an Attempt, the more glorious shall the victorie be, when thou shalt obtaine the same. For not matters of small importance, but such as be hard and vnlikely to be atchieued, deserue honour. Vertue oftentimes making her selfe knowne amongst foule Vices, as the Sunne doth in middest of the starres. But I pray thee tell mee, who set thee in hand with this second Taske: and what gentle God heated thee with this other flame? seeing thou so long time, didst vowe ser∣uice vnto the diuine Iulietta; who when shee shall know hereof, will condemne thee for chaunging, and account thee as one fickle and vnconstant. Ah Fortunio, (replyed I) none can iustlie conceiue such finister opinion of mee. For doest not thou knowe, that my Loues were neuer other then honest and commen∣dable? I neuer loued the Bodie of anie woman, so much as I did her soule. It was the beautie of the minde, and not the perfection of her personage that I esteemed, and therefore doest not thou (call to membrie) that onely sighes, haue bene the fruites of my loues? He cannot be tearmed a Thiefe or Robber, that liketh and seeketh for all such qua∣lities, as Vertue maketh amiable, in anie subiect, where they are found. Neither will the wise be angrie, or offended at all, that their equalls are accounted of, and that their perfections are honoured and blazed abroade, as well as their owne bee. Long since, the auncient Sages of Sparta, neuer fell out amongst themselues, nor were iealous, the one of the other, if many of them had cast their affection vpon one goodly childe or other: because, they all striuing to exceede one an other in good will, endeuoured within themselues, to bring vp the same youth, to be as perfect as might bee. How then, can my famous Iulietta condemne mee, (or once thinke ill of mee?) if I (hauing heeretofore exalted, carrolized, and blazoned abroad, her rare Thewes,) doe now take Truce with my Penne, to the ende I might the more casilie bestowe a little time, in displaying, (by my writings) the excellent gifts of an other Ladie, who doth par∣ticipate with her Vertues? The loue that a kinde Father beareth vnto one of his Children, doth not hinder him, but that hee may make much of the rest. And the white colour that one estee∣meth of, (in his owne conceit) is no such let, but that hee may (as well) like, what is sable and blacke.
This word Vnconstant, or Wanering, is meant by such sensuall and voluptuous Lo∣uers, as seeke and hunt after pleasure onely, (delighting also in chaunge) and neuer ma∣king account of Vertue, as I doe. For of what Inconstancie can the faire and learned Iulietta taxe me, if (without ha∣uing broken my word vnto her) I honour her, as much as euer I did before? Where∣as, cruell should that honour be vnto mee, and hardly should shee deale with mee, if she should forbid me to reuerence and esteeme of an other Ladie, who deserueth the same dutious respect as shee doeth: As a iealous Husband is cruell and vnkinde vnto his chaste wife, if he shall prohibite and hinder her, to loue such qualities as are commen∣dable and praise-worthie. Honest Affection is not like vnto foolish Loue, for the one beareth and endureth many things with patience, it being possible for one man to loue manie vertuous sparits, without reproach, and all at one time: where the foolish Louer cannot loue ante more, then one fond woman at once: except hee be counted a Cozoner and forsworne. He cannot be iudged to be wise and of discretion, who (for his owne respect) will seeke to hinder in what hee may, that such things as are vertuous and commendable, should not be liked, nor accounted of. But such a one is not of himselfe, worthie of anie (Loue) at all: For to oppose ones selfe against the honour which is giuen vnto Vertue, is to be her mortall enemiet Vertue being worthie to be reuerenced and prised, in what manner soeuer she is found, as a rich Ring, is to be accounted of, vpon what finger soeuer it is put. Poore was Homer, and yet his Learning brought him to be respected, hee hauing had (bestowed vpon him) thousands of Honors, worthie of eternall glorie, yet if hee should haue sought to haue swallowed vp all these great Fauours done vnto him, and haue studied by all the meanes hee could to crosse others that deserued well, seeking to keepe them backe from such dignities, as were awarded vnto them: hee not onely should haue bene counted both grosse and ignorant, but also spitefull, malicious, and ill giuen. And so would the world repute of the matchlesse Iulietta, if shee should stomacke and take in ill part, that her equalls should haue such praise, as they but worthilie me∣rite. For although now I loue Diana, yet doe I not (anie way) giue ouer to like Iulietta. But the Schoole-maister sometimes giueth ouer teaching, graunting leaue vnto his Scholler to goe play: not suffering him alwayes to stand poaring vpon his booke: Euen so, I most humble must intreat her, to permit mee for a while, to sound forth the praises of Diana abroad, as I haue (alreadie) done hers. But now repose thy selfe Fortunio, and take thy quiet rest, for I perceiue thou art as yet wearie of thy great trauaile and labour, and we will hereafter finde a more conue∣nient leisure, to talke of these our olde matters. Wherevpon, the poore soule tooke mee at my word, and beeing (very willing to sleepe indeed,) presentlie went and layde him downe vpon a bedde, where hee rested soundly. Meane while, (vpon the suddaine) I was ioyfull, as that Captaine, who (hauing with stood the brunts and hazardes of Fortune,) returneth home, victour of the fielde: composed these Verses following. A fierce LOVE, that burned hast my hart with milde flame, In my Mistris sweet thoughts, thoughts for me too high, to reach too: And with deepe desire, doest make mee for to adore her. Ah proud LOVE, that lik'st our wailings, laugh'st for to see still, Our Breasts wounded all with goare, through heauenly Beautie, Through glaunce of such sparkling Eyes, as into our soules diue. After so much done vnto mee, now hast thou the courage After so many hurts th'ast done mee, now for to helpe mee?
And to abridge my paines? Speake (sweete Desire) I doe pray thee. Ah, but alas, what a Follie were it for mee to thinkese? Thy crueltie, thou nere giest ouer; Thou to the world comst Our Faults seuerely to punish, as the Gods Hang-man. Mars, by (their sufferance) knew thy too wanton a Mother. When thou into the world wast brought forth, like to a Bastard. Of Female bloodshed th' art Sonne, and of bloody murther: Foule fall thee therefore, that hast most shamefully cousned Thousands of Heroick spirits, whome wee doe Gods call: Canst thou then falsly breaking the lawes of thy Byrth-right, Curteous (now) become, and be not like to thy Father? Canst thou prooue better then thy Mother, who was an Harlot? No, no: for ripe Grapes from Thistles, neuer can we gather: Nor can I hope (once) well, that thou beeing proud, euer after Hast minde Gentle, to turne for my good, good for to doe mee. No (LOVE) I confesse, I not deserue, whome I doe honour, Worthie she is for the Gods, and too too fure is shee, for me. Too too vnworthie I am, t' enioy her, whom I doe loue so, Onely to thinke that I loue so faire a soule, doth appease paine. All my paine, and my torments, though they be as immortall, When I remember, that in her liues, what is adorned; How that the wisedome is in her of Pallas, abounding, How that portly Gate of Iuno, is in her walking. And how for Beautie (as Venus, shee's a Goddesse. Then goe thy wayes (Cupid,) packe hence, for well am I pleased, Thy helpe, nor thine ayde to assist mee, ought doe I care for. Happier I can neuer be, then when I behold her. Whom I doe highly prise, reuerence, and obey, aboue all things. And farre more then pleasures false, (Lusts chiefest Allurings) Which fond Loners buy full deare, ioyes, which soone doe away flitte, And likewise kill vs, long, long before our time's come. I doe not honour her, (for to dishonour her) for her Vertues are that I like, so they her minde haue adorned. For where Vertue is, there's a minde, Vnconquered euer. Nor will I crane any other guerdon, whilst I doe liue here. What's diuine will I loue, and what's worthily steemed, For such praise hath shee wonne, as she shall liue euerlasting. These Verses I kept, to present them vnto my Diana, hoping to find her in the same good minde, as I left her, and to gaine some one small fauour or other for my reward of her. But things that are framed slightly, are of little or no account of all: & warre it selfe, hath not so manie deuises and sundrie effects, but LOVE hath farre manie more. And yet no maruell, for hee being a tender and delicate childe, cannot chuse, but by nature must needs be mutable and vnconstant: And therefore it is no small misfortune vnto men, that are forced to obey, not a graue, and well experimented Maister. But this peeuish Boy, from whom want of yeares, taketh away all knowledge of Rea∣son, which as wee growe in bodie, so doeth it sprout forth in vs; For wretched is that Realme, that is gouerned by a Childe: because verie hardly without stumbling, can a blinde man leade another, without a light. Now I being merrie at the hart, and as iocund as might bee, went to see if I could finde out my Mistrisse, when thinking to haue no reason, nor occasion at all to feare, I then found her quite contrarie vnto my hopefull expectation. As Mowers are wonderfullie amazed, when as (the Sunne shining faire and cleare) they see vppon the suddaine, great showres of raine to streame downe, with manie hor∣rible flashings of Lightning and Thunder, (and much like vnto a blustering Tempest) a terrible Whirle-winde, breaking forth of the prisons of Aeolus, carrying away their
greene heapes of grasse, and other things, (as a troupe of Wolues doe bleating Sheepe) so that in the ende, they are forced to throwe away their sickles and Sithes, not once dreaming of any such pittifull chaunces before: Euen so hapned it vnto mee, I not loo∣king for any such hard fortune. Neuer went any thing more nearer vnto my heart then this did, I beeing so daun∣ted therwithall, as I was almost at the point of death. For hauing sought out my La∣die, whome: I expected should be as curteous and debonaire, as I had left her the day before, I found her quite and cleane altered from her former disposition; she looking vppon me with a most fierce and disdainefull countenance, not vouchsafing so much as to speake one milde word vnto me, or to accept of my Verses, which I (in humble wise did offer vnto her. Alas (thought I) what meaneth this? and how contrarie are the proceedings of LOVE, vnto all other things? For they chaunge alwayes, and this their suddaine alte∣ration, altereth still against the hope of Louers. Other men seeing their businesse to fall out well, looke for some happie issue there∣of. But in Loue, when our matters are prettilie well, and likely to prooue best, then are wee driuen most of all to feare; and when they are past all hope, then haue wee the chiefest cause to expect the best. If this encounter was not farre more bitter and vnfortunate, then the meeting of a Thiefe is vnto the way-faring man, iudge you (good Father,) for it is too grieuous a Corsiue vnto the innocent person, to be condemned vnto death, and yet not so much as once to heare nor vnderstand his iust defences in the same. But in the meane time, I must perforce swallow downe this vnwelcome Potion. As the Slaue that is runne away, beeing taken and brought backe againe vnto his Lord, trembleth and feareth sore, being forced to endure what punishment soeuer, shall be inflicted vpon him. Euen so, there was no other remedie, but that I must needs abide the displeasure of my Misters, and take patiently, what it should please her for to impose vpon mee. I know not whether any olde conceit comming afresh into her minde, had chaunged her former humour, or whether some other new opinion (conceiued without reason,) had made her so outragious or disdainefull towards mee. But whatsoeuer it was, neuer did I see her to looke so angerlie vpon me before. As the Maister of a Shippe is passing sadde and heauie, who hauing gotten verie nigh vnto the Hauen, and beginning to cast Anker, perceiueth himselfe to be carried backe againe into the maine Sea, by a suddaine storme, his Shippe being ready to runne vpon euery Rocke, and so to sinke and drowne. Euen so it was my lucke to perish euen in the Hauens mouth, and beeing escaped of a sicknes, then to die vpon the sudden. And thus you see how iust my complaints were. For more cruell are those dartes which vnlooked for pierce vs, then those that wee knowe of: and more sharpe is the paine, that commeth vpon the suddaine, then when we did (before) expect it. Being then fallen into this suddaine mischaunce, I knewe not what order to take, nor what resolution to resolue vpon, but only such as desperate wretches vse, which was to make away my selfe, and to haue recourse vnto the selfe-same death, which I had here∣tofore chosen, whereby I might rid me of my torments. And now I was entring into that great and beaten path of desperate caytifs, hoping by this means to bring an end to all my troubles: which dangerous course I had quick∣ly taken, had not the curreous heauens, bene more pittifull vnto mee, then I was vnto my selfe, making vaine and frustrate my former intention and meaning. O how hard is it (sometimes) for a man to die, and sometimes againe, how easilie may he dispatch himselfe? The wise man saith, that mans life is as brittle as glasse, that is, quickly broken: and yet notwithstanding, many liue longer then they would, wishing to die, although they cannot. For such as goe merrilie vnto their deaths, because they hope their miseries shall end with their liues, lament not at all for the losse thereof, but rather thinke, they haue a happie turne. As the sicke Patient that couragiously swalloweth downe his bit∣ter
Pills, which if hee were well and in health, were neuer able to doe it. Being throughly resolute what to doe, I now gaue ouer weeping and sighing, one∣lie I accused my Destinies; making mee one while fortunate, and then againe misera∣ble. Whilst in the meane space, I did a little complaine of my Mistrisse, but yet with such respect, and in such a reuerend manner, as she could take no exceptions against me at all. This done, I went to die for her, and yet durst I not terme her to be the occasion of my death: Not vnlike vnto these holie and deuout persons, (who although they be plagued with all sortes of miseries,) neither dare, nor will venture to call the Gods the Authours of their wretchednes. Me thought I was but too fortnnate, to die for so worthie a subiect, and that I was ouer-bountifully recompenced (for all my troubles) to haue that glory, as to haue seene my cruell Saint, for whom I dyed. O faithfull and loyall LOVE, that will not permit (what paines soeuer I endu∣red) that I should not complaine of mine enemie. So Pyramus dying for his Thisbes sake, thought not himselfe vnfortunate: neither accused her for his death. And so was I as willing to followe the same course, as that braue Caualier of Rome was, who boldly leaped into the swallowing Gulfe: or like his Countrey-man, that with as great courage thrust his fist into the fire. A matter that is alreadie well determined of, (be it neuer so hard,) is halfe dispat∣ched at the first: And there is nothing that looseth more time, then vncertaine reso∣lution. I had now got vp, vpon the toppe of the same Rocke (where I was before,) min∣ding to finish my loathed life, and was readie with a braue manly heart, to fling my selfe downe headlong into the bottome of the Sea, thinking to make my selfe a Citizen of the kingdome of Thetis: when the Nymph Orythia, (who still haunted mee, but in vaine, for my Loue) caught hold of mee by the arme, hindering mee from drowning my selfe, in those salt Ocean waues. As that Traueller is astonisht, who seeth the Skies to chaunge and skowle, whilst the Clowdes looke darke and bigge with raine: euen so was I amazed, when I saw my selfe so strangely preuented of my purpose. I knewe not whether I should take this which shee had done, in good part, or in ill, shee hauing disturbed mee in my desperate Action: Wherevpon, I looked vpon her, and sighing, as one that had bene awaked out of a dead sleepe, at what time he dreamed of some pleasant matter, spake thus vnto her. What is the reason (cruell as thou art) what is the reason I say, that thou shouldest thus oppose thy selfe against my good? What iniurie hast thou receiued at my hands, that thou shouldest thus bee a let and obstacle, vnto the ending of my miscries? and wherefore shouldest thou beare so spitefull a disdaine, to see mee ridde of all my griefes and troubles? Hard is my happe aboue all others, that when I am readie and willing to die, to a∣uoyd these my more then insupportable torments, I am still crossed and barred in this my chiefest desire. Alacke, Alacke, how vnlikely is it, that I shall finde comfort whilst I liue, when being at the very point to die, I cannot finde helpe to dispatch my selfe? Goe, goe, hard-harted as thou art, withdraw thy selfe from mee, (the chiefest foe I haue vnto my rest) and let it suffice thee, (that my plagues abound too much alreadie) without thine aide, to make my woundes more mortall and deadly, then they were be∣fore. The Nymph (hearing me say so, replyed thus.) Shepheard, Shepheard, if in the olde world there haue bene anie, that for casting away themselues, haue deserued fame, (although they were farre vnworthie thereof,) yet was it for some great occasion, and by reason of some laudable subject, and not for a vaine and trifeling matter, as thine is. And yet I will tell thee one thing, that so farre off is that man that murthereth himselfe, from true glorie, to challenge vnto himselfe the name of Constant, as quite contrarie to thy conceit, he rather deserueth shame and infamie. For he that is constant, endureth
aduersitie, with the same countenance as he did prosperitie, without being moued or pas∣sionated, one iotte at all, as that worthie Romane Marius was. Such as hauing not this resolute vertue of Constancie, and because they want true courage of the minde,A Sentence. to resist these worldly afflictions, (seeke straitwayes how to ridde themselues of their liues) deserue no praise or commendations at all, but ought to be accounted as most abiect, and white-liuered Cowards. Doeth he merite to taste of pleasure, that neuer suffered paine? to be a comman∣der, who neuer did obey? or to be partaker of honour, who neuer did hazard himselfe to winne the same? I thinke not. Euen so, such men deserue no grace nor fauour of the Gods at all, who cannot patiently beare out such tribulations, as are sent them from aboue, by reason of their sinnes:A Seatence. and therefore (thinking to escape them) goe about to murther themselues. Tell mee I pray thee, shall the Gouernour of that Cittie be excused from blame, who whilst the Cittizens thereof prospered, and all things went well with them, is con∣tent to continue and rule amongst them? But no sooner doth he see Fortune, to turne her smiling face from them, then hee giueth them the slippe, putting them to shift as well as they can for themselues. Cato is rather condemned then commended for killing himselfe, at what time his Countrey had most need of him. Neither can hee be rightly tearmed magnanimous, hauing chosen so easie a death, to auoyd a farre greater euill; of which, he seemed to ac∣knowledge and confesse to be vanquisht and ouercome, seeing he durst not stay to make proofe,An Example. and encounter with the same. And yet is hee worthie of farre more praise, then thou art. For he had a better colour to shadow his death then thou hast, whom soolish LOVE, hath thus ouerthrowne. Such cannot be called valiant and resolute, who for feare of suffering a greater e∣uill, cunninglie chuse the lesse, yeelding themselues vnto an easier punishment, to a∣uoid a farre more cruell. As Sceuola cannot be saide to haue a right braue minde, al∣though he burnt his arme, escaping by that meanes Death, which otherwise, hee could not eschue,A Seatence. being a farre greater torment, then the firing of his fist. Againe, say that a man had all the occasions in the world, whereby he might seeme to haue reason to massacre himselfe, and that it were impossible for him to support and endure, the anguish and agonies of his euer encreasing sorrowes; yet ought he still to expect and looke for grace and fauour from the heauens, who after they haue powred downe vpon vs raigne and stormes, send vs most faire and comfortable weather. There is none so wretched, but that at one time or another, tasteth of the goodnes of the Gods, and though it be not by and by, yet commeth it ere it be long, so that, we ought alwaies rather to hope the best, then to feare the worst; for death is the last refuge of mortallmen, which neuertheles they ought not to entertaine, without leaue of the su∣periour power,A Searence. the Lawe for bidding such to be capable of Christian buriall (but hauing a stake knockt into their bowels, to be laid in the cōmon high waies) who as Iudas shall lay violent hands vpon themselues, proclaiming them abroad, to be worse then murtherers and homicides, and making them infamous for euer. Take heede then, that thou fall not into this labvrinth of shame. For if one must needs die, he must haue a great care of the preseruation of his honour, and so to order the matter, that after his death, his memorie be not fouly sported with some blacke fault; for then is the time (when he is out of the world) that a man is talked of, either well or ill: if well, then euery one lamenteth his absence and losse, declaring how ne∣cessarie and profitable he was vnto his countrie: If ill, then doe they speake the worst they can of him, because they now feare him no more, knowing that dead men cannot bite at all. It is to small purpose,A Sentence. although we haue carried our selues vprightly all our life∣time, if the Catastrophe and end thereof be vnhonest and wicked. For the end doth make perfect the worke, and the goodliest building that is, is nothing worth, if the foundation thereof be not firme and sure. Liue so, whilest thou staiest in this world, as when thou shalt be dead, none may be a∣ble to lay reproach vnto thee.
Doe so I pray thee; for it would be a double death vnto me, although I cannot die my selfe (if I suruiuing thee) should heare thee ill spoken of, whom I haue alwaies so dearely loued. And to giue thee a most certaine and kind taste, how much I account of thee, now thou art in this wofull perplexitie (although thy loue is the thing I most desire, and that my chiefest happines consisteth in seeing thee without a Mistris) yet to the end I may doe thee good, I am content to hurt mine owne selfe; esteeming my selfe happie, in that I may redeeme thy life, with the losse of mine owne chiefest pleasure: promising thee, to entreate thy hard-harted Diana in thy behalfe, to plead vnto her for thee, & to succour thee (to the vttermost of my power) in thy loue, which is the tormentor of my rest and quietnes. O great proofe of a most perfect amitie in a Nymph! O rich witnesse & testimonie of her feruent affection! certaine was the assurance of her loyall friendship towards me, most beautifull was that vertue in her; most chaste was her desire; and as commendable was her willingnes therein: he is highly to be prised and set by, that dieth for his friend,A Sentence. yet, that man, is farre more worthy of praise, who resigneth all the interest he hath, in that thing which may make him most happie, to pleasure another therwithall, whilest he in the meane time for want therof, liueth in perpetual miserie: especially, if it be in the af∣faires of Loue, which are so nice, and so full of iealousie, as the Louer thinketh he loo∣seth nothing, although he loose his life and libertie, so he be not cousoned of his La∣dies fauour. Meane space, poore Orythia is content, (so she may helpe mee) to ouerthrowe her selfe, being resolute to be most wretched for euer, to the end shee may ridde me from all my griefes and sorrowes: whilst I stand admiring her right generous minde, amazed at her constancie, highlie prising her affection, and wonderfullie applauding her braue and straunge conceit. Wherevpon, I humblie thanked her for her kindnesse, accepting of her gratious offer, vowing vnto her, that I will not die (as now) but rather expect some happie issue of her employment: And therwithall I protest, that I am the willinger to liue, because I would satisfie her request, not daring to refuse her courtesie, because I found my selfe so much beholding vnto her; and not for any certaine hope I did conceiue, that I should finde grace at my Mistris hands. For how could I thinke to finde succor from her, who without occasion giuen, had deliuered me ouer vnto death? whereas I might well haue bene counted barbarous and vngratefull, to haue denied the request of this Nymph, especially when it proceeded from an affection so loyall and perfect, Ingratitude being as foule a vice, as bloodie Murther. Vnthankfull persons in the old time, were condemned vnto death,An Example. as the vnnaturall Sonnes of Sophocles were disinherited (loosing all their father goods) because they ac∣cused their aged father to doate for very age. Doe, as thou pleasest (most gratious Nymph said I) for I promise thee I will prolong my life at thy command, not that I expect thy enterprise may bring me any comfort, but onely, because I feare to disobey thee. Too much alreadie hast thou bound me vnto thee, and therefore I beseech thee, thinke I will sooner dispend my heart blood for thy sake, then for mine owne. Goe then thy waies, and the heauens prosper thee in thy voyage, yet if this my bu∣sines shall chance to be any hinderance vnto thee, let me then entreate so much at thy hands, that I (depriuing my selfe of this loathed life) may be rid of these corsiues which still torment me, and thou, be freed of this tedious charge, which so much troubles thee. Not so answered Orythia: Let mee alone, and I dare warrant thee all shall be well. Castles besieged, yeeld not at the first parley, & things that are brought to passe, pro∣cesse of time, and with mature deliberation and aduise, continue longer, and seeme more sweet afterward; for a man knoweth not the delightfulnes of pleasure aright, if he haue not a tast of paine before, and that which we haue most dearest bought and hardliest come by, we alwaies hold most pretious, and of most account. Liue then in peace, and
suffer me to trie my fortune, which I perswade my selfe, shall proue most happie in thy behalfe. So saying, the Nymph leaueth me, to take her iourney, minding to helpe me, al∣though she hurt her selfe, taking more care to heale my sore, then to cure her owne wound. I could not chuse but follow after her faire and softly (yet aloofe) when by chance I met Fortunnio in the way, all to be blubbered with weeping, who thought verily that I had bene dead, he roming vp and downe the Forrest like a man distraught, crying out, and calling still vpon my name, whom none (saue an Ecco) answered. Much did he bewaile my losse, making greater moane for me then I deserued, whi∣lest (most vnwisely) he blamed Loue, as the Author of my death, and enuied most bit∣terly against the stonie hart of my faire Mistris. But no sooner had he a sight of me, but that he came running most cheerfully vnto me, and most tenderly embraced me, changing his former sad and heauie countenance, not vnlike to him, who hauing found some pretious Iewell, which he before accoun∣ted as lost, beginneth to reuiue, and to be merrie againe. Then did he tell me how my Ladie had hard I was dead, she belieuing the same for most certaine truth (for Orythia had for my good) spread abroad this report with as much speed as possible she could, which comming vnto my Dianas eares, was not a little vnpleasant vnto her, as was found by the number of salt teares which she shed, as a sure restimonie of her true griefe. Which when I knew, I began to take comfort againe, and to reuiue my selfe with a fresh hope of some good successe to come: and thereupon I compiled these verses fol∣lowing, vpon the teares which my Mistris shed in my behalfe, whilest I attended with great deuotion the often wished for returne of kinde Orythia. Examitor and Pentamitor verses. (Sweet) doe not thinke thy pearly teares, my paines can asswage ought, Not death, but thy teares, bring to my soule his adue: For thy grieuous plaints in steed of one onely shert death, Thousand deaths and more are to me, paine to enerease. I not deserue that thou for me shouldst wofully weepe thus, Tis not death, but thy teares, take from my selfe my delight: Death alone this sillie corpse commands, when it iskes him, But thy griefes doeforce, soule for to flie to the skie. After so many paines in our loue, leaue vnto me giue none Hence to depart in peace, rest that I may in my graue: Long enough haue I liu'd, since that so gentle a liking, Tide hath thy hart to mine, and to thy soule ioyned miue. Then this my exceeding torments (Faire) doe not enuie, Since that I desire life (then thy selfe) for to leaue: Farewell, pleasd he dyes, who dying, findeth a fauour, When that his Ladies hand, close vp his eyes at his end. What more sacred Tombe, to be interd can I chuse me, Then to die in thy armes, where my desire euer liu'd? If whilst I liu'd, thou care didst take for my poore life, At my happines then, ah be not enuious now. Leaue I beseech thee, teares to shed, since teares cannot helpe me, For my soule once gone, thou by thy teares cannot haue Cruell death to relent with sighes, you neuer intreate can, Blest that Louer dies, who by his Loue makes an end. Onely this I beg at thy hands, before that I die here, Those faire beautious eyes, kisse that I might but a while: Might I but finde this kindnes rare, then blest would my soule be. Nor would it are forget, thanks to requite in his minde:
(Faire) too much it were for me to die in thy sweet armes, He that dies content, death neuer feeles, or his dart: Who to his Mistris, doth deuote his hart as a present, Leaues the same in his brest, royally laide in a Tombe. Gloomie night for to close mine eyes fast, can neuer haue power, Nor can I die as long as (what I like) I may see. Then doe but thinke on me, whose soule was onely deuoted Vnto thy selfe, and which liu'd in thy brest that is chaste. In the bottome of my darke graue, shine shall thy bright eyes, Whilst with a new fire, death shall me reuiue once againe. For if (heretofore) the same could into my soule peirce, Who can hinder it now, brightly to shine on my coarse? Then deare Saint) to leaue these wailings let me request thee, I doe not sigh, cause I die, but thee to see to lament. For since (of thy grace) I am not worthy, but vnfit, Then as much as a teare, why for my sake shouldst thou shed? Vnder the yoake of amorous seruice, whilst that I liu'd, What good once did I thee, what haue I done for thee ere? Tis no sense to bewaile the losse of one that deserues not, Who to none but himselfe, whilst that he liu'd did he loue. This is the cause my soule force my coarse to relinquish, For that he seruice small did (whilst he liu'd to my dame. Yet since this my wisht for death most happily hapneth, Since by my parting now, I from my griefe now doe part: Tis my fortune (for me too good) ah faire doe not enuie, Since that alone through death, happily, liue doth the soule. Wipe then thy faire eyes, and without shewe of a mourner, This my breathlesse Trunke, vnto the graue doe thou beare: Thrise happie Tombe, since he againe reuiues with a new life, Who (dead) leaueth his Loue rauished, him for to joy. This was the mestfull Dittie I made, I being then so troubled in my minde, as I knew not well how to expresse my griefe, although I vsed many scalding sighes and salt teares, to make manifest the same: I being of cōceit, that it was impossible for me to bla∣zon forth the crueltie of Loue in his right colours: and yet did I seeke to comfort my selfe, in that I had many cōpanions in my miserie heretofore. O victorious Caesar, for all thy valour, thou wast conquered by louely Cleopatra, who had a sonne by thee called Cesarion. And thou, graue Emperour, and diuine Phylosopher, diddest thou not doate vpon thy most vnhonest Faustina, whilest thou thy selfe becamest Loues prisoner, notwith∣standing all thy wisedome and greatnes? Hanniball found his force too strong for him, who although he had so often giuen the foile vnto the Romans, yet when he lost his pretious libertie, through lying in Capua, and making Loue vnto a woman there, was ouercome by that temperate Romane, Scipio. Demetrius likewise, was so bewitched, with the faire Curtezan of Athens, as he stood in awe of her, as if he had bene her bond-slaue. And if we should leaue the earth, and flie vp into the heauens, wee shall finde the Gods themselues haue bene schollers in Cupids schoole. For did not Ioue loue Europa: Lida, Alcumena: and diuers others? Phoebus, Cassandra, Daphne, and many moe? Mars, Venus: Venus Adonis: Diana, Endimion: and I know not whome besides. Why then, if it be so, I must needs say, that thy power extendeth farre and neere, thou being as mightie in the heauens, as thou art here vpon the earth. Fortunio seeing mee in this humour, beganne thus. How now man? but euen now thou shewedst thy selfe to be conquerour ouer thy passions, setting a good face on the matter, whilest thou didst bare out the brunt there∣of: And now againe, thou seemest as a recreant, to yeeld vnto thy anguish and sorrow,
crying out and vexing thy selfe, as if thou wouldest die vpon the suddaine: what is the reason of this alteration and change? It is a credit for a man to change from vice to vertue, and of bad, to become good, but not to goe on still, growing worse and worse. Dauid is praised for amending his wicked life, and for becomming a new man, where his Sonne Salomon is condemned, in that he forgot himselfe in his latter daies, be∣comming an Idolater, and a whoremonger, amongst his concubines. Thinkest thou, that it is enough for thee to say, thou art not able to resist the force of Loue, and that other mens faults are sufficient to excuse and defend thine? That thiefe is not exempted from punishment, who excuseth himselfe (hauing robbed from others) that he hath but done, as an other hath done before him; for though it be lawfull to imitate such actions as are commendable and vertuous, yet is it not tollerable, to doe what is wicked and villainous. This colour then will not serue thee, and therefore if (as thou not long since diddest affirme) thou louest the inward qualities of the minde, without coueting that fleshly pleasure (which Louers so much studie to obtaine (although with great labour and losse) but what is the reason thou takest on thus? And why shouldest thou seeme to dispaire, being readie euery houre almost to goe about to giue ouer the world? For louing the soule, (onely) the bodie, which is but a clo∣set for the same, cannot hinder thy affection, neither canst thou hope to receiue any o∣ther contentment or pleasure of thy loue, then in conceit: whereas thou doing thus (as thou doest) thou wilt make the world belieue, that thy loue is of another manner of na∣ture then thou wouldest perswade vs, it being the common fashion of sottish Louers, and such as desire sensuall delights, to crie out and lament, as if they were readie to die, when they cannot taste the sweetnes of the same: as the sicke Patient dieth for want of phy∣sicke, that should expell such superfluous humours, as hurt him. Now if thy Loue be such (as thou saiest) that it neither demandeth nor expecteth in any sort this pleasure, what maketh thee for want of enioying the same, to run still vn∣to death? wringing thy hands, and making such pittious moane, as is strange to behold? Therefore are such men farre more furious and mad, then those senselesse Bedlems are, who without cause, seeke to offer violence vnto themselues, imitating the heathen people of Aegypt, who vsed to burne themselues, without any cause at all, but onely when the toy tooke them in the head: for most deare ought we to hold our life, be∣cause it is vnrecouerable: neither must we forgoe it, vnlesse for some great occasion, as either for the benefit of our common-wealth, or for speciall good and aduancement of all our friends. I seeing Fortunto to be so earnest, replied thus. O Fortunio, I cannot see how a man can lose a lesser losse, then the shortning of his daies: for loosing them, he lighteth vpon a path that leadeth him into eternall rest, and therefore he is not hindered at all: resembling that marchant, who exchangeth bad marchandise, for such as are most pretious and rich. For a smaller matter then mine, thousands of wise men haue shortned their liues. A witnes whereof, is that wise man, who following Alexander the great, and much fauoured of him, gaue not ouer for all that, to erect a great pile of wood, which he setting a fire, most cheerfully leapt therein (without sturring once) and so was there buried. But perhaps you will aske me what was the cause that vrged him thereunto: truely none; but onely because he would leaue this mortall life, to inherit a life euerlasting. But say, that no liuely apprehention of intollerable griefe did force a man to this desire, yet are the very defects of Nature, and the desire to become immortall, sufficient enough to imprint most deeply this conceit in his soule: especially, if (after death) we shall be free from feeling of any paine, according vnto the grosse errour of the volup∣tuous Epicure. For is it not farre better neuer to be borne, then to liue and endure miserie? But we flie higher in our thoughts, thē those Phylosophers: for we by this meanes, set not onely an end vnto our wretchednes, but we change them into glorie & content∣ment, and our fraile and fleshly bodie, into an immortall state, free from all corruption.
Therefore my conclusion is, that seesing the onely maimes of Nature, without any other accident of euill, are of force enough to imprint within vs this desire of death, we are not to be reprehēded, if we die, in as much as we are stirred vp vnto death, as well be∣cause of these imperfections, as also by reason of such a subiect of deadly griefe, as can no way be remedied nor holpen but by the fatall Destinies; and those that doe contrari∣wise, cannot be compared for constancie and vertue, vnto those women, who (one stri∣uing with another) leaped into the flaming fire, wherein their dead spouses were bur∣ned: a deepe passion of true sorrow, and a vehement desire to follow their husband, being that which did animate them vnto this death. Besides, such as are in dispaire, for euer seeing ioyfull daies in this world, haue not they the greatest reason of all to die? which (if any such) shall refuse, they are of a more base and timerous disposition, then those women afore said, seeing that in death onely, a man incountreth with quiet rest, as (whilest we liue) we are yoaked and tyed vnto troubles. The sage Hebrew King, praiseth in his prouerbes, the dead, more then he doth the liuing, death being the securest harbor of all other, where when we are arriued, we are ex∣empted from rowing any more in the dangerous barge of this turbulent world. Fond is that Pilot, who (through the fauour of the heauens, hauing gotten into a safe creake and bay, will needs venter backe againe into the maine Sea, at what time a tempest ari∣seth, and so suffereth shipwracke. Those great personages in times past, in steed of being afraid of death, tooke death as the chiefest remedie against all their crosses and misfortunes. Tryumphant Casar, who enioyed all the delights that might be, although he had reason to couet to liue (be∣ing blessed with so much happines) was so farre off from being afraid of death, as he would needs entertaine the same, although he might haue auoyded it, if he had so plea∣sed. And shall we then (who quite contrarie to him) are ouercharged with thousands of plagues, being (in respect of him) most vile, base and abiect vassalles, to whom disgraces are common, and all pleasures, hatefull aduersaries, seare that, which he in the chiefest of all his felicities neuer once so much as doubted? So to doe, would argue vs to haue small courage, and we should be like vnto the base minded Macedonian King, who rather then he would die, suffered himselfe to be carri∣ed aliue in tryumph, through the stretes of Rome, being afterward starued to death in prison. Yet farre more generous, and of a brauer resolution, was Cleopatra (although a fillie woman) who deceiued the expectation of Augustus, by killing her selfe, and so hin∣dering him thereby, from beautifying his glorious tryumphant Chariot, with the liuely shewe of her owne proper person. No, no, before this mischiefe shall seaze vpon me, and that disgrace shall still try∣umph ouer me; I will end both my life and my lamentations all at once, like that gal∣lant Egyptian Princes. Neither is this argument forcible enough, to say, that because one loueth onely the inward qualities of his Mistris, therefore he should not die; for farre greater is the de∣spite, and the distresse is more violent, which proceedeth from those, who haue loued chastely, without offering any outrage or vnseemly behauiour to discredit themselues, then it is amongst other vaine Louers: and therefore thy Mistris haue the lesse reason to be so hard-harted and vnkinde towards them, when they are vrged vnto no such villainie. This therefore is my opinion, that death is an hundred times more sweeter then life, and that the onely defaults of Nature, without other reasons that proceed from sorrow, are of force sufficient to make vs wish and venter vpon the same. For the free man is onely happie, and free can none be, whilest they are intangled in the nets of the miseries of this world, death onely being of power to infranchise vs, and therefore is it most happie, and most necessarie for man. While I was (thus) disputing with my old acquaintance and friend; curteous Orythia, was nothing forgetfull of me, who comming before my Ladie, pleaded hard in my behalfe, she beginning thus. Certainly (beautious Diana) most cruell is that man, that seeketh the life of an other who neuer offended him.
The Gods who are without beginning,A Sentence. and therefore more to be respected then men (although not so soone moued to wrath) demand sildome or neuer the blood of mortall creatures to expiate their faults, but being more kinde then so, are content with the warme sacrifices of beasts. How then can he purge himselfe, who hauing neuer bene abused by such a one, yet worketh all the meanes he can to cut his throate? It is the propertie of Tyrants (banished from the companie of men) from whom through rigour of their owne lawe and wills, they take both life and liuing without any reasonable cause giuen them, to bath their murthering hands in giltlesse blood, but such as be godly and iust Princes, will neuer commit so hainous an act: much lesse ought La∣dies to acqaint themselues therewithall, they being the very patternes of compassion, of pittie, and of mildnes; and not of blood, of murther, or of vengance. O what paine doth Lydia proue in the pitchy bottome of hell, for causing her louing Seruant to be murthered? What sharpe punishment doe the daughters of Danaus endure, for cutting their hus∣bands throates? and with what violent plagues is Clytemnestra scourged, in dying her hands with the lukewarme blood of her deare Spouse and bedfellow Agamemnon? for if we be cruell, then cruell shall we finde those, into whose power we shall chance to light to be chastised, because the same euill we doe, shall be done vnto vs againe. Doe not you thinke, that it were better for a woman to loose (somewhat that belon∣geth vnto her, then to destroy the life of a man (not to be recouered any more) the life I say of a man, which the Gods themselues haue first breathed into them, bestowed vp∣on them? Aboue all vices,A Sentence. crueltie is the most insupportable; intollerable is shedding of blood, and horrible is beastly murther. None can make themselues more strange, or more contrarie vnto the Gods, then in setting abroch this damned vice, they themselues hating crueltie, abhorring nothing so much as blood-shed. If we would be willing, that they should pardon vs, let vs then after their example be curteous and milde, towards such as shall implore our aide, when they haue neede of vs: for the selfe same mercie we shall shewe vnto strangers, who haue offended vs, the same shall we finde returned home to vs by the immortall powers themselues againe. Let vs then shun this Sauadge minde, and barbarous fault, as a deadly pestilence, and let vs driue it from vs, as we would doe a mortall poyson from our bodies, for it killeth our good name and renowme, which ought to be dearer vnto vs, then our pretious liues by odds. And since it is so, what then hath moued thee (most Faire, yet cruell Nymph) to pursue so egerly the life of wretched Arcas? Alacke, why wouldest thou haue him die, what fault, what crime, or what offence hath he committed against thee? but (perhaps) thou wilt say he loueth thee, and how then? what? doe not we loue the Gods, and are they not glad and contented we so should loue them? Thinkest thou that any goodly thing, or whatsoeuer sauoureth of the beautie of the Gods,An Example. can be here belowe vpon the earth, and not be loued, and highly prised by mor∣tall men? If the Lawe commandeth vs to pardon our enemies (as Caesar is more com∣mended for his clemencie towards his foes, then for his notorious victories) how much more then, ought we to make account of such as fancie and affect vs? If for killing our aduersaries, in steed of shewing them grace and fauour, we are condemned as faultie, how much more shall we be, if we goe about to murther our friends? Then (gratious Diana) fall not into so horrible a sinne; Thou art too faire to be froward and vnkinde, neither will any wise woman, euer refuse the chaste and modest Amitie of a vertuous spirit, who is able to make her memorie immortall, and to liue for euer. What outrage or discurtesie doth a yong man vnto a sweet Ladie, in louing her, as long as he goeth not about to offer violence vnto her honour? For as that woman is not to be excused, who at the earnest praiers of her Louer, suf∣fereth that goodly Flower to be slipt, wherein consists her reputation and credit: so can∣not
shee chuse but be blamed, who seeketh the vtter ruine and ouerthrowe of such as chastly honour her, without impeach of honour. So doeth Arcas loue thee, and why then doest thou force him to make away himselfe? Cruell is the wrong that one receiueth of his friend, but farre more piercing is that, which commeth from a mans owne selfe, (seeing none can be greater friendes vnto vs then our owne selues.) Be not then the cause that this poore wretch should massacre himselfe, least it be hereafter cast in thy teeth, that thou hast slaine him, which if thou doest, it may fall out with thee, as it did with proud Narassus: who dyed, falling in loue with his owne selfe, after he had disdained the friendship of diuers faire and curteous Nymphs. But I will say no more, for thou art wise, and to such, fewe words are sufficient: thou art faire, and therefore I hope wilt not be oner froward: and thou art religious, which maketh mee perswade my selfe, that thou wilt haue a conscience, especially in a matter of so great importance as this is. Thus did the pittifull Orytha pleade for me against her owne selfe, willing is she to die, so shee may saue my life, not caring what sorrowes she endured, so shee could rid me from out my troubles. Diana hauing heard her, was readie to make answere, for they that are faire spoken, and can speake with discretion, haue alwayes the best and readiest wittes, and so had shee, Mercury lodging in her tongue, and purest houie, dropping from out her mouth. Harke then how wisely she replyed. If any man vexed with a furious spirit, shall (without beeing proucked or vrged, by any other then by their owneselus) rune wilfully vnto death, can any be blamed for the same, but onely their owne selues? Or is it reasonable, that such as be guiltlesse shall be punished, and answere for the faults that others commit? Iuno is the occasion of the plagues that that luxurious Ixion endureth, and yet it was his owne offence that was the cause thereof, and not she her selfe? If these vaine and fan∣tastike Louers, who are weakened in their right wittes through Cupid, shall murther and make away themselues: are therefore those Ladies vnto whome they offer their seruice, the cause of their ruine and ouerthrow? Hee onely rightly may be called the author of mischiefe, who either hath done it, or hath caused it to be done. But women, doe they force men to loue them? and doe they compell them (in despite of themselues) to deuote themselues vnto them? What they doe, they doe of themselues, and through their owne follies doeth this madnes pro∣ceed, and therefore, who is the cause of their vndoing, but their owne selues? If the enuious person, dieth for very griefe and rage of minde, because he seeth his neighbour prosper and doe well: who but himselfe is the occasion thereof? None for∣ceth any man to loue. And so no woman ought to be vrged to loose that (which is as pretious vnto her, as her owne life) which is her honour, to satisfie and please such, who through their owne vainnesse, and mece fondnesse, shall worke their owne hurt and decay. That desperate wretch, that drowneth himselfe, is hee to thanke any other then his owneselfe, for his drowning? And say, that Shepheard of whom thou talkest should die, through his owne peeuish sollie, think you that  feare, least the world would count me to be the cause thereof? or that I shall be blamed in that he hath done amisse? I warrant you no: For I neuer brought him into this narrow straight, which if hee follow, it is his owne fault, and not mine. Besides, to say I seeke to couet, or to be the cause of his death, you doe me wrong: for I delight not in crueltie, the contentment and well fare of another, being as deare vn∣to mee, as mine owne health. Yet neuerthelesse, this I must tell you, that I would be ve∣rie loth hee should liue, to be so hurtfull vnto mee, as to destroy the goodly building of mine honor, which being once ouerthrowne, can neuer be repaired, or built new againe. That hee liue, I most heartilie wish: but yet, with the conseruation of my good name & fame. For otherwise, I desire vengeance to light vpon him, as on my most mor∣tall foe, although I will neuer be but a friend vnto his chaste Amitie: prouided alwaies, that he giue sufficient testimonies it be such, by his good carriage & modest behauiour.
For I am not so ignorant, but that I knowe pure and chaste Loue, to be a most diuine and beautifull Vertue, and the honest affection of right generous, and Gentle∣manlike spirites, to be commendable and prasse-worthie: seeing they are of power to make famous our memories for euer. All Portraitures, Tables, Counterfaites, and Pictures, soone loose their colours and decay, be they neuer so excellently well drawne, quickly are they spoiled, and soone doth Time deuour them. No Picture of Achilles now remaineth, & yet his praise doth, through Homers Muse. None of Alexander the great, although both Apelles and Lysippus, two ex∣quisite Painters had often drew him. And yet although their famous works be consumed and gone, the braue writings of Quintus Curtius (blazoning forth the life of this mighty Monark) liue and flourish. Neither is the verse of Virgil dead, ringing out the vertues of AEneas, although the counterfaites of that Troyan Prince, be all turned vnto dust. And so, if that Arcas, be (yet) aliue, I wish he so may still continue; thy onely intreaty and request being of force to command more of mee then this, seeing it is thy pleasure he should be entertained. But if he will so vnaduisedly, rashly, and so foolishly offend his owne selfe, I heere wash my handes, as cleare from this matter, protesting heere before all, that I am in∣nocent of his death, because I neuer gaue him any such occasion of discontentment: If perchaunce he haue found me, that I haue not bene so curteous, nor so affable vnto him at one time, as I haue bin at an other: Or if that I haue looked more heauy & sad now and then, then I haue vsed to doe heretofore. Thinketh he therefore, that he hath iust reason to lay all the blame vpon me, as if I had bene she, that was the Author of his ouerthrow? If so, he is deceiued. For our bodies (which are subiect vnto the influences of the celesti∣all Signes) are either ioyfull or sadde, according vnto their motions. This being the cause, that when we meet (by fortune) with one of our acquaintance, and hee is (as then) troubled with many thoughts in his mind, or some bad celestiall Pla∣net is predominate ouer him: wee then, (by his sower countenance) would take him for our enemie, but no sooner is his humour past and gone from him, but hee is our good friend againe, and as kinde vnto vs, as euer he was before. The weaker must alwaies yeeld (somewhat) vnto the stronger, because the one is ne∣uer distraught, nor carryed away with our publike affaires, where the other are drawne a∣broad with much businesse, and diuers cares (which hindereth them oftentimes) to re∣member, or thinke vpon their inferiours. Let him then liue, if he be (as yet) liuing: For neuer let Diana wish to liue, to see that day, wherein she shall be reproached to haue bene the cause of his death, who by his wri∣tings doth eternize the Vertuous, especially, when I may preserue his life, and that he see∣keth not to haue any thing of mee, that is preiudiciall vnto mine honour. This was the answere of wise Diana, vnto faire Orythia, who most kindely thanking her in my behalfe, came merrilie away, seeking to find me out: Who no sooner saw me, but that shee deliuered vnto me my Ladies minde, and therewithall, aduised me to goe presently vnto her, and to present my selfe vnto her. How to requite this curteous Nymphe for so exceeding a fauour done vnto mee, I know not; Whilst I was framing a set speech in my minde, to shew my selfe in some sort gratefull vnto her. How now (quoth she) it is no time now to studie? away, and get you gone vnto your Mistris. As for thanks, I looke for none at your handes, I hauing done but what was my dutie, seeing such as are bound, must needs obey: yet I beseech the god∣desse of Loue, to make thee once to pittie me, who wish thee no worse fortune, then I doe vnto mine owne soule, although thy chiefe happines, must needs be my bad ouerthrow. And hauing so sayd, casting a pittious eye towards me, and sighing most heauilie, as if her heart would haue burst, she went away from me, and so left me. I could not chuse but weepe, thinking vpon her: When (remembring my Ladies message) I set forward speedilie to wend towards her, carrying in my hand a certain Sonnet, which I had made in her praise not long before, meaning to present it vnto her. Being arriued where she was, I found her accompanied with other Nymphes, sitting by the side of a Fountaine, which issued forth from out the veines of a stately Rocke, the water whereof, was farre clearer then any Cristall, in whose bottome was a dainty yealow Sand, such as that of Pac∣tolus,
intermixed with a number of precious stones, of sundry colours, & had a man bene able to haue thrust his nimble hand deep enogh, he might (without wetting of his arme) with exceeding great pleasure, haue taken a number of little fishes, running vp & downe, and playing most wantonly there: one while, hyding themselues within the entrailes of the grauell, and another while, in sundrie corners and holes of the Fountaine. Whilst being slipperie, and skipping too and fro, they would most cunninglie get out of the fingers of him that had caught them. From this Fountaine, there came forth two sweet Riuers, which growing into a great water, ranne round about the whole Coun∣trey, loosing themselues as they fell into the Sea adioyning. This Fountaine was shadowed ouer with beautious Cipresse, and louely Orenge ttees, the sweete buds and blossomes whereof, was able to rauish the mindes euen of bruit Beasts: within the Rock, were many seates to rest on, framed by nature so artificiallie, as no cunning could any way come neare them, they being alwaies couered with pleasing Camomell, the more to delight the sense of man. The ground all along was full of greene grasse, and other pretie hearbes, which the teeth of Cattell had neuer spoyled, nor ouer-heate of the day, scorched or burned. Manie sweete Rose-trees sprung forth, from out the sides of that Rocke, in diuers places, and that in so iustand seemly an order, as you would haue thought they had bene planted, and set by the handy-labour of some curious Gardiner: whilst all sort of Roots sprouted out in their right colours, the odoriferous sent whereof was such, and the scitua∣tion of the place so delightfull, as you would haue thoght your selfe in Paradice, as long as you had continued there. Neuer was there Pallace more beautifull. That Fountaine which the warlike Horse caused to spring out of the ground,An Example. with the hoose of his foote, was nothing so daintie, (although more commended, by such as dranke of the water thereof) they being inspired with the gift of Poetrie euer after. In this so pleasant a seate then, did I finde gratious Diana, passing away her time, one while, with washing her beautifull face: an other while, her Diamond eyes, and then againe, her long and slender hands. No care as then troubled her, neither was she busied in canuasing in her braines,A Similie. any serious matter of weighty importance. As that great Sacrificer, who thinking to sacrifice to Iuno the goddesse of Riches, (finding her Image either bloodie, or sweating) suddainely withdraweth himselfe from thence, consulting with his fellow-Priest, about the strange chance, before he beginne his Ceremonies againe; Euen so, I seeing so rare a beautie, stood as one amazed, without speech, and as if I had bene in a sound. And now I began to consider within my selfe, whether I were best to goe forwards on my iourney, and offer my Present vnto this Nymphe, or whether without speaking vnto her, I should turne backe againe, and goe from whence I came. For although such onely finde Fortune to fauour them, who are venturous, and of bold spirits, (yet thought I) it were farre better, not to trye all, (especially, when a mans life or credit lyeth therevpon) then like bold Bayard, to runne bluntly onwards, and so to take repulse, and be denyed of his sute. For more sure and certaine is the meane life, and estate, then is the richest and highest in authority, wherin there is nothing but trou∣ble and danger. This was the cause I stood so long debating of the matter within my selfe, whether I were best to pursue my first enterprise or no:A Sentence. For hardly dare a man speak to such a one as we feare & respect, but in the end, the same thing that made mee most to doubt, did rid me out of the same, stifling my feare, & driuing away all sorrow from me. For my Mistris hauing espied mee, (who was neare readie to goe back againe) called me vnto her. O how sweete and comfortable was that sound vnto mee? I thinking I had bene called by some God there-abouts. Gratious and full of courtesie was her speech, inso∣much, as I counted my name most blessed, because it was pronounced by my louelie Goddesse. No longer will I maruell now, although the voyces of Saintes heeretofore, haue bene of power to call vp dead Coarses, from out the bottome of their graues, (where they lay buried) restoring them vnto life againe: since that of my faire Mistrisse was a∣ble to driue away all sadnesse and sorrow from mee, and to reuiue fresh hope within me.
This made me draw neare vnto her, when after many dutious Ceremonies done by me vnto her, I presented her with my Paper, which the opening, with a cheerfull coun∣tenance, read this Sonnet following. (Faire) thou the heauen (like to thy selfe) mak'st faire, So thou my Fortune blessest (thee) to loue: He vanquisht is not, though of Armour bare, When with the Sunne, his strength Mars dares not prut. If I (thy Beauties stine) my selfe right call, Who (thee t'adore) can blame my loyaltse? The selfe same God, that Louers worship all, Is that sweete God, which breeds their miseris. (Faire) then I loue thee, ah what ist I say? Nay more, I worship thee, and thee admire: Mverse, and voyce, shall honour thee for aye, Sing still thy praise, thy glorse still desire. (Faire) it is much, the Gods for to resemble, But more to be, like Vertue; yet without Sage Pallas helpe, Ioue nere had made to tremble, Offurious Tytans, that rebellious Rout. To thee then like to Gods, to Vertue like, All praises wee'le ascribe, as guerdon right. As she read these Verses, shee seemed to smile,A Similie. giuing mee a verie kinde looke, and many thankes for the same. As the Vine-worker reioyceth, when comming into the field, (betimes in the morning) hee findeth his Vine sprung forth, and readie to budde all ouer, which promiseth him a bountifull Largesse, to come from Bacchus: Euen so began I to be light for ioy, to see so cheerfull a countenance to come from her, hoping to haue some good fortune afterward. O how sundrie and suddaine, are the alterations in loue? One while a Louer is dead, and then againe, he is aliue: now hee is merrie, and then by and by, he is sadde: a small matter, being able to make him hope or dispaire, as a litle Leuen, maketh a great deale of Paste sower. But as I was most vnfortunate before, so beganne I now to be most happie of all: For no sooner had my Mistris read what was written, but shee began thus. It is great griefe and hart vnto a gallant Courtier, who can, and faine would, make some excellent proofe of his valour: when hee cannot meete with a fitte place, or fielde, wherein he might exercise and put in practise his Chiualrie. Euen so, it is great pittie (Shepheard) that thou canst not encounter a subiect, wor∣thy of thy penne, which might be able, and of sufficiencie enough, to make thy Muse shewe her selfe abroad, in her right colours. For this Poeticall veine of thine, without hauing some rare, or diuine matter to animate it, and to set it forward, is like vnto a good∣lie body that hath no soule: which, although it shewe faire and beautifull, yet can it doe little good,A comparison. because it wanteth life. Or it may be compared vnto a large and fatte fielde, bringing forth much grasse, which is a testimonie of his fertile richnesse: But yet for want of labour and sowing, yeeldeth not anie Corne at all. I assure thee, I am right heartilie sorrie, that thou wantest an excellent subiect, whereon to worke. For then, I verily perswade my selfe, we should see most admirable conceits to come from thy Muse. As for my selfe, I neither will, nor dare refuse these Verses, which thou hast bestow∣ed vpon mee, they sanouring of the same sweetnesse, for then worthilie mightest thou iudge mee to be more prouder then the Gods, who thankfullie accept of the smallest gifts, that mortall men doe offer them.
But yet I could wish with all my hart, that they had bene meant vnto some other more vertuous Saint: For worthie things belong vnto such as are worthie personages, great matters vnto great & mightie Potentates, & what is honorable, is due vnto the vertuous: no otherwise, then shame & reproach do belong vnto the infamous, & such as be wicked. Notwithstanding all this, I will not giue ouer to account of thy Muse, seeing that (for all shee hath taken so leane and barren a subiect as my selfe) she doth so well, by rea∣son whereof, she sheweth herselfe to be the more worthie of commendation and praise. But farre better, and more perfect (by great oddes) would she appeare, if the founda∣tion wherevpon she had built, had bene but as goodly, as shee her selfe is faire. For then no doubt, but she would bring forth most straunge and matchlesse workes, as of beauti∣full parents, sweete and well-fauoured children are borne. Ah, say not so, most sacred Nymph (replyed I) although these your speeches are like vnto a lowlie vertue, wherein (the more you humble your selfe) the more you are exalted; For what Goddesse is there raigning in the Skies aboue, that meriteth more praise then thou doest? And what mortall woman is there liuing, that carrieth a minde more chaste, a heart more vertuous, a beautie more excellent, or a iudgement more perfect, then thou thy selfe doest? Although great persons are by the benefite of Fortune, raised and aduaunced vnto many Titles of honour, and are enriched with Treasures mightilie, we cannot therefore say, that for that onely cause, they are more worthie of praise, then such meaner crea∣tures, as are barred from such great wealth and authoritie, so long as they be as curteous as the others: For true glory is not giuen to blinde and cheating Fortune, but vnto di∣uine and heauenly Vertue. He is worthy of little praise, who hath nothing of his owne, but is faine to borrow of others: & such are rich men, who throgh the aduancement of nature,A Sentence. & not of their own industrie, enioy that which they haue: wheras such as are wise, (who of their own selues, without the help of others) shew many proofs of vertue, deserue to be comended indeed. Poore Homer is more accounted of, then rich Agamemnon: laudlesse Maro, then coue∣tous Crassus: & poore Solon, more then golden Croesus. And so (faire Nymph) although thou hast not the name of a Goddesse, (seeing in desert, thou doest merite the same) why shouldest thou refuse that praise, that is rightly due, and belonging vnto the soueraigne powers aboue. But I know thy minde, and by thy speech doe gather what thou meanest. Thou see∣mest to refuse the fruits of my Muse, (and not without great reason) because they are too weake, and vnable to display, and set abroach thy vertues. For as those that are excellent Poets, greatly honor wise and worthy spirits: so such as be grosse and vnlearned, rather bring discredite, then credite vnto them, by their harsh and foolish vorses; It being far better for a braue Heroicall minde, not to be praised at all, then to heare himselfe com∣mended, by the mouth of an illiterated and simple Poetizer. This is the cause thou refusest my verse, but it is certaine, that the more Vertue flieth from glorie, the more doeth glorie follow her. The Sages in times past did well,An Example. to re∣iect the praises, which were attributed vnto them, and because they would not be seene; when they put in practise many rare and admirable exploites, they hidde themselues close, within some vnfrequented Desart or other. And yet neuerthelesse, they had their due in the ende, and when they least dreamed of any such matter. Glorie passeth through the pikes of all difficulties,A Sentence. yet it descendeth downe into the Tombs of the dead: sounding like a Trumpet, the due praises of manie when they are buryed, who whilst they liued, would not accept of any such matter. For as the Cloudes, although they shew thicke, darke, and gloomie, cannot for all that, hinder the brightnes of the Sunne, but for all their foggie vapours, hee will breake out, and ap∣peare in his splendent Maiestie; Euen so, (maugre the cruell times, yea, and in despite of their owne selues) the vertuous are euer honoured, whom glorie it selfe, doeth neuer abandon or forsake. And therefore (gratious Nymph) reiect not what my Muse in most humble manner bestoweth vpon thee, seeing she doth the best she can. For the good will of the giuer, & not the richnes of the gift, doth perfect, & make better the present. Poore folke giue as much (althogh it be of little value) considering their abilitie, as the migh∣tier
sort doe,A Sentence. although they bestow neuer so much: and the sillie widowes Mite, was as well accepted, as the richest mens golde, which in the Temple was offered. Dainethen to make me so fortunate, as to vouchsafe to accept of me to chaunt forth thy praises; And doubt not, but so earnest a desire shall so much animate and incou∣rage my Muse, as she will think nothing can see me to be too hard for her. For this cause onely do I liue: nothing so much keeping life within my bodie, as a zealous desire (He∣rald-like) to blazon forth thy vertues, which If I thought I might not obtaine, I would chuse rather to die then liue. My gifts are but small, and yet more commendable shalt thou be, for accepting of them, then if they had bene richer: because the world shall see, that not anie couetous humor of gaine, nor any worth of the present, moued mee to make a tender of the same, but only an humble mind, & the right noblenes, of thy more then curteous own nature. Thus did I argue for my selfe, when my faire Saint, who tooke some pleasure in my speech, beganne to answer me in this manner. Neuer ought any honest praise to be reiected, because it proceedeth from good will. The Gods themselues taking in good part the praises of the simple, as well as of those that are more mightie. I therefore accept of thine, if thou thinkest there be any thing in mee, (as I doubt me there is not) worthy of thy studie, but yet with this condition, that like a faithfull Hystoriographer, and not as a fawning Poet, thou set downe the truth. For as that Crowe,An Example. when she was despoyled of her feathers, which shee had borrowed of the other Byrds, became naked and bare; & as that face is found to be more fowle, and fuller of wrinkles, which is vsed to be dawbed with paintings, then that which neuer hath any other, then her naturall beautie; So when one is praised, & afterwards his defects and vitious life commeth to be knowne abroad, he is more disgraced with infaie & discre∣dit, then if he had not bene spoken of before, & only because of his owne imperfections. Be then iust and true in thy writings, and then no doubt, but the labour which thou shalt take, shalbe much lessened & abated, and small shalbe the paine thou puttest thy pen too, because thou shalt finde little or nothing in mee, worthy to be commended. But aboue all, I would wish thee, to haue speciall regard vnto this: that thy works (if by chaunce thou shalt find, I be worthy of thy Inuention) breed neither iealousie of me, nor malicious enuie against me, the two common plagues amongst all men. For it were farre better to liue bare and poorely, and without beeing made famous abroad, then to be rich, and be enuied of all, and so to purchase the ill will of euery one. This onely desire, was Casars death, his enemies bearing malice at his vertues: and this was the losse of the life of Alexander the great, who was hated for his exceeding great victories. So said the beautious Nymph, and that with so good a grace, as (although shee see∣med to make a shewe, that shee was vnwilling to accept of the praises of my Muse) yet did she so wittilie order the matter, as I found by the circumstance of her discourse, she did not altogether reiect mine offer.A Sentence. Quickly did I find her meaning, for (who marketh so narrowly the manner & fashion, the gesture, and the countenance of his Mistris, as doeth the Louer, seeing he findeth either good or hurt, in the least glaunce of her eyes? Soone did I conceiue that she did not differ much from my minde, and I made my selfe ready to answer her: when behold, we might suddenly heare a great noise a far off, as if it had bene of fome wilde Beast, that brake through bushes, past through hedges, and forced the very trees to stoope and shake, with his furious running against them. This noise made my Ladie, and all her company maruellously afraid, for it was most terrible in their cares: wherevpon, they began to take their flight, and that they might runne the swifter, the feare of this straunge accident, lent them wings. I seeing this, tooke my worthie Diana vnder the arme, (the greatest fauour that euer I had before receiued of her) and yet was it not willingly graunted by her: For ne∣uer would shee haue suffered me to haue done so much, but that the danger, and her pre∣sent necessitie was such, I helping her the better to get vp vnto the toppe of the foresaid high Rocke, at the foote of which, was (as I tolde you before) a most faire and cleare Christiall Fountaine. When beeing there, wee thought our selues to be quite out of all perill and danger: and that if it were a Beare, or a Lyon, or any Tyger, it could not ouer
easily get vp to the top of the same: or at least, that we could not be discouered in so high a place: but yet neuerthelesse, my Ladie still quaking & trembling, as one that could not abandon her pensiuenes vpon the suddaine. She endured, that I should holde her vnder the arme, whilest in the meane time, I ventured to touch her white and daintie hand, which was to me, as if I had bene in Para∣dise, for so much did feare possesse her, as she neuer thought of any such matter. O what a happie time had I as then? and how much was I beholding vnto that wilde beast, al∣though the terror thereof, did make me to shake? A right holy day was that day vnto me, and the happiest that euer I had in all my life. Great was the pleasure my poore heart felt as then, when I had that libertie to touch those rare and victorious hands, as long since these desperate Pirates had,An Example. who came from farre, onely to kisse the fist of Scipio, surnamed Affrican, after he had taken his farewell of vngratefull Rome. Neuer was there so lillie a white hand, neuer one so soft and supple, for many braue mindes had they brought vnder their yoake, they not once daring to re∣fuse her command. Although this fauour was but small, yet stood I so much in awe to displease her, as I trembled more for feare of her, then I did of the Monster. For twise had I made triall of her anger alreadie, which I felt more hot then fire it selfe, doubting greatly least I should fall into the like danger againe. Thus, whilest I now and then touched her sweet hands, she neuer perceiued what I did, whether it were, either because she made shewe that she knew it not, or because feare had so hindered her, that she could not conceiue of any such thing: for where dread sea∣zeth vpon one, there can be no other thoughts, she driuing them away, and making her selfe onely Mistris of that place. But howsoeuer it was, it fell out well for me, to enioy so great a happines. But if the onely touching of her hand, was of force to bring me into an Extasie of ioy and pleasure, what then (thinke you) would the kissing of the same haue wrought in me, if I had had license to haue done so much vnto her? No doubt I had died through extreame delight, as that Romane Gentlewoman did,An Example. when she sawe her sonne returned home safe and aliue, from that bloodie battaile of Cannas, where she thought he had bene slaine. But I was not worthy of so great a good, and therefore was well contented with the fortune I had before. Meane space, this beast commeth with a most strange boldnes, there not being his like in all the world, affrighting not onely the Gods of the woods, but men, and other senselesse creatures also. The Serpent Python was neuer so horrible, the Hydra that Hercules slew, not halfe so terrible: nor that great Crocadile, that was taken vpon the bankes of Nilus, and present∣ted vnto King Ptolomie by his fishers, was halfe so hideous or fierce. He had the head of a wilde Boore, hauing sharpe and great prickles round about his throate, as red as any blood: his haire, his skinne, and his eares, were as a Lyons: his bellie as a Leopard. His taile as a Serpent, his feete as a Griffon, & he had wings as an Eagle, The descripti∣on of that vg∣ly Monster PRIDE. with great proudnes did he come to drinke at that cleare Fountaine, I wondring much, that the verie spring thereof did not drie vp, at the sight of so vgly a Monster. He drinke at his pleasure, whilest very dread kept vs within a little hole, which we by chance had found out vpon the top of the Rocke, into which we had gotten, because we would not be seene of this odious beast, but when we sawe him winged, we then began to feare, more then euer we had done before; for then we thought verily, that he would take his flight vp, vnto the Rocke, and so deuour vs, who stood trembling and shaking, because we imagined it could not be but that he had seene vs: for alwaies feare turneth euerything to the worst, iudging sinisterly of the same. To be short, he had seene vs indeed, and (no doubt) to our great hurt, had he made after vs, to finde our feare true,The descripti∣on of Humili. tie. but that there arriued vpon the suddaine a young Da∣mozell plainely apparelled, in white linnin, with a comely kind of attire vpon her head, faire in face, sober in countenance, lowly in gate, and yet most louely to behold. In her hand she had a Bowe which bent when she pleased, and seuen arrowes, well headed and sharpe, and though she were otherwise naked, not hauing other weapons at all, yet did
she not stand in doubt of this fierce Monster, but boldly marched towards him, whilest though her pace was soft and humble, yet did it seeme this hugie beast did feare her, and faine would haue bene gone from her. Diuers were our opinions as concerning this Dame, some thought she was Diana, others that it was Iune, some Minerna, and some Venus. But to say truth, she resembled none of them, being more faire, then some of them, and lesse beautifull then the other: and yet more milde and curteous then any of them all. To conclude, we all agreed, with a generall consent, that she was some diuine crea∣ture, seeing she addressed her selfe to goe against the Monster so boldly, who perceiuing her to approach towards him, turned towards her, vomitting forth so great and flashing a flame, as all seemed to be on fire thereabouts, we thinking that she had bene consumed with the same. But as gold taken out of the burning Furnace,A Similie. is farre more bright and fierce, then when it was first flung in, and as Camomill, the more it is trod vpon, the thicke and bet∣ter it groweth: euen so, might we see this faire Archeresh to shew more cleare and beauti∣full, when the flame was once past and gone then she had bene before. No hurt had she at all, which made vs to wonder, whilest putting one of her arrowes into her Bowe, she aimed so right, as she planted it within one of the eyes of this monste∣rous beast, who for very rage and madnes, cast forth a most horrible roaring, mingled with fire, blood, & frothy fome; whereupon, he flieth vp into the aire, thinking to come downe with great violence vpon her, and so to gripe her within his Tallents, but she quickly shot another shaft into his bellie, as he was about to flie vpon her, who slipping a little aside, suffered him to fall with great force vpon the hard ground. This made him to leape vp hastily againe, and with strange furie to run towards his enemie to deuour her, who neuer gaue backe one foore for the matter, but quickly let fliean other arrow, which lighted iust vpon one of his eares, which made him so outra∣gious through very griefe and paine, as he flew vpon her with great violence, and with his sharpe pawes (in despite of her) snatcht her Bowe & Arrowes from her: which done, away he runneth with them through the wood, leauing the flight, and the faire Virgin, that followed after him. I seeing this, made all the hast I could to get downe, to the end I might know what she was, and thereupon followed her hard. Hauing ouertaken her, I was giuen to vnderstand by her, that this Monster was PRIDE, hauing the head of a wilde Boore, proud & greediet: he skinne, the haire, and the colour, of a roaring Lyon, stately and high minded, more then other beasts: the bel∣lie of a mutinous Leopard, wonderfull insolent, the clawes of a Griffon, by nature arrogant. The taile of a Serpent, subtill, peruerse, and impudent: and the wings of an Eagle, who is by kinde, loftie, and high minded. This Monster was borne before all time, pro∣ceeding from the Excrements of heauen and earth,Of the Origi∣nall ad first beginning of Pride. when the Eternall Iehouah, first diui∣ded them, since when it hath haunted men continually. The euerliuing Sonne of the euerlasting God, comming amongst vs, draue him away, since which time, he being returned into the world, hath done more hurt, then e∣uer he had done before, as the thiefe doth, that hath once escaped out of Gaile. Neuer was there any so wise, that hath bene able to resist him, no not the old Phy∣losophers themselues, who composed many famous workes in disgrace and contempt of vaine-glorie, setting downe their names in the forefront of their bookes, but were o∣uercome by him. All Christians (for the most part) were in the same predicament, especially such, who tearme themselues to be Maisters of the Lawe, and teach the same: for so sweet a thing is glorie, as euery one desireth, and runneth to haue it. But (as I told you before) our Sauiour Christ, being borne in an old rotten stable, within a Manger vpon haie, and betwixt two harmelesse beasts, chased away this cruell Monster, vnto the shame of all other mortall creatures. For his Pallace royal was a stable, his Princely Chariot, a Manger: his fine sheetes, haie and strawe: his Seruitors, an Oxe and an Asse: and his Princes, poore and sillie Shepheards. After this, the good Constantiue, hauing giuen so much lands vnto the Popes, as
they began to dispute with armed weapons, what right they had vnto the same, he  in amongst the Cleargie, and so by little and little, amongst all sorts of men else. Thus hath he long time run vp and downe, till at the length,An example discourit . I my selfe who a cal∣led Humilitie, obtained so much, as either I might kill him, or at the least driue him out of the world. But the Traitor perceiuing himselfe to be vanquishit, withdraweth himselfe from me, and closely hideth himselfe, one while in Monasteries, an other while in womens brests, now in the Court of Princes, and then againe amongst Souldiours and men of warre, so as I can neuer chase him away, by reason be hath so many sure and common pla∣ces, whereunto he doth retire. In the end (by chance) I found him in this Desart (a thing most miraculous) for sildome or neuer, was he wont to haunt solitarily places, his chiefe dwelling, being al∣waies in the proud Pallaces, of haughtie and high minded Monarks. And if I had bene able to haue fastned all mine Arrowes which I brought with me, he had bene dead ere this, but the damned wretch (being encouraged by the succours, which great personages lend him) hath growne insolent and bold, as he hath ventured to snatch foure of them from me, which he neuer durst to haue done, if he had fought with me onely of himselfe, and had not bene assisted and countenanced out by the aide of others. If thou hast well marked and considered of my carriage, and mine attire, thou ma∣est easily gesse I am Humilitie, his deadly enemie, but (at this day) so hated of all men, as they reiect me, suffering me (as thou seest) to walke (in a manner) naked, as miserable and starued creatures void of all reliefe, whereas Pride, is well and richly cloathed, full fed, and much made of, and well entertained of euery one. If thou remembrest well our combat, thou sawest me, to shoote three Arrowes at him, all which did hit him right.The Arrowes that Humilitie shot at the Monster Pride. The first Ar∣towe was shame aftes. The first, was the shape of Shamefastnes, which strucke out the eyes of Pride, for ne∣uer shall any bashfull and modest man or woman be subiect vnto Pride. as simple and de∣bonaire, was chaste Hyppolitus, curteous, Alexander the great, and affable and milde the valiant Scipio. Of women, humble was Cassandra: Lucretia, meeke and gentle: Oclatoia, and Cornelia, louely and sweet in behauiour. The second Arrow, was the Arrow of Truth, for neuer can a iust or vpright con∣science,The Second Truth. be trouched with Pride, and this flewe into his eares, which sheweth, that no true man, will euer importune or abuse the cares of any, with false tales, and deceitfull lies: as most true and iust of their word, was Aristdes, Phcion, and Cato the elder. The third, which hit his bellie, was the Arrow of Sobrietie, for what man soeuer shall vse to fast, and giue himselfe to abstinence, shall neuer waxe proud,The third Se∣brictie. because wine and glut∣tonie engendreth Pride, discention, quarrels, and strife; Witnesse, Epanondas, Cincinatus, Cate, Cir, and diuers other. And these were the three Shaftes, with which he was wounded. The other foure, which he tooke away (perforce) from me, were these follow∣ing. The first was of Iustice, which should haue hit into the Muzzle or snout, for a iust and vpright Iudge, will neuer take delight in the sent of gifts and presents,The foure o∣ther Arrowes, that Pride tooke away from Humi∣litie. The first was of Iustice. The Second of Fortitude. The third of Patience. least he should be corrupted thereby; neither will he be insolent and high minded at all. A president we haue of Samuel the Prophet, of Daniel, and diuers others. The second was that of Fortitude, which should haue pierced quite through his necke, for neuer was a valiant Conquerour proud, but rather curteous and milde, wit∣nesse Alexander, Casar, Edward the third, King of England: and Charles the fift, with di∣uers others beside. The third was that of Patience, which should haue depriued him of his wings; for the Patient man that can stay the good houre, hath the aduantage of these proud and ambitious persons, remaining maister of his owne will, where haughtie minded spirits fall soonest, when they seeke to flie highest. Of the number of such as haue bene patient, was that graue Camillus, who being
exiled from his countrie, which he had so often offended, patiently attended her leisure, vntill at the length, she acknowledging her fault, called him home againe. So likewise was Cicero another, choosing rather to liue as a banished man, enduring with patience his vniust iniurie, then his Citie should for his cause, grow to ciuill Dis∣cention and vtter ouerthrow, his staied forbearance giuing him in the end the victorie, against all his proud enemies. The fourth and last, being seauen in all, was that of Mildenes, for neuer was milde or friendly person, proud, and this Arrow should haue strucke off the legs of this Monster. For meeke and humble mindes, shall by little and little take downe and tame the high courages of the proud: and such was Dyon, surnamed the curteous, who brought lowe the audatious boldnes of the Tyrant Dennis: and such another was Scipio the gentle, who brake the insolent proceeding of haughtie Hanniball. These be the Arrowes by which this vgly beast might haue bene tamed and subdu∣ed,The forth, and last was of Mildnes. but he hauing taken foure from me, I doubt mesore, that he will neuer be brought vnder Subiection by any. As for my selfe, I can no more (now) hunt, nor chase him away, sithence I am abandoned of men, and disarmed as thouseest, and therefore, seeing I finde my selfe hated here in the world, and quite without armour, I must be forced to take my iourney vp to heauen, vnto the other vertue: where I doubt not, but I shall be better en∣tertained, then I haue bene here vpon the earth. Meane space, I admonish thee, and all such as thou shalt thinke worthie to make ac∣quainted with this matter, to detest and aborre this shamelesse Monster, and to follow me in my course of life; otherwise they shall be afflicted with like punishment, as those proud Giants, the Titanois were, for their more then audatious presumption. Hauing made an end of her speech, I might perceiue wings to issue out of the sides of this beau∣tious Damozell: wherewith I saw her to flie vp towards the element, passing through the airie Regious, vntill she came vnto the heauenly Court of the Eternall King: since which time, she neuer descended, nor neuer (as I doubt) will she any more. This accident droue me into no small amazement, not vnlike him, that seeth ma∣ny strange enchantments done by a Magitian, whereupon, with more hast then good speed, I went to finde my Mistris, to declare this aduenture vnto her, but the feare she had of the foresaid beast, had driuen her from thence, so as I found nothing but the corner within which we had hidden our selues. But O me vnhappie wretch, that reported that, which afterward was my vtter ruine and ouerthrow.An Example. O what euill sometimes this little tongue of ours doth vnto vs, for that of Demosthenes ouerthrew the libertie of Greece. And therefore thrise wise was that Phylosopher, that thought nothing in this world to be worse then the tongue, because it not onely bringeth calamitie vnto him that spea∣keth, but also vnto the whole common-wealth besides. And therefore, well said that old Sage of Greece, who affirmed, that silence was com∣mendable, and without blame, whereas speaking, was subiect vnto reprehention and reproach. The auncient wise men in times past, did offer Sacrifice vnto dumb Silence, as vnto a sacred Deitie, adoring her with great reuerence, for many a one haue bene cut short of their liues, because of their ouer-rash and bold speech: and this found I, to be but too true, by mine owne experience, and vnto my no small griefe. Well, I not finding my Mistris there, went seeking of her vp and downe, not making account of any paine, so I might once haue a sight of her, loue making that labour, to seeme but easie and sweet, which Louers vndertake, when they follow in pursuit their faire and beautious Ladies, for the desire which they haue to see them, maketh them to thinke it is no trauaile at all, and that man thinketh that he rather plaieth then worketh, who expecteth some worthie recompence when he hath brought his worke vnto an end. This made me to run vp and downe to see if I could finde her, whilest being earnest in this busines, I might heare a certaine voice comming forth of a thicke quickset, where∣vpon I staied awhile to harken if it were hers or no, but I knew quickly it was not, as soone as I hard the Song, which was as followeth.
Withouten scope, To haue the hopen My Ladie any more, Since cannot bee, That I may see, To death ile flie therefore. Sweet death now come, And to me runne. Since I to thee doe crie, Be thou my friend, That I may end These dates of miserie. Whilst I doe line, I nought but grieue, Deprined of all ioy, How can that hart, Of case haue part, When Loue doth him annoy? My sorrowes soure, My cries each houre, My soule doth pinch with paine, My heauie moanes, My sighes nor groanes, Can neuer moue my dame. Why then, so long, (Death) dost me wrong? That yet I am not dead, That man doth rest, Happie and blest, Whose soule from hence is sled. No worldly strife, No ill so rife, Can hurt who is in graus, Die he doth not, But life hath got, That such a good may haue. Thus was the Shepheard (amorous of my Diana) of whome I told you before, who reaped no more sweet fruits of his loue, nor found any more curtesie at her hands, then I had done, which was in effect nothing, so that we being borne (both) vnder one Plan∣net, became to become partners and companions in our loue and miserie together. He sighed and sobbed as I did, he wailed and wept as I vsed to doe, and yet neither his sigh∣ing nor his teares, were any more profitable vnto him then they were vnto me. After his Song was finished, he began thus afresh to complaine. O Cupid, how well haue the Gods chosen thee to be the bloodie butcher of their cruelties, since they could not bestowe this office vpon any that could discharge the place so well as thou, by rea∣son thou art more cruellie giuen, then any one that is in heauen aboue, or else in hell belowe? There is no tortor or torment, no Corsie or anquish, of what Nature or kinde soe∣uer, that is without hope, Loue onely excepted: for to miserable Captaines, there is some hope of their freedome, to poore and beggerly wretches, a conceit to become rich a∣gaine: & to sicke persons, some comfort to recouer their former health; but loue is with∣out all likelihood or beliefe of hope whatsoeuer. Who then is more cruell then he, who more to be doubted, and who so hurtfull and dammageable vnto mankinde? and therefore when the Gods meane to punish vs most cruellie, then doe they send this cruell executioner vnto vs, he being farre worse then the flashing lightning it selfe, for that (without languishing) quickly dispatcheth vs, where this, after it once beginneth with vs, neuer maketh an end, driuing vs to linger in a worse then deadly consumption. Too well finde I this, and feele it to my smart, louing in dispaire, and yet in such sort, as death, which is hatefull vnto men (and is of force to rid me out of this agonie and insupportable passions) is forbidden me, I not daring to die, for feare to loose the wisht for presence of her who daily killeth me. So doth the Marchant allured with profit, scowre so often the swelling Seas, that in the end, both he and his ship, with all his Marchandise is swallowed therein. And so I loue, and yet will not giue ouer that which in the end will drowne me, and be the cause of my pittious ouerthrow: but as the Gods harden the harts of such men whom they meane to chastise, who when it is too late begin to thinke how they might haue aunided the same, so the more rigorously to punish me, the heauens haue forced me to loue, depriuing me of all meanes how to helpe my selfe, because they are desirous of my fall. O thrise blessed Leander, Piramus; and Paris, in respect of me, who for loue left their
liues, and yet had this good hap, that before they died, they enioyed their Mistrees companie, and were beloued of them: where I on the other side, am hated and loathed of mine. But diuers, and of sundrie effects are the shafts of Loue, some are of leade, and they rather coole and freeze, then heate: others, hedded with gold, which pierce into our hearts, setting a fire many flames within the same. With the Leaden Arrow hath Cupid strucke my Ladie, which maketh her colde and cruell vnto my mischiefe: and with a gold enoue, is my poore hart wounded, burning the same incessantly, and making it to die remedilesse. As the waifairing man, who perceiin two or three wolues deuouring a sheepe most greedily in the corner of a field, goeth his way faire and softly, that he may not be perceiued by them. Euen so, I hauing herd what this Shepheard said, stole softly by him without any noise, because he should not see me in quest of my Ladie; and yet had I no great need so to doe; for Loue taketh a mans sight and sences away from him, in such wise, as they be∣come Rocks or Trees, as Myrrha was. And thus was I rid of my fellow in Loue, whome I left alone to meditate therevpon, this musing, working mischiefe, not alone to his thoughts, but vnto h eyes and bodie also. Meane space, I seeke vp and downe for my Diana. Neuer did those two bretheren being Twinnes, wander more carefully to seeke all about for their rauisht sister, then I sought here and there for her, whome at the last I found dauncing amongst other Nymphs, who to driue away the feare from her, which as yet held her, had deuised this sportfull pastime, to see if they could make her merrie. One thought drowneth another, one exercise maketh another to be forgotten, and nothing sooner driueth away a Tempest, then the bright beames of the Sunne, his chie∣fest enemie. Still and husht did I stand to se this trim daunsing, not being a little proud to behold my Saint, who excelled all the rest (whih they trod the measures) as well in beautie as in behauiour and good grace, as the Phenix doth all other Birds. And now she had quite forgotten the foresaid Monster, and her feare was past and gone, when no sooner she espied me, but that her colour began to change, she shewing not that liuelines in the Galliard, as she had done before, for my presence brought the danger before her eyes, which she had but lately sced, putting her in minde afresh of the foule deformitie of the Mrster. Accursedd, that should be occasion of griefe vnto her, vpon whome my whole life and libertie did depend. But this was but a preamble or a beginning of my sorrowes, the end whereof was more then lamentable and Tragi∣call. Well may I say, too true is that pouertie, which learneth vs, that one pleasure en∣gendreth a thousand cares, and that nothing is so much subiect vnto change, as is the prosperitie of man. Quickly did I perceiue how my Dna was altered, yet knew I not well the occasion thereof, for one while I thought it was for meere pittie of my paines that she looked so, who beholding me, began to bethinke her selfe of the same: another while I doubted, least some sinister conceit, was come into her head against me, she being loth to vtter it with her owne mouth vnto me. Being thus troubled in minde with two contrarie opinions, I thought it best to stay, vntill they had made an end of their pastime, the better to be resolued therein, being greatly moued, in that vpon my first arriuall, I sawe her change her countenance, and therefore longed the more to know the cause thereof. It is strange to see, how we are alwaies more desirous and curious to vnderstand what is bad in our owne behalfes, then that which is good for vs, as if we our selues and not others, would become murtherers of our owne healths. Meane space, many things ran in my braines, whilest my Mistris (passing by) cast now and then a glaunce vpon me, which sometimes I tooke for the best, and then a∣gaine I doubted the worst. To be short, I resembled the guiltie Fellon, who strucken colde with feare, attendeth his last sentence, either of life or death, whilest I listned vnto their singing, and
amongst diuers other Sonnets, I brought this away with me, which one of the Nymphs warbled forth, and therather did I learne it by roate so soone, because it did somewhat answere vnto my humour. AN ODE. Worthy's hee of the bright Day, Who doth loyall LOVE obay. CVPID onely I doe loue, Him I worship stillaboue: Happie is he that by the same, Wisedome to himselfe doth gaine. Worthy's hee of the bright Day, Who doth loyall LOVE obay. O how sweete is that warme Fire. Which our hearts heates with Desire? To our soules no sweetnes is, Halfe so dulcet as is this. Worthy's hee of the bright Day, Who doth loyall LOVE obay. Blessed LOVE, withouten crime, Two Sonles pleaseth at one time: Then doth LOVE, his Louer right, When his loue hee doeth requite. Worthy's hee of the bright Day, Who doth layall LOVE obay. Of two Soules hee makes but one, In two Bodies all alone: LOVE more happie cannot hee, Then wee louing Couples see. Worthy's hee of thi bright Day, What doth loyall LOVE obay. Pleasure none vpon the ground, Like to LOVE is to be found: Pieasures passe as transitorie, LOVE (still) lines in great glorie. Worhy's hee of the bright Day, Who doth loyall LOVE obay. After the Nymph had made an end of her Song, which charmed my spirites, my Ladie (as another Caliope, answered her. Ah renowned Father, how sweete, (and yet sower withall) was that voyce of hers vnto mee? Empoysoned Ipocras is not halfe so dangerous vnto the health of man, as that Dittie was cruell vnto my very soule. Neuer was those bewitching tunes of the alluring Syrens, halfe so gratious and de∣lightfull, which the prudent Duke of Ithaca, feared more then Death it selfe. One of the fairest parcells of a womans beautie, is her voyce, whilst it doeth rauish the hearts of the stauders by, with true Harmonie, and whilst her warbling Accents, pierce and enter into the very depth of their soules.
By our eares, doth it enter downe into our harts, but it commeth not from thence, without spoyle and riches. For it carrieth away the minde of man, playing as the sub∣till war-like foe doth, who marching vpon his enemies Countrey, setteth vpon the same violently, & neuer returneth home again, vntill he be loaden with great prey & treasure. So sweete was her voyce, and so bright her Saphire eyes, as I could not chuse but crie out, (although softly, and vnto my selfe,) Ah woe is me, I die. But now I pray you, harken vnto my Ladies Song, which was quite contrary vnto that, that went before. For thus it was. Worthie is hee of darke Night, That in Cupid doth delight. Nothing in this World can be, Sweeter then our Libertie: Which LOVE often takes away, And then all our ioyes decay. Worthie is hee of blaeke Night, That in Cupid doeth delight. LOVE doth neuer sorrow misse, (Who grieues) malcontented is: But LOVE (thus) doth Louers sting, Doth not LOVE, then sorrow bring? Worthie is hee of Blacke Night, That in Cupid doth delight. Who that soule hath ere seene oasde, Vpon whom fierce LOVE hath soasde! The Mistris and the Sernant both, Oft through LOVE, their liues doe loath. Worthie is hee of blaeke Night, That in Cupid doth delight. Gods from heauen haue chast'e and som, This vile wretch, vs to torment: Nor are wee him to endure, That such plagnes vs, doth procure. Worthie is hee of blaoke Night, That in Cupid doth delight. Then most wretched him I deeme, That of this blinde Boye doth steeme: Worser Plague there's not of ills, That consumes still, yet (nere) kills. Worthie is hee of blacke Night, That is Cupid takes delight. If this Song did astenne me, driuing me into a heauy dump, you may caslly iudge; For I assure you, I began now to giue ouer all hope to haue any more ioyfull dayes in this world, and I was of this opinion that my Ladit had (for the nonce) deliuered the same in my presence, to the end I should not looke for any fauour at her hands, and that by this Song, she had as it were bidden me farewell.
For such women as are wise and of diseretion, haue a thousand deuises to take their leaues, and to be rid of their Louers, whome they esteeme not: as well to shadow their cruell mindes with the same, as to be free and cleare from them, without reproach or blame. For what need had my Mistris to bid me Adieu, since I neuer was worthie, nor accounted to be one that shee should loue? No, no: I was not a man good enough, to heare (of a beautie so perfect) so much as this one small word (Goe thy wayes.) But haughtie and high minded LOVE, vseth to distribute his pride amongst his followers: in such sort, as you shall seldome or ne∣uer, see a Louer, but that hee is insolent and proud, promising farre more vnto himselfe, then hee is like to obtaine. Hee that is a seruant, will be alwayes sure to haue one quali∣tie or other of his Maisters, as a newe vessell retaineth still the sent of that liquor, with which he hath bene first seasoned. And so I (before this time) beganne to thinke better of my selfe, then I had cause, but my vain-glorious humor was quickly taken downe, resembling the Lightning flash, which no sooner is borne, but that it dyeth: or a buble of water, which is no sooner come, but that it is gone againe presentlie. The Dance ended, my Ladie came straight towards mee, demanding, and enquiring of me, what that Monster and that Maide were, and what became of them? I tolde her all (as I did vnto you, without forgetting any thing) describing vnto her, (with all the best cunning I had) both the vglinesse of that deformed beast, and the beautie of the Damosell that did encounter with him. As that braue Caualier whome his enemie doeth dare to Combat, standeth musing within himselfe (sometime) before hee doeth answere, debating in his minde, whether he should accept or refuse the Combat, so stood my Mistris mute and still at my speeches, studying a great while, before she spake any one word. In the end she sitteth her downe, when hauing willed vs to sit by her, shee beginneth with a most sober and sadde looke, thus to deliuer her minde. Seeing (Shepheard) that this Monster is called Pride, thou couldest not describe so fowle a Beast (and so horrible) bad de enough, neither must thou speake too much in the praise of so sweete, so faire, and gentle a Virgin as that Damosell was, because shee is Hu∣militie: For what thing is there in the world, more vglie then Pride? What more disa∣greeing from the Nature of Gods and men? what so great an aduerfarie vnto Vertue? and what more contrarie vnto the glorie of mankinde? Pride, was first placed in heauen amongst the Angelicall spirits, which the Almighty God had made beautifull, immortall, and without corruption:An excellēt dis∣course against Pride. but this Monster hauing defamed and disgraced them, was (with them) throwne downefrom thence, from whence he came to inhabit in the terrestriall Paradise. There did this damned wretch, poyson our first Parents, perswading them,The fall of Lucifer through Pride. that they should be like vnto their Creator, if they would (by transgressing his sacred Ordinance) cate of the forbidden Tree. These poore soules belieued him, but they ouerthrew themselues, for hauing hear∣kened vnto him, God driuing them out of that dainty Paradise, condemned them to die,The fall of our first parents A∣dam and Eue, through Pride. after they had (in much sorrow and care) finished their naturall liue With them, was this Serpent hunted away, who retired himselfe amongst mortall men, liuing heere in the world, and fewe were there of the sonnes of men, which did not entertaine and make much of him. Caine nourished this hell-hound a long time, being induced through him, to kill his humble and meek-harted brother, who could not abide this insolent Dragon. Afterward,The fall of Caine through Pride. as men grew & increased, so hath this Monster done, both in power and credit: insomuch as he counselled the children of the earth to build a Tower, which might reach vp into heauen. These vaine fooles belieued him, busying themselues about their high Turret, and taking great paines to accomplish and effect this rash and haughtie enterprise. But the HOLIE ONE of Syon, ouerthrew their building,The ouer∣throw of the Tower of Ba∣bylon, throgh Pride. destroyed the worke of their owne hands, and brake their audacious attempts, driuing the Monster himselfe, al∣most out of his wittes, to see such an alteration and chaunge. Hereof was it, that the first Poets fained: That those huge Giants, the Tytans,
being sonnes of the earth, went about to set hill vppon hill, and mountaine vppon mountaine, that they might scale vp to heauen, and that (therefore) Iupiter destroyed them with Lightning, by the ayde and assistance of Minerua, the Goddesse of wisedome: ouerthrowing their prefumptuous action, with his foresaid Thunderbolts. Since when, this Monster hath entered into the Courtes of Princes and Kings, im∣poysoning them so strongly with his accursed venome,The ouer∣throw of the Pesian Kings, through Pride. as they grew to be exceeding proud, causing themselues to be worshipped and adored of men, as the Kings of Persia did, he giuing addresse vnto some of them, that they should imitate Iupster, making his Thunder to roare, and to cast Lightning abroad, as he vsed. This proud Conceit was entertained in the Pallace of Alcxander the great, after he had brought the Empire of Persia vnder subiection:The ouer∣throw of Alex∣ander the great through Pride. For hee grewe so arrogant and so high minded, as he would needs be adored by his people, but death (quickly) extinguisht both his glorie and his life, after hee grewe to be odious amongst his owne followers, through his insolent Pride. So would Nabuchadonozar be worshipped, causing his Image to be set vp, he com∣maunding euerie one to offer sacrifice and prayer vnto it,The fall of Na∣bucadnezar, through Pride. as vnto a God. But the three Children of the Iowes refused this vniust law: who for that cause, were cast into a hote burning Ouen, they being neuerthelesse taken forth from thence, without hauing anie hurt at all, through the helpe of an Angell, which their God had sent to succour them. Yet the same God, being iealous of his Glorie, which he will not haue attributed vnto a∣nie, but vnto himselfe, scourged that proud Monarke, for forgetting himselfe so much. In so much as hee made him to liue (the space of seuen whole yeares) amongst bruit Beasts, eating the like pasture that they did, and hauing in a manner, the selfe-same skinne, and verie forme as they had, so as hee became both hairie and rough as an Oxt. This hellish Monster seeing so mightie a Potentate brought so lowe, so miserable, and into so pittious an estate, left him, and went to seeke out the Romanes, who being Lords of the whole world, receiued him with great ioy, but hee infected their mindes vpon a suddrine, making them so proud, as (one not beeing able to endure the greatnes of another) they toke vp Armes, reuenging vpon their owne selues, those great wrongs and outrages which they had done vnto other strange Nations. Thus was their Peacocks plumes taken downe, and their pride asswaged, haughtie Pompay,The fall of Pompay the great, through Pride. being worthilie murthered, because he refused such honest conditions of peace which Caesar offered him, who desirous to be a Monarke, and to raigne as absolute, brag∣ged that he was able to leauie and make a thousand Legions of armed Souldiers out of Italie, with holding vp his hand onely. The Romanes beeing ouerthrowen through Ciuill dissention, and this subtill Ser∣pent seeing them at so lowe an Ebbe, that they could not at that time, be anie longer at charges with him:The ouer∣throw of the French Nati∣on, by the va∣liant English∣men, through Pride. hee commeth ouer the Mountaines, and so into France, vnto the French-men, whom likewise hee vndid, through his wicked poyson: for (they forsooth) would needs be Monarkes of all the world, but their braue courages were quickly coo∣led, for they were brought so lowe, and had so many terrible ouerthrowes, by their aun∣cient enemies, the valiant ENGLISHMEN, as they lost all, not hauing so much as a little hoe, wherein to put their heads, after they had seene their Kings taken priso∣ners aliue, and all the flower of their Nobilitie discomfited and slaine. Which this Monster perceiuing, and that they looked so pale and leane, as they could not cherish him as they had done heretofore: away hee flieth vnto the Ottomans, who as then beganne to lay a foundation of their Tyrannie in Asia the lesse,The fall of Ba∣iazet the great Turke, throgh Pride. whome he so infocted, as they would needes be kneeled vnto, as vnto Gods, but small time did their vaine-glorie last; For Tamberlaine came, who spoyled their Empire, tooke Baiazet, Prince of the Turkes, prisoner, and the more to Eclipse and abase his haughtie stomack, hee caused him to be fedde in a Cage of golde, making him to serue in steede of a foote∣stoole, when he went to horse-backe. Which this Monster seeing, hee taketh his leane of the Turkes, following him, who had ouercome them, who grewe so insolent and proud, as hee tearmed himselfe The Scourge of God.
Neither would hee take any Citie or Towne which hee had besieged, vnto his mer∣cie, if they had exceeded three dayes before they had surrendred themselues vnto him. But this insolent man was punished of God, his children within a while after,The fall of Tamberlaine, through Pride. lo∣sing all that hee had gotten before, which the olde Serpent espying, backe hee returneth once more to Rome, thrusting himselfe amongst the Romane Emperours, whome he like∣wise did ruinate. For Sopor King of Persia, ouerthrew one of them in battaile,The fall of the Romane Em∣perours, through Pride. and taking him priso∣ner, vsed him in steed of a forme or thresholde, when hee would get vp vppon his horse. And yet for all this, did not this Monster giue ouer Rome,Pride lodged among Eccle∣siasticall per∣sons in Rome. but get him selfe amongst the Ecclesiasticall persons, whome he sorely indaungered, and that done, hee commeth backe into France, where in the time of Charles the great, hee was honoured, was bidde welcome, and was entertained with great credite in his Court. Hee passing the Alpes, to place the Pope in his Pontificall chaire this wicked Mon∣ster followed him, remaining long in Italie,Pride amongst Heretikes. insomuch as the Diuell beganne to raise vp new Teachers and Sowers of false doctrine, with which hee acquainted himselfe, pussing vp these turbulent Spirites with such pride, as they disdained, both Saintes, Angells, and Princes. From thence he tooke his iourney vnto the Switzers, who called them∣selues, the Correctors of Princes. But Francis, the first of that name, and King of France, abated their Surquedrie,Pride amongst the Zuitzers, & they plagued for the same. brauely ouerthrowing them, and learning them vnto their cost, that they might be ta∣med and beaten. From whence he went to dwell amongst Heretikes, where he yet con∣tinueth, and so will doe still, and this hath bene the life of this horrible Monster Pride, so much hated and detested of good men. But now (quite contrarie vnto him) there is nothing more sweete, more sacred, or more deuout, then is faire HVMILITIE, which gaue victorie vnto chaste Iudith, against Holofernes: to religious Hester, aganst Aman: to simple Dauid,A praise of HVMILITY. against huge Go∣liah: to kinde Iudas Machabeus, against fierce Antiochus: and to curteous Godfrey of Bullion, against the Turkes and Sarracins: to Charles the great, (the honour of France) against Painims, and vnbelieuers: to Charles the fifth, against the High Dutch-men: and to Great Francis, the French King, against Italians and Spaniards. Then let vs follow Humilitie, and chase from vs Pride: For neuer shall any proud person finde the gates of Heauen open vnto him. God hath not driuen from thence those proud Angels, that others, (as proud as they) should be entertained there. Onely the humble and lowly mindes shall mount vp thither, as our humble Sauiour IESVS CHRIST did most gloriouslie, and so his milde Mother, that blessed Virgin, S. Mary, his single-hearted Apostels, and those meeke and patient Martyrs, they shall inhabit that glorious Kingdome for euer. The proud man, may bee resembled vnto the Cedar of Libanon,A Similie. which a suddaine Thunder cracketh, bendeth, & breaketh in pieces: or as a sharpe edged Axe doth heaw asunder; Euē so shall a proud man quickly fall, but shal passe away, as if he had neuer bene. This was the cause the high iudge Celestiall, caused the earth to open, and swallow downe Corah, Dathan. and Abyram, in that they durst rise vp against their guide Moses: This was the death of mutinous Absolon, taking Armes against his owne Father.An Example of Pride. This made insolent Ieroboam so miserable, who would pill and pole his harmelesse subjects. This ouerthrew impudent Iezabel, suffering her to be deuoured of Dogges. And to be briefe, this punished ambitious Antiochus: high-minded Senacherit, with ten thousand more. His Parable is most true, who sent home the poore Publicane (beeing humble and meeke) more iustified vnto his house, then hee did the proud Pharisie, who stood vaun∣ting so much vppon his owne good-works, with this sentence, Free that bu  himselfe shall be glorified: and hee that glorifieth himselfe, shall not be exalted. O how much better and comelier is it, that a man should say vnto one, Friend sit vp higher, at the Table, & take a more honourable place vnto you: then to say, Come downe, & sit lower, that a worthier person then thy selfe, may sit where thou doest. Hence then Pride, and fie vpon Haughtines, pack hence Ambition, and away with vainglory.
these being most dangerous plagues vnto men, infecting as well their consciences, as their mindes within them. On the other side, sweere and profitable is Humilitie, for so doth the wise man teach vs, when hee saith, Boast not thy selfe of to morrow, for little doest thou knowe what tuill this day may bring vnto thee. Amilcar,Amilear de∣ceuted throgh Pride. chiefe Generall of the Carthaginian forces, besieging Syracusa, had an answere from his false Gods, that hee should suppe the day following within the same Towne: wherevpon, he straightwaies began to waxe proud, and yet did it fall out otper∣wise then he expected, for although hee supped the same night within the Citie, it was not as a Conquerour, but as a prisoner, hee being taken in a Skirmish, which they of the besieged Towne made against him. Let vs not therefore vaunt our selues ouermuch, least wee be taken downe sooner then we looke for: for hee onely that is lowly in minde, shall be accounted of. Let vs then shunne all Prids: to auoyd the same, we must leaue all companies, all Cities, and all Courts of Princes. So did the deuout and mortified Marie Magdalene, leaue the world, retiring her selfe into a Rock,The death of M. Magdalen. where being all alone, she lamented her sinnes past, with great contri∣tion and repentance, passing the rest of her life, in this deuout manner. To leaue this Monster, the Auncient good Fathers, ranne into Woods and Desarts, leauing their Townes and Cities, as Paul, Anthony, Hierome, and diuers moe, because Prsde seldome or neuer haunteth solitarie places, for feare he should be starued for hun, ger, (but rather runneth amongst the Rich, and where there is good store, and plentie of euery thing, and thither likewise must wee withdraw our selues, if wee meane to liue de∣uoutlie indeed. The Almightie Sonne of the euerliuing God, chose a Wildernesse for his field of warre,A solitary place better for Me∣ditano of hea∣uenly matters, then Citties, or company of men. at what time hee did combat with the Diuell, after that he had fasted fortie dayes, and fourtie nights. O thrice happie they, who giuing ouer the world, passe the rest of their liues in true holinesse and vertue, in some secrete and remote place, as if it were an Hermitage, where neither Ambition, nor Enuie, neither Couetousnes, nor vaine Loue, trouble them not at all, whilst they with great contentment and pleasure, passe the rest of their liues, free from all daungers whatfoeuer. There they grieue not to see their enemies waxe rich, and themselues to growe poore. There no brawlings at the Barre about Law matters, no confused noyse for the profite of Cities, no toyling and moyling like Drudges in the Countrey, doth trouble or molest them at all, whilst they onely liue vnto their God, not regarding or once min∣ding any matters or businesse of the world. After this manner of life,A proofe of the Contem∣platius life. meane I to end mine owne, and I will studie to finde out this sacred Humilitie, which neuer deceiueth anie. For hardly can hee misse of his pur∣pose, or be frustrated of his enterprise, who goeth willingly about the same, not beeing troubled with any thing else in his minde at all. Hence then all Ambitious creatures, for I must needes leaue you, since you soyle our soules, as oyle doth staine a garment. A solitarie and sequestred kinde of life is best,Pride is neuer in poote and vertuous pla∣ces. more pleasing, and more secure then any other. So will I liue, and such a one will I be, to uoyd that furious Monster Pride, who neuer commeth in chaste and priuate pla∣ces, which are well gouerned, and where good exercises are vsed, in all laudable sort that may be. And therfore here I protest, that from hence forward, I will leaue this wicked world, and that most willingly, with all the vaine pompes, and flattering greatnesse of the same, wishing euery one that is wise to followe mee, taking the same course I am in hand to doe. So horrible and terrible is the foulenesse of that Beast, as it maketh me (yet) to trem∣ble for verie feare, and neuer shall I thinke thereof, but that I shall finde my selfe the worse a long time after: Therefore to preuent the worst, and not to fall into his gry∣ping pawes, I am resolued to forsake all companie of men, shutting my selfe within some vncoth and vnfrequented place, like vnto a Recluse, where without euer seeing
any bodie, I will end the remnant of this my too long life, farre from Pride and ambiti∣on, and voyd of all loue and enuie. This is my constant and certaine resolution, which I propose to such as (minding to follow me) are willing to be partakers of true Humslitie, gaining thereby rest in this world, and in the world to come peace euerlasting. Therefore (my deare and sweet companions) although I be loth, yet must I needs leaue you, to seeke out this rough and austere kinde of abode, where my drerie eyes shall be exempted from the view of this strange Monster, which would make me to die for ve∣ry feare onely, if they should by chance once more haue neuer so little sight of him: yea, yea, I will seeke to auoide his loathed prefence by this good meanes, whilest following the steps of humble Humilitie, I shall imitate that great vessell of election, who reioyced in nothing so much, as in the crosse of Christ. That religious S. Iohn the Baptist, who called himselfe, the voice of a cryer in the wil∣dernes, and that godly Elias, who tearmed himselfe to be a feather blowne vp and downe by the winde, all which three, were lowly and humble aduersries to Pride, and voide of all ambition. Therefore haue I set vp my rest to cast Anker in this Hauen, after my sayling through so many and dangerous mortall Seas, desiring you all (my deare and louing sisters) most humble entreating you, that none of you doe me that great wrong, as to seeke to dehort me from this so holy a resolution, which if you should, yet were it but in vaine, and to no purpose at all: he is accursed, that seekes to leade astray that sinner, who is entered into the path of his saluation, he hauing a sorrowfull heart, and being penitent in his minde for the same. Now (reuerend Sire) iudge you if this Oration was pleasing vnto me or no, I stood mute and still, as that huge Gretian Horse made of wood, wherein were hidden the enemies of Troy, for neuer (vntill then) did I feele the piereing darts of sorrow aright. In respect of this, all my other paines were but pleasures, nay meere toyes (to speake of) in a manner, compared vnto this Corfie, which so violently seazed vpon me, as I felt most bloodie pangs, and cruell conflicts to make warre within me, the anguish thereof being so insupportable, as I looked euery houre when my soule and bodie should haue parted asunder. Ah most vnluckie tongue, who taught thee to talke so much? Alas, that man should be so vnwife, as to make way vnto his owne ouerthrow, whilest he thinking to doe for the best, it falleth out vnto him for the worst, and where he loo∣keth to haue praise, there oftentimes he purchaseth most blame and discredit. Full little did I thinke, but that whilest I reported the filthines of the Monster, she would haue gi∣uen me great thankes for the same, and that made me with the best tearmes I could, to set out my tale, but it fell out quite contrarie, for I seeking to get somewhat, lost all. Well doe I see, that the prudencie of man is nothing, whilest God scosteth at their wisedome, changing their dissignes, quite contrarie vnto their desire. Great reason had I to curse that lucklesse Monster, vnto the bottomlesse pit of hell, although (before) I had praised him so much, because through him I was permitted to touch the faire hand of my froward Mistris. And thus Louers, either hate or loue, what their blind God putteth into their heads, they being still wauering and inconstant in their opinions. Diuers were the heauie thoughts, which as then seazed vpon me, I being growne (in a manner) to follow blacke dispaire, because I sawe I was like to be depriued of the presence of my Ladie for euer, if she (going onward as she began) would seclude her selfe from all companies, like vnto an Ankresse. An other while, I imagined that I my selfe was culpable of all this wofull mischance, fearing shroadly, that all such as should deplore or lament the losse of her, would lay all the fault vpon me. And therefore had I great reason to mourne and sorrow as I did, I shewing by many signes, and expressing by diuers waies, how my feeble heart was wounded, with an incurable fore. But whilest I stood (thus) sighing, and lamenting vnto my selfe, and whilest all the sad Nymphs had fixed their weeping eyes vpō the ground, not knowing what to say vn∣to the speech which their Ladie made, the Shepheard who was amorous of her, arriued
there, who after he had with a dutifull Conge, saluted her, and all her troupe, presented her with these verses foilowing. My pittious eye (in mailing) nothing more, Bel oldeth faire, then thy diuinest grace: Nothing I see more sacred to adore, Then that pure vertue, that shines in thy face. For thee I liue, for thee I (willing) die, Wishing no Sunne to see, but for thy sake: But should I thee offend, then wretched I. Thus good, and ill, alike for thee I take. For so rare subiect as thy selfe diuine, My hart can neuer suffer ouermuch: Although these cares knawe this poore hart of mine, And (to the quicke) in euery part me touch. Happie is he that suffereth for pure Loue, For whilest he loues so, he himselfe doth finde Transformed into such beautie, as doth moue Life, whereas death before to him was signds. A Deitie, then beautie is aright, When it such wonders worketh in her sight. Another. (Cruell) for louing thee, ile end my daies, Since (dying) I shall liue still in thy beautie: Who dieth Conquerour merrits double praise, But farre more be, who dieth for louing duetie. Immortall glorie Piramus did gaine For this; besides his loyall chastitie Was much commended, when by death the same, Freede Thisbe from most wofull miserie. As he for her, so I for thee will doe, For thee ile die, of my chaste Loue the honour: And as the Phoenix ile consume for you. I (as himselfe) consuming, in that manner. Whilst of my bones so burned shall reuiue, Thousands of Louers created by this fire: Who for their constant Loue shall be aliue World without end, renowmed through true desire. Of these Sonnets she made no account, but hauing read them (which she did rather to be rid of him, then otherwise) she gaue them backe againe vnto the Shepheard (con∣trarie vnto her wonted custome) with these words. Little hath she neede of praise, who because she should auoid the same, maketh her selfe of a liue creature, but a deadly coarse, and yet of her owne valuntarle will and pleasure. Wretched are such men as take pleasure to haue their eares tickled with praises. God onely, who is immortall, infinite without sinne, and euerlasting, deserueth glorie alone. Then (Shepheard) talke no more vnto me of such vanities as these are, for I am no
better then a most miserable caitiffe, who am going to die, and to giue ouer the world, if that auncient Greeke, refused all titles of honour, affirming that he knew onely one thing, which was, that he knew nothing: thinkest thou then, that I can deserue it, I who am as brittle as glasse, descended from that first woman, yea, and from her owne sex, who through her pride, ouerthew all the world? O Shepheard, Shepheard, if as (now) our first Grandmother Eue liued, so farre would she be from looking for honour and reuerend duetie to be done vnto her, as she would doe nothing but weepe continually, whilest her haire (with which we set out and beau∣tifie our faces) should serue her to doe nothing else, then drie and weepe those drerie teares of hers. Away then withall vaine-glorie. Behold, Saladine Emperour of the Infidels, who dy∣ing, commanded that this Epitaph should be set vpon his Tombe.An excellens Epit aph. Here lieth famous Saladine, who of so many Kingdomes, victories, Riches, and Titles of honour, which he had whilst he liued, hath carried away with him, nothing but a plaine sheete into his graue. All is meere vanitie that man doth, euery thing passeth away like winde, and after they are dead, there is no more remembrance of them. That deserueth no glorie at all,A Sentence. which is subiect vnto ruine, and corruption: nothing is more mortall, or declining then man: why then wouldest thou haue him commended, seeing he perisheth, and being perished, the cause of his honour (which thou so much chauntest) doth perish also? But God, who is without beginning, without middle, or ending, and who decaieth not at all, doth merrit praise onely, because he cannot fade, and therefore the subiect of his glorie is alwaies liuing, which we sing continually vnto his name. Away then, away with these foolish verses, rather flattering, then true, and let me ne∣uer heare nor see any thing that hath neuer so little a tast or shew of this misshapen Mon∣ster Pride. Is it possible that man should presume, that he merriteth praise, who being made of earth, is no better then earth, and yet before he can returne to be the same a∣gaine, he is found to be so miserable, as he must feed the wormes which are his brethe∣ren, as prudent Iob wisely did acknowledge as much? Doth he thinke that he hath greater force then wild beasts haue? if so, why then he is deceiued: for many a thousand of them is there, that are stronger then he: doth he thinke he is more liuely in bodie then they? no he is not: is he longer liued then they? neither: is he wittier or more prouident then they be? no: Or doth he thinke that he is better able to withstand the weakenes of Nature better then they? nor that neither: for they are brone, armed with a skinne, with haire, and with pawes, whereas he is brought into the world naked, crying and howling for hunger and sicknesse. Away then Vaine-glorie, hence. Canst thou (poore earthly creature) magnifie thy selfe in thy malicious minde, because thou art mightie in sinne, and in iniquitie? God shall destroy thee, and roote thee out from the earth, as the good Gardiner plucketh vp the bad Grafts. God shall disseuer thee from his children, and thou shalt not enioy that Land of promise, which is appointed for such as are simple, godly, and iust. Ah subtill Poesie, how many good spirits hast thou abused? Meane common∣wealths hauing bene brought vnto nothing, by reason of Poets and Orators,Against the abuse of Poets and Orators. because they haue both wittingly and willingly done iniurie vnto Truth. The Orators of Athens, ouerthrew their citie, because they incensed Phillip,Against De∣mosthenes. King of Macedon, against them, through their smooth and flattering Orations, whilest they concealed the veritie of the cause (for the nonce) from the people: and that Romane Orator, how often did he blind the eyes of the Iudges,Against Ci∣cero. perswading them to condemne the guiltlesse, and to set at libertie the guiltie, as he himselfe (although most impudent∣ly) hath not be ashamed to confesse? O rather wicked, then right wise and learned men, that bestowe these good gifts which are giuen you from aboue, to so bad vse, and to so ill an end, you making your Auditors belieue, that blacke is white, wresting their honest mindes, quite contrarie vnto their iust and vpright meaning. And yet although you are bad, yet are Poets farre worse. For thou (Homer) being a notable Liar, hast made Hector to be vanquisht, and Achilles victor,Against Ho∣mer. the Greekes to be Maisters of the field, and the Troyans to be ouerthrowne; but herein thou errest, and li∣est mightily, for all was quite contrarie; and thou bringest a Vlisses to be prudent,
valiant, and a perfect, and an accomplisht man euery way. But here againe thou fainest, for a base coward was he, and of no reckoning nor regard; his wife being farre worse, and of a most shamelesse life, whom thou settest out to be the onely flower of chastitie. Cruell and lying Virgil,Against Vir∣gil. thou writest of one Aeneas, father of Gods, and of his coun∣trie, one that was full of valure, of Iustice and of pietie. Ah false and vnhonest Poet, doe not we all know, that he was a Traitor vnto his countrie, that he sold his owne citie, deli∣uering it vp into the hands of the Greekes his mortall enemies, like another Iudas, there being nothing worthie of commendation in him, but that he was a periurde wretch, a white liuered Caitiffe, and a most notorious impudent villaine. Besides, thou hast left vs one Dido, to be a harlot, and amorous (forsooth) of this fugitiue: but here thou liest againe, for neuer did she (poore soule) see him in all her life, being a most honourable Ladie, and farre more vertuous, then either thou, or thy for∣sworne Troyan were. O shamelesse and deceitfull Poets, how happie is that citie, that en∣tertaineth no such Monsters as you: As was Sparta sometimes, when it had neither Poets nor Orators, nor gold nor siluer, and all because they would not be abused. Vnfortunate then and foolish are such, as make account of you, deuising how they might be extolled and lifted vp with praises vnto the skies, through your dissembling Pennes Away then I pray thee (my friend) and take thy verses againe, and neuer hereaf∣ter venture to present me any more with such trash as this: but rather call to minde, that fond Poet, who made a bargaine with Alexander the great, that for euery good verse he should present vnto him, he should haue a crowne in gold: and for euery bad, a box vpon the eare: but so often was he strucken, and so many blowes had he, as in the end he died, he not hauing bene able to haue made any verse worthy of reward. Thinke of this sillie Poet,A foolish Poet. when thou goest about to endite, for better were it for one to hold his peace, then to talke without reason. And therefore let no person hereafter be so bold, as presume to write any verse concerning my name, for I make account rather to purchase blame then credit any way thereby: and it will sooner hurt me, then be a helpe vnto me. Let vs then goe vnto some farre secret and solitarie place, and there let vs inclose our selues as it were in a Religious Monasterie, and with vs, let vs imprison our youthfull desires and motions, our Ambition and Vaine-glorie, and there let vs so liue, as the darke clouds of Pride may neuer eclips the Sunne of our Humilitie. And you (my Maisters) who haue bene nourished and fed with this foolish studie, loosing most vainely your young and golden time,Young Schol∣lers ought to vse their gifts, and time well, and not vainely and ill. goe your waies, and sing your Son∣nets vnto others, and seeke some other Subiect then my selfe, on whom you may bestow them. Heauens grant my name may neuer be heard of more in any mouth, and that gi∣uing ouer the world, I may giue ouer all worldly affects, since he onely is right happie, that is exempted from mortall vanities, being gotten alone to dwell by himselfe in some vncoth wildernes, through which, he is free from thousands of mischances and en∣combrances, which bring much trouble vnto our soules. This is the course I meane to take, from which before I will be turned, I will endure the torments and tortors of any cruell death whatsoeuer. O how bitter a Pill was this vn∣to my stomacke, and what anguish and sorrow did the other Shepheard conceiue in his minde, when he hard this irreuocable sentence of his vtter vndoing pronounced by her. He stood confounded and amazed, as Diomede the Greeke did, when fighting with braue Hector, he might see the lightning of heauen to fall before his eyes. His speech failed him, his tongue faltered in his mouth, and being ashamed to see he had the re∣pulse, he knew not what to say. And no meruaile, for the worthiest Phylosophers in the world, haue become mute, before meaner persons then she, witnesse Demosthenes, with diuers others. And now I found my selfe depriued of all hope to describe the rare vertues of my Mistris, seeing she so constantly refused the praises which (and but of right) was attributed vnto her: there∣fore I esteemed my selfe rather the more vnfortunate, because I had but onely this one way to shew my loyall minde vnto her, of which when I was hindered, I felt my selfe to die, a more then languishing death. As that messenger, who perceiuing his Maister to be angry with him, presenteth
him with some pretie gift or other, hoping thereby to pacifie & appease his choller, but when he seeth that he reiecteth the same, he falleth presently into dispaire, and dieth for very griese and anguish of minde: Euen so I, when I sawe a counter-maund, whereby I was forbidden to blazon forth the rare parts, & matchlesse qualities of my Mistris, I became as one sencelesse, through pure sorrow of the same, because I was barred of my will in that which I so much desired. Long time did I stand like a dumb Image or Idoll, whilst I perceiued, that none durst controll the proceeding of vnkinde Diana, so wise and prudent, did euery one hold her: and in the meane time, the other Nymphs, did as the followers of that wise Phylo∣sopher, who neuer gaue any other reason for the opinions which they held, but this; Ipse Dixit. Pihagoras said so, they not daring for their liues to contradict their chiefe head in any thing, such awfull respect, and dutifull feare did they carrie towards her. A liuely apprehension of a most passionate and sudden sorrow hindered my speech, so as I could not answere as I might; confuting her former resolution, with most liuely and apparant reasons. It is easie for poyson that is entered into a mans bodie, to worke as it list, vrging him to his end, if no remedie be sought to resist the same: Euen so, the o∣pinion of my Mistris (not being refelled) whereby she might be perswaded to giue it o∣uer, made her to continue the more firme and resolute therein. And now faine would I haue spoken, although (before) I wished I had neuer ope∣ned my mouth, but I durst not, for feare of offending her whom I coueted to please more then my selfe. Euery one of the Nymphs (without daring as much as once to re∣plie against Diana) stood stone still, holding downe their head s, as if they allowed of her proceedings; which was the matter, that the more afflicted me, I thinking that they were of the selfesame conceit, and that they had perswaded her first, to leaue and giue o∣uer the world: yet if I might haue had but that libertie as but now and then to haue seene her in her solitarie Receptacle or Cell, I wold not haue cared halfe so much: but that was impossible, for I knew none but women might come there (all men being banished from that place) as they were from those sacrifices, which the Romane dames vsed to solemnize and offer secretly and in the night, vnto the Goddesse. Bona Dea. These were the reasons that made me so sad, and these the occasions, that wrought me such sorrow, yet in the end may heart was so great, and I longed so much to speake, to see if I could dehort her from her former determination, as griefe forced me to burst out yet with a wofull gesture and a heauie looke, in this manner. Most sage and prudent Nymph, God hath not forbid vs to honour those that be his creatures, but rather the more to induee vs to doe the more reuerence vnto them, calleth them Gods, for the glorie that others giue vnto them, returneth backe vnto him againe. That King, whom his Subiects obey, doth not hinder, neither is he angry that they beare respect vnto his Leftenants, because the same dutie reboundeth backe againe vn∣to him who is their Soueraigne, and for that without him, no such reuerence should be done. He hath promised vnto those that are his children, that they shall sit as Iudges vp∣on his Throne at the last day, to iudge the twelue Tribes of Israel. Is he then iealous, if mortall men be honoured? No doubt he is not. For if this were true, then would he ne∣uer haue giuen them so great power (as he hath done) here in this world, neither haue set them in the place of his owne authoritie and gouernment, wherein they are installed, because he knew well, that they had neuer bene able to execute their office, nor to haue done such miracles as he suffered them to doe, vnlesse they had bene honoured and ad∣mired by them. Therefore is he not angrie, that good men are highly accounted of, but rather punisheth such as will not be obedient and dutifull vnto them, as he did the Iewes who mocked and despised Moses, who praying to him for them, he made this answere. Nogro, it is not thou, whom they haue despised, but mine owne felfe. By which we may gather, he will haue his elect to be respected. Wherefore (most gratious Nymph) if that great and euerlasting God, to serue him here belowe vpon the earth, hath raigned downe vpon thee thousands of goodly and beautifull vertues, being willing thou shouldest be honoured and esteemed of euery one, why then shouldest thou refuse such fauours offered vnto thee? Iudith after she had ouercome cruell Holofor∣nes,
and deliuered her countrie from tyrannie and Bondage, refused not the honours which were done vnto her, knowing that glorie is the daughter of Vertue, and that the one can neuer be parted from the other. So likewise, let vs humbly beseech thee, to accept in good part our small praises (al∣though I confesse farre vnworthy for thee) seeing they are all we can bestowe vpon thee, for so doing, thou shalt not fall into suspition of Pride, as long as thou doest but what is the pleasure of God, whose minde was, that some creatures should be more per∣fect then other some, to the end he would haue himselfe glorified by them, and because they should be more admired and wondered at, then the rest. In which number, you (faire Ladie) may place your selfe, for you were formed and made, that the wonderfull workemanship of the Eternall Iehouah might be the more ad∣mired: and therefore you haue no reason to hinder that honour which is done vnto him through your meanes, he himselfe speaking of the worthines of his Elect, saith thus. If any one shall follow and administer vnto me, my father who liueth in the heauens, shall honour him againe. If God himselfe disdaineth not to doe honour vnto those that are his, who dare (then) oppose himselfe against that which he commandeth vs? Ought not we to imitate the Eternall Father, who is the Author of all wisedome, in doing of which, we must as he hath taught vs, giue reuerence and respect vnto the iust and best worthy, who are not to refuse it, seeing it proceedeth from his diuine ordi∣nance? Contemne not that honour which is due vnto you, least you shew your selfe an ene∣ynto his sacred will, it being done vnto you, by the father of all wisedome, because he will haue you to be commended amongst mortall men. And whereas you condemne and disdaine both Orators and Poets, yet haue there bene many of them that haue not done good vnto their priuate friends onely, but also vnto their whole countrie and common-wealth. Besides,A praise of Cicero. that famous Orator of Rome, did he not preserue his citie through his pru∣dent Eloquence, from being vtterly spoyled and ouerthrowne, when Cateline, Cethegus, Lentulus, with diuers other of their complices, had conspired together, first to cut the throates of the chiefe Citizens, and then to set Rome on fire; he alone bringing to passe through his prudent policie, that which the brauest Romane Captaine amongst them would neuer haue effected, without the effusion of blood, of millions of Citizens? Therefore did Cicero shew himselfe more stout and more profitable, then the grea∣test Commanders and brauest Souldiours of them all,Cicero preser∣ued Rome from the con∣sitacie of Ca∣reline and o∣ther noble Romanes. who with the losse of many a man purchased a Conquest vnto their countrie, wheras he, without the death of any one, ouer∣threw his aduersaries, who were the more dangerous, in that they kept within the citie it selfe. Besides this notable exployt of his, how often hath he saued many a good Citizen, and worthy Gentlemen from death, as that Roscius, most vniustly accused before the Tyrant Scilly, Ligarius, and Deioterus, with many more, all which (through his diuine Eloquence) he restored vnto life: yea, he did more then all this; for he rather chose to goe into voluntarie exile, then to encounter and withstand the force of his vniust ene∣mies (although he might very easily haue done the same) and so by that meanes saued Rome, which otherwise was readie to take his part (if so he had pleased) he hauing the maior part of the greatest persons, and in a manner the whole youth of Rome to be on his side. Many other good deeds did this worthy man, leauing diuers learned peeces of workes behind him, to the no small profite and benefit of that royall citie. Where you blame Homer,A praise of Homer. you doe that which neuer any in the world hath done before, for so highly was he accounted of, as there were diuers goodly cities, which fal∣ling at debate and contention amongst themselues, committed their whole busines vnto his iudgement, they receiuing for an irreuocable Sentence, but onely one of his verses, and after he was dead, they fell out, and striued, who should haue his bodie to in∣terre the same. He is counted the Author of all Arts and Sciences. But say he should (sometimes) spare the truth now and then in his writings (as if he seemed to be a little partiall) yet was he neuerthelesse to be borne withall, and could doe
no otherwise then hee did, in speaking (somewhat) in the praise and commendation of his owne Countrey: For, for our Countrey we are borne, and are bound to doe more for it, then for our selues. Againe, you must consider, he was a Poet, and no Hystoriographer, and that Po∣ets haue more libertie, to write according vnto their owne fancie or affection, then Hy∣storiographers haue, who (without great reproach) cannot abuse sacred Veritie it selfe. But howsoeuer it is, the workes of Homer, are full of iudgement and Learning, from whence, as from a deepe Fountaine, euery great Scholler draweth forth his learning, and without his books, grosse Ignorance had darkned the whole world with her blacke gloo∣mie Cloudes. As for Virgil, how could he doe lesse, than what he did, seeing he did but praise such, from whom hee had receiued so many benefites, and good turnes, and who had restored him, vnto his former liuing and Lands, all which he (before) had lost? The vngratefull man is as bad, and as worthy to be punished, as is the Homicide. Besides, it is better (now and then) to straine curtesie with Truth, then to murther a man, for there may be amends made for a lie, but not for ones life, when it is gone, and taken away. And therefore that great Mantua Poet, is more to be excused, in that he somewhat dissembled the veritie of the storie, which he wrote, praising his benefactors, because he would not be vnthankfull vnto them, then, if hee had spoken the Truth, and so concea∣led those great kindnesses which hee had receiued, whereby hee should be taxed of in∣gratitude. But for all this, he is reputed for the Prince of Latin Poets, his Aeneidos shewing to be a most learned and beautifull worke, in so much as he dying (before he had sufficient time to make a finall ende thereof, especially of those verses which hee left vnperfect) Augustus the Emperour, would not permit that anie of his owne Poets should take the same in hand to correct it. Being loth that so famous a Poeme should be iniuried any way, hee chusing rather to leaue it vnfinished, as he found it, then that it should be per∣fected by the hand of any other. Not vnlike that picture, which excellent Zeuxis be∣ganne to make for Venus, no Painter daring (after his death) to take vpon him to ende the same. Cicero, (before Octanius his raigne) comming (by chaunce, before he dyed) to haue a sight of some of Virgils verses, cryed out with great admiration: Behold another hope of Rome for I knowe not how the witte of man can deuise a grea∣ter worke then this. Poets then, are not so much to be blamed, as you imagine, for without them, wee should be depriued of many goodly Inuentions, and graue Moralls: ca, and from ma∣ny diuine praises, which wee attribute vnto God, as are the Psalmes of Dauid, which are in verse, proceeding from that sacred Prince and Poet of the Iewes. Contrary vnto your minde, was Alexander the great, who made so great account of Homers verse, as he had alwayes his Iliades vnder the pillow of his bedde, lying hard by his sword, affirming oftentimes, Achilles to be most fortunate, because he was renowmed by so famous a Poet, wishing that hee had bene as then aliue, to the end hee might haue graced him so much, as to haue set forth his valiant exploits. Where you alledge Demosthenes, to haue made the Macedonians and the Athenians, to wage battell together; I answere you, that hee could doe no lesse, then perswade his Countrey-men to defend the libertie of their Countrey, it beeing the greatest Treasure that free people esteemed, especially the Grecians, who continually were vp in Armes, to conserue their auncient Liberties. In so much, as it is reported of Demosthenes, that if hee had had as much force, power, and vallour, as he had of good affection, and true zeale towards his Countrey, the Macedonians had neuer conquered Athens. But he cannot be blamed, who fighteth vntill the last gaspe of life, dying with the first and chiefest, for the health of his Countrey: as did that stout Orator, who lost his life for that cause, hauing done many good seruices, and brought much profite vnto the
Athenians before. For beeing banished from amongst them, hee went presently with∣out loosing anit time at all, vp and downe such Citties as belonged vnto the Spartanes, who were deadly enemies vnto Athens, whom hee perswaded so vehemently, and with such exceeding rare Eloquence, as he brought them to be willing to yeeld, and to be vn∣der the gouernment of his Countrey. The valiant Pirus king of the Epirotes, was not of your aduise, hee being wont to say, that his Orator Cineas, got more Townes by his Eloquence, then hee could doe by his Armie Royall, and Souldiers. Thus doe you see, that whom you haue disliked, the greatest Monarks in the world haue accounted of, and so should you doe (most beautifull Virgin) if you did well. But least reason of all haue you to be of opinion to leaue this Actiue life, for to followe the Contemplatiue; because hee that laboureth most, is worthie of the greatest hire: hee that aduentureth most dangerouslie, deserueth most praise: and hee that effecteth, and bringeth to a good ende, a worke more admirable, and more excellent, then others, doth merit greatest reward and honour. Now in the Actiue life, there is more trauaile, more profite for our Countrey, and more labour in the same, which if it be so, then are they worthie of more guerdon, and commendation, that liue in this world, then such (as retiring themselues, to liue in a cor∣ner) onely profite themselues. Our Sauiour Christ, the right Mirrour of Christian vertue, tooke vpon him this course of life: liuing, conuersing, and dwelling amongst men, without withdrawing himselfe altogether into the Wildernes, to the ende hee might be profitable vnto him∣selfe onely. After him followed his Apostles, who gaue not ouer the world, to seeke some vn∣coth place of dwelling, to liue priuately vnto themselues: But rather chose to come a∣broad into the face of the world, where they laboured, trauailed, sweat, and suffered much affliction for others, and not for themselues. God will not haue that anie should hide his Talent vnder the ground, (and so put it to no vse) seeing he hath lent it him, for the publike commoditie of all men. Neither will hee, that a Lampe be hidden vnder a bushell, vnto no ende, but rather that it shall giue light abroad. For in what doeth that man stand in steed of, (who fearing to be em∣ployed about the publike good) seeketh onely to profite himselfe? If euery one were of your opinion, what Magistrates, what Gouernours, or what Officers, should wee haue to rule and gouerne Common-wealths? For so none would willingly take vpon him the busines of his Countrey, remembring the troubles belon∣ging vnto the same, but rather withdraw themselues from thence, to liue quietly, and at their owne contentment. But the Lawes both of God and man, forbid such kinde of dealings. For they will, that such, whome God hath made sufficient and fit for the Com∣mon-wealth, shall serue the same: yea, though against his will, and not liue idlely, at his owne pleasure, in as much, as it is not reasonable, that the Master of a Shippe shall sleepe and take his rest, whilst the Vessell is tossed with the storme and Tempest vpon the Sea, and the passengers therein, stand in danger to be drowned. Euen so, it is a most vniust thing, that the busines of the Weale publike, and those that may profite them by their vertue, should liue quiet and at ease, without doing anie thing at all, but lie at pleasure, in some one odde corner or another, priuately vnto him∣selfe; and the rather, because our Countrey (most iustlie) claimeth to haue interest in our bodies, and in our soules. Also this was the reason,Many great Princes forced to take vpon thm the go∣uernment of the Common-wealth, for ea∣gn their als. that long agone, the Romanes constrained Cincinnatus and Fabritius, to leaue their Countrey Houses, and the delights they found abroad, to make them take charge of the Common-wealths affaires, and to fight against their enemies. So was graue Sneca. called from his studie (maugre himselfe) and from his sweete liber∣tie, to trouble himselfe, with his Princes businesse. So in times past did the French-men, vse to take their Kings out of Monasteries, to follow the charge of the Common-wealth and Kingdome. And so was that cruell Amurath, Emperour of the Turkes, withdrawne from out a
certaine solitarie place, which hee had chosen to finish his life in, (hauing before instal∣led his sonne, that bloody Mahometh, in his Estate royall) to encounter with the Chri∣stian Armie,) so much feared of those Pagans, and which, (for that cause) craued the pre∣sence of old Amurath himselfe. So you, (most louely Nymph) who by your prudent behauiour, are able to doe much good seruice vnto the Weale-publike, ought not to refuse so honourable a la∣bour, but rather be the more willinger, when you may doe good vnto your followers and friends. For what shall become of this goodly companie of Nymphes, which are committed vnto your charge and conduct, if you shall leaue them? They shalbe like vnto a faire flocke, that hath no Shepheard, and therefore in great daunger to be de∣uoured of rauenous Wolues. Chaunge then, chaunge I beseech you, this your late conceited opinion, and if not for loue of your owneselfe, yet at the least doe it, in fauour of these sweet Nymphes, who, without you, are most miserable creatures, abandoned and giuen ouer vnto the rage of most vnfortunate mishaps. Thus did I plead mine owne cause, euery one of the Nymphes commending and applauding my perswasions, being glad of my discourse, and allowing of my speeches, whilst they all (with one consent) made the same sute vnto her, they themselues beeing now become bolde, (since I had broken the yce before them) to deliuer in effect, as much vnto her, as I had done alreadie; And the more to moue her vnto pittie, no teares, nor sighes were spared, no mournfull complaints forgotten, neither any pittious intreatings left vnremembred. After this followed a long narration of the dangers which her absence was like to bring vnto them (after they had a little blamed her) first to take them as her charge and guide, and then to leaue them thus vpon the suddaine. To be briefe, there was nothing left vnspoken, whereby she might be disswaded,A Similie. to giue ouer this her enterprise. But as an olde Beech tree, deepely rooted in the ground, being strong and huge in growth, is not moued any thing at all, with the small blastes of Sommer windes; and as the stubborne Rock that standeth in the middest of the Sea, ne∣uer stirreth for all the waues, that beate and flash against him: Euen so, my cruell Ladie, was not moued at all, although with teares, with cries, and with laments, we called still vp∣on her, shee being resolute in her first purpose and determination, affirming the heauens themselues, not to be sufficient to alter her minde. For (said shee,) it is to those (whom the soueraigne of all Kings, hath giuen force and power to serue their Common-wealths) you should addresse your speeches and not vnto me, who am but a poore silly Maide, who stand in no other stead, then to eate the fruites which proceed from the earth, & who can no way be beneficiall vnto my Countrey, but only by my prayers, which I shall farre better deliuer and present before the diuine Ma∣iestie, I being in some remote place, separated and alone, then if I should liue, where I should behold the fond vanities of worldlings continually. As for you (my deare companions) a worser guide then my selfe, Heauen neuer can bestow vpon you. That Goddesse Diana, whom you serue, shall take care of you, neither wil she leaue you vnprouided of some one or other worthy protectresse, that may alwaies defend you. Should I haue stayed with you still, (yet could not you haue hoped, that I could haue done any good for you, by reason of the small power & ability, which vncon∣stant Fortune hath bestowed vpon me. And yet I must needs confesse, that your absence will be an exceeding corsie & griefe vnto me, and that losing you, I shall lose the chiefest stay of my ioy & contentment. But notwithstanding all this, so sweet and comfortable is the thought of spirituall things, as I must leaue all mortall pleasures for them. This on∣ly is my comfort, that the separation of our bodies shall neuer part our former affection, which we haue borne one another. Then I beseech you all, forget not me, as I will euer remember you. You shall haue parcell of my prayers, and I will thinke vpon you in my soule when I am alone. Weepe not then for her, who goeth away to lead a most blessed life: otherwise, I shall take you to be my mortall enemies, enuying my good fortune, neither bewaile her losse, who neuer could be halfe so profitable vnto you, whilst shee li∣ued with you, as shee shall be, when she is sundred from you.
Flintie Rockes sometimes are diuided, through Lightninges and Thunders, much more may earthly creatures be seuered one from another. All Companies and all Acquaintance, must needes (one day) breake off, whereas their true Friendship and loyall Amitie, neuer departeth, nor dyeth at all. If euer you haue loued me, then reioyce with me, and wish vnto me that glorie and felicitie, which I prepare for my life, to finish the rest of these wretched dayes of mine. But it now draweth on towards the euening, I therefore will trouble you no more at this time, but bid you all good night, & let euery one withdraw thēselues vnto their lodgings Wherevpon, they all went homewardes, whilst I my selfe stayed all alone behind, for I was not able to rise vp from the ground whereon I sat, by reason of the exceeding griefe I felt within me. Mouelesse I lay, like vnto a Tower, cold I was as any stone, and senselesse I seemed, resembling a dead Coarse, which is layed in a Tombe, without mouing, speaking, or sighing at all. All that long night did I spend, falling into cold sweats, and heauie soundings, wee∣ping and sobbing vntill my hart nigh burst, without either sleepe or rest, no not so much as once closing mine eye-liddes. The day being come, I found my selfe a little, and (God knowes, it was little indeed) amended, wherevpon, with much adoe, I got vp, and went to my lodging, where finding paper and Inke, sheading thousandes of teares, and sending forth millions of sighes, I wrote these dolefull verses following. Since farre exilde from mee doth wound my soule, And that a mortall desperate straunge disease, Doth stealing seaze vpon my bloudlesse Coarse, What should I longer linger for to ate? Since Death alone can cure this vncoth flame, Mine eies hane wept, mine hart hath sigh'd too much, My soule is wearied with enduring paine, Hee dieth not, that in dying ends all griefe. Those lonely Eyes are now debasht from mee, So is that gratious Fauour, more then faire, For whom I breath, and feede vpon this Aire, Blest is that man that then yeelds vp his Ghost, When as he findes himselfe in heauens disgrace, And seeth the Welkin for to wound him still, With mee shall wend into my Fatall Tombe, My bloody griefes, and more then dolefull Dule, And all those thoughts of her, who, when I liu'd, Made mee to prooue a worse then trebble Death. Let no man then seeme for to waile my losse, Since friendly Death by it my cares doth crosse. It is enough, since for my worthlesse Death, My Mistris faire, forbeareth to lament, Nor grieues that I should part (so soone) her fro, Dead I should please her, better then when life Did soiourne in this earthly Inne of mine, And therefore I will end my loathed dayes. My prying Eyes, first authours of mine ill, My gentle hart, ore loyall in his loue, (As they deseru'd) sharpe paine shall first endure, Reason it is, that they who first offended, Should be inflicted with due punishment, For so the heauens will guerdon each aright. Cupid, doth vse for to abridge our dayes, Nor, for our woes, doth quit vs otherwise.
First hee doth wound, and then he heales againe, By two Deuises, and both contraries: The first our heart burnes, th'other kills our strength, Th'one cruell is, the other's amiable. Blest is he, that LOVE serues, since (in one day) Hee happie, or vnhappie, make him may. Hauing made this sorrowfull Song, I determined to present it vnto my Ladie, (come of it (whatsoeuer could) for my last farewell, that euer she should haue of mee; wherevpon I went to seeke her, and such was my good fortune, as I found her all alone, walking vnder the shadow of a number of sweet Cipresse trees. No sooner had I a sight of her, but that a certaine timerous respect, ioyned with a kinde of amazement, seazed vpon mee, so that I became vpon the suddaine, as colde as any Ice. Wherevpon I began to be astonisht, quite forgetting my former resolution, whilst I remained as a Pillar fixed in the ground, not being abe to doe anie thing, but to gaze vpon her more then Angelicall face. My vitall spirits, were all flowen into mine eyes, who held them very earnestlie bu∣sied in contemplation of this her more then peerlesse beautifull countenance. Whilst I thus beheld her, I remembred the vnsupportable losse I was like to en∣dure, losing her diuine presence, knowing that the more I viewde her, the more was my griefe, when I thought I should be depriued from her: and yet neuerthelesse, I tooke a wonderfull great contentment, to lose my selfe in this sweete Riuer, as the flie doth, when hee is drowned in sweete milke. Minerua, neuer seemed more graue, nor fuller of maiestie, vnto poore Arachne, (when shee was punished by her) neither did Diana shewe more amiable or louely, when she accompanied her Shepheard Endimion, then my Mistris did in mine eye. Being thus rauished with so heauenly a sight, I could not withdraw my selfe from the same, desiring no other death in my minde, but in beholding her, so to giue vp the Ghost, which the Virgin perceiuing, thus saluted mee. What is the matter (Shepheard) that you are vp so early this morning? what see∣kest thou here, and why lookest thou so sadde and heauilie? Away with this dumpish melancholy, the butcher of mans life, for hee liueth not, but rather languisheth, as one dying, who being ouer sadde and heauie, cannot shake this pensiue humour from him. What (man) be of good courage, we must he ordered by the will of the Gods, and (without killing ourselues, with these inward passions) must attend the good houre, vn∣till it shall please them to call vs: For neither weeping nor wailing can alter our Desti∣nies, neither can they be mended thereby, because it lieth not in our handes, but in the heauenly Powers, to amend what is amisse. This is my aduise, in that I wish thee well, for wee are giuen by nature, to wish well vnto those whom we know are our friends and wel-willers, whereas otherwise we should be worse then bruit beasts, who acknowledge curtesies which they haue receiued. Then take this counsell from mee, although I was borne rather to learne counsell, then to giue counsell vnto others. But the Gardiner sometimes can giue good hearbes for Phisicke, and a wise man now and then, may be aduised, by one that is simple and without learning: as Moses did, who tooke the opinion of his Father in law, being farre lesse skilfull then hee. I doubt not, but thou knowest by experience, that this which I haue saide, will be profitable vnto thee, and that thou wilt hereafter remember mee, for the good aduise which I haue giuen thee. Thus spake the Nymph most kindely, her curteous speeches, putting life into my bodie againe, making me blush with a vermillion colour, which she seemed to like well of. Wherevpon, I taking hart at grasse, (although still crazed with inward heauinesse) beganne thus to answere her. Oh sacred Goddesse, is it possible that hee, that is stiffened and benommed in all his limmes and ioyntes, with an extreame colde, should be warme without Fire?
Euen so, can hee comfort and delight himselfe, who without hauing the least sub∣iect of ioy in the world, hath all his Bodie attached with a wonderfull strange and hea∣uie sadnesse? Amongst all the wise Sages of the world past, there haue bene very fewe, that haue bene able to haue dissembled and concealed their inwdard griefes and sorrowes. Elias, that great Prophet, could neuer doe it, but rather flying into a Desart, to a∣uoyd the furie of wicked Achab, most pittiously desired to die. Neither could Iob, the patterne of all patience, smother the same, but rather weeping, and taking on most la∣mentablie, wished to be ridde from his miserable life. And thinke you, I that am so poore a wretch (in respect of them) am able to hide mine anguish, and driue away these inward afflictions which so much torment mee, es∣pecially when I haue so great reason to lament my Disasters? Wonder not then (gracious Nymph) that I seeme thus to waile and weepe, but ra∣ther suffer mee to goe through with the same, to the ende I may the sooner be brought vnto my graue, for that is the onely comfort of such forlorne and forsaken Caitiffes as my selfe, yea Death, sweete Death, is the Port and Hauen, of all such distressed mindes as I am. O that I were blinde, that I might not see the mischiefe that is ready to take holde vpon mee: or that I were senslesse, and voyde of all passions, to the ende I might be ex∣empted from such dangerous plagues, as are alreadie ready to infect me. Must I be well in bodie, and yet deadly sicke in minde? Must I be sicke in minde, and yet not consume away? And must I consume away, and not yet die, but languish thus in horror, worse then in hell, yea, and that continually? O vniust Heauens, ô too vnkinde and barbarous LOVE, what haue I done vnto thee Cupid, that for all my loyall loue, thou (thus) shouldest reward me. Haue I euer defied or denyed thee, as Apollo did, after hee had slaine that huge Serpent Python, when he mocked at thee, and at thine Arrowes, as thou flewest in the Ayre; that thou shoul∣dest thus wound mee, with so vncurable rigour, and exasperate thus, thy worse then sa∣uadge Tyrannie against mee? Ah Mistris, deare Mistris, behold here before you, the most wretchedst creature that euer liued vnder the Cope of heauen, the very Anatomie of miserie, and the true Mirrour of all misfortunes: And belieue I beseech you, that the terrours which euery minute of an houre, affright his inward soule, is farre worse then vglie Death it selfe. But iustly am I punished, seeing (as ouer presumptuous) I durst be bolde to flie so high, like vnto another Phaeton, presuming to adore your more then druine and sacred Beauties. Yet (sweet Ladie) pardon me, because LOVE is the cause, who was assisted by your faire eyes, to make me his base prisoner, and abiect bond slaue for euer: against whom, no force, neither heauenly, nor humane, is able to preuaile. Thus was I bolde to pleade like an earnest suter for grace, vnto my Ladie, I know∣ing well that I was neuer like to finde so fitte an occasion againe, as then I had, because I saw she was resolute to enter into a kinde of life, farre worse, and harsher, then anie Mo∣nasticall liuing whatsoeuer. And therefore I thought with my selfe, that seeing I was fully bent and purposed to die, I knewe the worst, and worse then Death, I could not be adiudged. Thus you see how desperate persons sometimes helpe themselues, although quite contrarie vnto their owne expectation. So fought that sicke and diseased Souldier, being full of valour, vnder his Gene∣rall, king Antigonus, onely because he would be ridde of his disease, which did so much afflict him; but no sooner was hee cured thereof, then that he became a notable Cow∣ard, as one that was desirous to sleepe in a whose skinne, and neuer after would venture in the warres againe. The faire Virgin, hearing mee thus earnest, were it, either because shee was loth to leaue behind her (she being now readie to depart from vs) any cause to conceiue hardly of her, or whether it were that my pittifull speeches had moued her vnto remorse, and to
haue compassion vpon me, I know: not but I found her nothing so austere nor sower to∣wards me, as she was wont to be, which I gathered by her indifferent milde answere, she replying thus. If thy disease (Arcas) be incurable, and that as thou thy selfe thinkest, it will hardly be healed, why then hast thou bene so obstinate, as thou wouldest not in time seeke what thou mightest to haue bene rid of the same? Very simple is he, who vndertaketh to transport a huge Rocke from one place to an other, when it is not by nature to be remoued. So if thou seest that my loue can no way be profitable vnto thee, why then, wilt thou be so selfe-wild, as to persist therein, it being such an other piece of worke, as those Giants tooke in hand, when they went about to scale vp to heauen? for say I were willing to shew thee what fauour I might, yet could I doe thee no good, because of my credit, assuring my selfe, that if thou louest me indeed, (and as thou so often hast protested) thou wilt not desire any thing of me, that might o∣uerthrow me, in doing of thee good. True loue is of this nature, that it will neuer suffer any iniurie to be done, vnto that which it loueth, neither can it (rightly) be termed Loue, but rather furious rage, if it be cause of any such wrong. But I pray thee tell me, what is it that thou wouldest haue of me? wouldest thou that in sauing thee, I should vtterly vndoe my selfe? or wouldest thou haue, that thy content∣ment should be built and founded, vpon the ruines of my discontentments, and disho∣nour? I cannot tell, neither know I what thy meaning is, and yet this good conceit haue I of thee, that I am perswaded thou harborest no such bad thought within thee, and therefore let me intreate thee, that thou wilt be content, since I grieue at thy distresse, and that I would most willingly ease thee of thy paine (if possible I could) so it did not stand with the losse of mine honour. Then if thou louest mee, I doe not thinke thou wouldest suffer me to endure such an inestimable dammage. Consider well of this matter, and thou shalt finde that I can no way pleasure thee as thou desirest, and as I my selfe couet, vnlesse I would ouerthrow my estate for euer. Of two euils the least is to be chosen. It is farre better to cure a little hurt betimes, then stan∣ding obstinate therein, permit the same to grow to be incurable, and so to die. Therefore shew now the loyall affection which thou hast alwaies protested to haue borne me, insatisfying thy selfe with these me honest reasons, without seeking any more by sauing th selfe, to be the cause of my fall, and vtter ruine: but if this will not content thee, then must I needs  lust, and not modest Loue that is in thee, and that as a orcallenene, thou est about to vndoe me, and therefore haue great cause to feae thee, vnto thy rash , without going about to excuse me vnto thee any way, but to flie from then, as from a deadly foe. Hauing so said, she held her peae, seeming to be much troubled in her minde, as I might casily gather by her colour, which did often goe and come in her face, and yet these speeches so much pleased me, as I was confounded therewithall, as I knew not what to say. Neuer was that alluring song, of the daughters of Acholous more charming, neither the loue potion of subtill Circes, more swept and pleasant, then that was. No heart, were it neuer so hard, but her tongue was able to mollifie, it being of power to take downe, and make gentle the proudest minde that euer man bare. And now I made account I was sufficiently satisfied for all my trauailes past, and that I had a full and large recompence for all my former aflictions, in that it had pleased my Ladie to con∣ my meaning with so great fauour: whereupon I presumed to replie thus vpon the suddaine. Vertuous, and peerlesse Diana: what testimonie haue I euer giuen you, and how haue I euer carried my selfe towards you, but that my Loue was alwaies chaste and mo∣dest? If so, why then should you now mistrust me? Alas, if I be now chaunged, (my miseries being so wretched as they are, and that you thinke I am worse then I haue bene) why then doe you not quickly pronounce the sentence of Death against mee, without permitting me to liue any longer? No; no: my desires were neuer others then thine. Neuer did I thinke to disobey
thy commandements, nor offer iniurie vnto thine vntainted honour, rather shall this bodie of mine be swallowed vp by wilde and sauage beasts; and thinke not (I beseech you) otherwise of me, but that I would take reuenge vpon mine owne proper selfe, for your honours sake, if through my default it should happen to receiue the least hurt or dammage that may be. Nay, should I goe about but to crosse thee in thy will, and not doe as thou biddest, I should thinke the worse of my selfe as long as life shall last; whilest liuing so, I would commit it no life, but rather worse then death it selfe. Sufficient enough, and too much am I pleased for my paines, enough am I recompenced for my trauailes, and am satisfied at the full, for all my labours past, seeing thou hast so much vouchsafed to abase thy wor∣thy selfe (in striking a Saile so lowe) as to speake to me so much thine inferiour. Onely this onely small boone, let me intreate of thee, which by thy facred Vertue, by thy rate prudencie, by thy excellent wit, and by thine exquisite beautie, I shall desire thee not to denie, that is, to giue meleaue, to kisse thy faire and victorious hand, which shall content me as much as if I were Monarch of the whole vniuersall world, the remembrance where∣of shall make the rest of my daies to proue most happie and fortunate. Aduise you then, if this my prayer be iust and ciuill, which if it be so, then graunt me so much grace. But if not, thy will be fulfilled, thy pleasure be done, and thy desire be ac∣complisht euery way. It is the first that euer I begd, and it shall be the last that euer I will craue. Thus did I boldly put forward my selfe, vrging my Mistris with great vehemencie for the same, who stood still studying vpon the matter a while, whilest she blushed like the damaske Rose in May: I in the meane time houered betweene hope and scare, halfe dead and halfe aliue, to heare what she would answere, who in the end replied thus. Ah Shepheard, how easie a matter is it, to finde a small thing, that may hurt much? and how quickly may we obtaine and purchase that, which hapneth most to our displea∣sures afterward? This naturall appetite of ours, which inuiteth vs to desire so many things, which we imagine to finde sweet and pleasing, passeth away as doth a flash of lightning in the aire, leauing vs neuer a whit the richer, nor the more contented then we were before. What profit doth that pleasure bring vnto Louers, which they so earnestly couet to enioy, but a most heauie and sad repentance, when it is once gon and past? Things that are vertuous, ought to be desired alone, because they last, and not such as are mortall, weake, and fraile, although they seeme sweet at the first beginning. This which thou demandest of me, will doe thee no good, and though perhaps thou supposest thou shalt feele some shadow thereof, yet will it so soone vanish and be gone, as thou shalt not haue leisure to haue so much as a true tast thereof. Ah Arcas, Arcas, diddest thou but know, how much this honour is recommended vnto vs, what great care and heed there is giuen vnto vs, to accompanie it, and how much we are bound and obliged to looke: most narrowly and straightly vnto the same, I verily belieue, thou wouldest not wish me that I should breake the least duetie belonging vnto the conseruation thereof, not for all the liuing in the world. But perhaps thou wilt say, it is very true and yet I answere, that he that offendeth in any small matter, is suspected to be culpable of greater: and the first opening of a fault, is difficult vnto a vertuous minde, but very casie, when he shall be permitted to take an habit in the same. For so small a trifle, and such a thing as can doe thee no good, be not (I beseech thee) the cause that I be esteemed or taken for other, then hithereto I haue bene: for hare and leane, should that tryumph be, which thou shouldest purchase by mine ho∣nour, because my blood should presently make satisfaction for the same. Content thee then, with what I haue said, and thinke that I will not denie thee any thing, which may stand with my credit: but considering that this which thou requirest, may some way im∣peach the same, I cannot iustly yeeld vnto thy demand. Leaue (then I say once more) to importune me for that, which will doe thee no good, yet will hurt me much, and then shall I thinke that thy speeches are true, and that thy loue is chaste and vertuous, as thou
hast hitherto protested. This was my Ladies sharpe replie, which draue away all my former ioy I had con∣ceiued of hope, by reason of her first kinde words; so as now my complaints began a∣fresh againe, my teares renewed, and my sighes came forth faster then they had done before. I was so galled with sorrow, and so much griped at the heart with this her vnexpec∣ted deniall, as I could doe nothing but weepe, holding downe mine eyes towards the ground, as not daring to looke vpon her. In the end, surcharged and oppressed with contrarie passions, I burst out into these wofull tearmes, hauing before sent forth thousands of scalding sighes, as precursors of the same. O cruell Loue, O miserable Starres, iealous of my good, O dismall day wherin I was borne, and more then thrise accursed life of mine, since I am more wretched then a∣ny whatsoeuer liuing. After much labour taking, and many a yeares sayling, the Pilot at length arriueth vnto his Hauen, but I (Caitiffe that I am) finde no end of my torments: None giueth suc∣cour vnto me, neither doth any as much (as a little) ease me, my sicknes encreaseth with the day, continueth all night long, and yet neuer amendeth. Alas, alas, why died not I at the first, when hauing offended you (my dearest Ladie) you exild me from you louely presence? Vnfortunate Shepheard that I was, to perswade my selfe to liue, and hope the best, when I finde no cause but of dispaire and death. Ah had I then taken that readie course, I had bene (now) free from these hellish panges which euery minute oppresse my heart, and I had bene partaker of those rare beati∣tudes, which the soules of happie Louers enioy for euer. Sacred and Religious Diana, since you adiudge me vnworthy of any small fauour at your hands, and that without yeelding to agree vnto so little a matter, you are desirous of my end, yet at the least doe thus much for me, as to permit me to die (in leiu of all my troubles) before thy beautious face. This I beg at your hand, for default of that other curtesie which you iudge me vn∣worthy of: for although you haue denied me the first, yet I hope you will agree vnto the secod: otherwise I vow, after I haue a hundred thousand times tearmed you by the name of Cruell, I will most desperately lay violent hands vpon my selfe, crying out that you haue bene the cause of mine vntimely ouerthrow. Graunt me then one of my requests, the last of which you cannot well denie, be∣cause it costeth you nothing. What hurt can this be vnto you any way, but rather good, when you shall doe so charitable a deed vnto the common-wealth, as to permit him to die, who is vnprofitable vnto the same? Without licence from you, I neither may nor will take this bloodie course in hand, seeing I hold my life from you, and that you alone and none but you, haue puissance ouer me. Linger not then, to yeeld vnto my desire, for if you thinke, that my trauailes past, haue merited any reward, you cannot better recom∣pence them, then to graunt me death, which is the onely thing I couet, seeing I must be depriued of your cheerfull presence, as one not worthy to enioy it. As the Hunter is amazed, hauing lost the tracing of the Deare which he hunteth (his dogs being at a bay) knoweth not which way to goe, nor well what path to take, whilest his Hounds barking vpon some dich side round about him, he standeth musing what to doe. Euen such a one my Ladie seemed to be, she seeing her selfe charged with two con∣trarie demaunds, both which she iudged aduersaries vnto her honour, which to take she knoweth not well, and therefore standeth studying (as one sad and pensiue) what to say vnto this matter. If she should giue me her hand to kisse, she feareth least I should foolishly, and with∣out wit, speake something that might discredit her: and if she should suffer me to die (she being now readie to giue ouer the world, and to become (as it were) a Religious Nunne, she doubted least the world would say, she had done it for griefe of me. Besides, she was vnwilling that I should die, vnto whom (despite of her selfe) she thought her selfe somewhat beholding, knowing that death was but a cold recompence, for so great loue as I had borne her. Much was she perplexed in her minde about this
busines, my hard fortune did somewhat soften her stonie heart: but then againe, the res∣pect of her honour did harden it as much, but had Loue had but some interest or power in her, she had quickly brought these two contraries vnto an agreement: but alas, he then had not, neither is he like (euer) to haue. What should she doe in these two extre∣mities, and how should she throughly satisfie and content her honour? One while she putteth forth her hand for me to kisse, and then (vpon the suddaine) putteth it backe againe: one while she is about to casshire me with rough speeches, and then againe, she seemeth willing to yeeld vnto my request: one while she careth not al∣though I die, and then by and by she cannot endure she should be counted so cruell. Meane space, she seeth me to raine whole riuers of teares, and to send forth blacke clouds of scalding sighes, whilest with a sobbing heart I thus (once more) follow mine old sute vnto her. What is the reason (faire Goddesse) that you thus stand lingring through delaies, and not suffer this forsaken and abiect wretch to die? To what end doth he liue? which way can he profite his countrie? and what reason haue you to lament his destruction? Pronounce, pronounce thy faithfull sentence quickly, for he attendeth for nothing else, to the end he may with a more braue courage wend his way, to put in practise the same. Speake then, and giue our this musing: when the Iudge sitteth vpon the life or death of an offender, he standeth not studying vpon the same, but soone pronounceth his finall iudgement. Deliuer (then) my sentence, as a fatall Oracle, without delaying a∣ny longer: for to what end is it to winne time, for that which cannot be auoided. Free and discharge my doubtfull soule, from farther care, and seeme not to enuie at the good for∣tune which I am like to haue by laying violent hands vpon my selfe. Diana seeing me looke so pale and gastly, began to be a little moued with com∣passion towards me, whereupon she thus answered. Ah Shepheard, why dealest thou so hardly with me? and why doest thou constraine me to doe that which is against my will? and why (to saue thy selfe doest thou seeke that I may perish? Hard hap had I, to be borne vnder so vnluckie a Plannet, sithence (inac∣cording vnto thy request) I shall leaue vnto the world a bad opinion of my chaste minde, and in resusing to yeeld vnto thee, I shall be counted the murtherer of thy life. Ah would to God that that day wherein I first sawe thee, had bene the last houre that euer mine eyes had seene thee any more. But seeing there is no remedie in extremities, come what will, I will rather ingage mine owne life, then venture thine, and if it be my fortune to die for this fault, yet will I thinke to finde my death more sweet vnto me, then if I had put thee to suffer the same, seeing thou hast endured so much for my sake onely. Take then this accursed hand (accursed because of mine honour) and doe with it as thou shalt please, yet with this solemne protestation, that if this my curtesie, shall bring the least suspition or scandall of my good name and fame vnto me, the selfe same hand that hath bene the cause thereof, shall make amends by shedding the purest blood which is within this bodie. Whereupon she presented me her faire hand to kisse. But in this exploit, I behaued my selfe as that braue Cauailier, who doth sweare to be the death of his enemie, whilest he keepeth him close and standeth out against him; but no sooner doth he submit himselfe vnto him, but that he receiueth him most curte∣ously, forgiuing all displeasures that is past: Euen so plaid I, for holding this pretions pawne within my power, and perceiuing that it grieued my Mistris to giue the same as she did, I vtterly refused her kinde offer, resoluing with my selfe, rather to languish still like a miserable creature, then to giue her the least displeasure that might be, and yet ne∣uerthelesse, I disputed of this question a good while, before I let her hand goe from me. One while the great delight which it presented vnto mine eyes, longing sore as a starued man for foode to possesse this rich Iewell, pressed me very much to take that hap∣pie occasion, not vnlike vnto that man, who hauing not of long time eate any thing (& finding a Table furnished with great store of meate) falleth vnto his Victualls, and can∣not
for his life forbeare from eating that, though he would neuer so faine. An other while, the extreame Loue which I bare vnto my Ladie, compelling me to seeke and preferre the contentment of her, aboue mine owne quiet, opposed it selfe a∣gainst me, counterchecking my desire; And therefore well might she perceiue how farre I was from seeking the purchase of her dishonour, when I resolued to endure millions of torments, before I would be an occasion that she should grieue or be discontented any way at all. Hauing long time debated within my selfe about this matter, in the end I did as that prudent King of the Spartans, who being almost dead for thirst, caused all his fol∣lowers to drinke their fills, he himselfe refusing to tast as much as one drop of the water (although he sat vpon the Fountaines side) to the end he might saue his people from seruile bondage: and so did I refuse this worthy gift, seeing I sawe how dearely my Mis∣tris accounted of the same; and therefore taking her by that faire hand, I said thus vnto her. No, no (my sacred Goddesse) neuer shall it be obiected as a foule reproach vnto wretched Arcas that he went about to force the vertuous Diana. Death shall be more agreeable vnto me then life, before I will constraine or com∣pell thee to any thing, that is against thine owne will. Suffer me I pray thee to continue the same, as I am, and let neither the one nor the other of my requests be graunted: I will not offer to touch thy beautious hand, with my polluted lips, seeing I perceiue) thou thinkest that it will be some disparagement vnto thee; neither will I die at all, seeing my death is not agreeable vnto thee, but rather liuing (as I doe) a most languishing life, I will still attend thy last will & pleasure. First shall my soule flie forth from out this bodie, rather shall my heart burst in sunder within my brest, and sooner shall this vitall breath of mine be stopped on the suddaine, before I will doe any thing, that shall any way mislike thy minde. If I demaund ought that is vnlaw∣full, pardon me I beseech you, seeing Loue is the cause thereof. As for my selfe, I will meekely beare, and patiently endure my tedious troubles, and still vexing corsies, without lodging any more such two vnwelcome guests within me, as you shall dislike of. Then O yee miserable wretches, all you that sometimes haue liued here vpon the earth; come, come, and rid your selues of all your cares, and lay them all vpon me, who am ble and of force to beare them. And now you my drearie eyes, euer∣lasting let your teares be; my scalding sighes, neuer giue ouer to smoake from out my brest, whilest thou my tongue shalt doe nothing else, but pitteously report thy heauie Martyrdomes. Alas, when will that houre come, wherein (after I haue sufficiently wept and wailed, sighed and sobbed)! may depart this vaile of miserie. Ah (Ladie) must mine eyes endure to behold thine absence? and shall my tongue be able to bid thee farewell? No no, rather let mine eyes be blind for euer, and let my tongue neuer pronounce word more. Ah kinde death, gentle death, curteous death, if euer thou hast brought succour vn∣to any sorrowfull wight, then come and helpe me. Behold I call thee, heare how I cry vnto thee, nay more, I summon thee in Iustice to appeare. But is it possible that a solitarie place, shall seclude so sweet a Saint from my compa∣nie? and must I be faine (loosing the substance) to feed vpon the shadow? No it cannot be, I first must die, not being able to endure her absence. Madam, your most wretched, and yet more loyall Seruant Arcas, cannot leaue your presence, but he must (withall) leaue his owne life: he must die before your eyes, before he depart from you: and faine would he sacrifice his heart vpon the Altar of your beautie, if he might haue but your good will and leaue. But I see it will not be, for I am yours and not mine owne, you may not be without me, and therefore I will follow you wheresoeuer you goe, and when I can goe no far∣ther, then will I shorten my daies to end mine endlesse sorrowes. For many Louers haue there bene, lesse faithfull then I am, and nothing so zealous in loue as my selfe, that haue finished their liues when they were depriued of their louing dames: and shall not I be as fortunate as they, euery way as vertuous as they? especially when I haue deserued more then they haue? which when I haue done, I hope (gratious Virgin) your chaste soule will doe no lesse then testifie, what great respectand dutious affection I bare vnto you,
vntill my latest gaspe, hauing long serued you, and yet neuer had any reward at all. But what talke I of reward, when I desire to die, were it onely for this thing in that I durst presume to loue you? and yet, it is not death that daunteth not at all, onely I grieue, because I feare, I neuer shall finde so sweet a face in the other world, with which I may delight me. But I am not the first Louer hath bene sent away vnrewarded of his Mistris, and yet too great hath my recompence bene, in that I haue had that great good hap, as to haue seene you whilest I liued, and now I must loose you, can I doe other then loose my selfe? you goe your way, and thinke you, I shall stay behind? Ah then how much are you de∣ceiued, for I will die, yea I will die, although not by your commandement, yet because I shall see you no more: and this I here protest, I am most resolutely minded to doe, come whatsoeuer will thereof: meane space, withdraw thy hand from me, which I desire not to kisse, since tis with thy displeasure: whilest I liued I sought to please thee, and now I die, I will not seeke to crosse thee. Away then with this thy hand, too faire for me to touch, assuring thee that I am as much contented with thy good will, as if I had enuoyed the greatest pleasure in the world. Then once againe (I beseech thee) let me alone, and trouble me no more, I bid the world adue, and take my last farewell of thee, for die I will, since tis the onely thing which I desire. Diana, seeing me looke so gastly, began to be afraid of me, doubting least I would presently haue laid violent hands vpon my selfe, as I sweare vnto you (reuerend father) I had done, but that I found her more tractable and more kinde, which was the cause, that after she had many times sighed (beholding me with a most pittifull and curteous as∣pect) and mourning (as it were to see me in so heauie a plight) she spake thus mildly vn∣to me. Ah Arcas, most faithfull Arcas, if thou wilt die for my sake, there is no reason but I should be miserable for thee, to requite this thy great kindnesse towards me. So will I be for thee, and such a one doe I wish my selfe to be, as long as I shall liue. Say not then, that thou art the most miserable wretch aliue, since Diana is a parta∣ker of thy miserable fortunes, who to haue regard vnto her honour, and for the loue she beateth vnto thee, shall liue most miserable all the rest of her sad life, being somewhat comforted in this onely, that she cannot suffer for two more worthy subiects. As sweet shall be my griefes, when I shall thinke of thee, as my ioy shall be, when dis∣pleasing I remember thee not at all: I see it is the will of the Gods, that things should thus fall out, and I will not be repugnant against the same: more proofes I haue not to mani∣fest my good meaning vnto thee (being hindered through mine honour) in leiu where∣of, I will giue thee a tast of the rest, by my continuall Martyrdomes. Therefore I coniure thee by that chaste Loue, thou hast so long borne me, offer no violence vnto thy selfe, but stay the will of the heauens, for it may so fall out as (thou maist) perhaps (see me once more) before thou diest, and seeing the houre is now come (that without seeing me more) I must absent my selfe from thee, I will not conceit mine affection from thee, for I know thou wilt not seeke thy profit by my hi∣derance. Too well doe I know, and must needs acknowledge thy faithfull and infinite Loue towards me. If euer man hath bene worthy of a Ladies Loue, then it is thine owne selfe, therefore thinke that nothing in the world hath hindered me, to make requitall vnto thee, as full well thou hast deserued, but chaste honour, and seeing I cannot doe other∣wise, let me increate thee, haue patience. Besides, if the assurance of my amitie, may comfort thee (seeing thou canst not re∣ceiue any other consolation at my hands) assure thy selfe I loue thee deerly, yea (deare Arcas) dearely doe I loue thee; and to giue a most plaine testimonie of the same, I will and command thee, vpon that power and authoritie which thou hast giuen vnto me ouer thee, that thou kisse my hand as thou before desirest: and I pray thee most hartily, to belieue that I am wonderfull sorie, because I cannot giue thee a more ample signe of my Loue vnto thee: content thee then with this small fauour of mine, and thinke it is
greater then it is, because it commeth from so willing a minde, (and from her) who wisheth vnto thee more happinesse, then she doth vnto her owne selfe. O sweete words, which as a lushious kinde of poyson, infected my soule with true ioy, although afterwards they cost me dearely, I hauing bought them at too high a rate, and yet what could I now desire more! But as the fall from an high Tree, is farre more daungerous, then from a lower: and as the afflictions of rich men spoyled of their goods, is farre more grieuous then those of the poore, because they neuer had any such wealth to loose. Euen so, these delightfull speeches wrought my miseries to be farre more cruell af∣terwards vnto mee, then if my Ladie (neuer) had pronounced them. Yet did they mee great good (as then) in respect I enioyed her companie, and in that she shewed her selfe so kinde vnto me. But alas, it was my Fortune, and not her fault, since none can with∣stand his hard destinie. Meane time, I being astonisht and amazed (trembling like that wayfaring man, when he beholdeth a Snake, winding about his legge) tooke my Lady by the Lilly-white hand, going about (with great reuerence to kisse it) when a suddaine feare, comming freshly in∣to my head, that my Diana, would mislike of the same, made me to forbeare a while. Whilst I thus said vnto her: Sweet Ladie, I beseech you forbeare, and let mee after (my wonted manner) languish away secretly in my sorrowes, rather then any discontent∣ment should trouble you at all. For too great a plague would that be vnto me, if I should liue to behold the ouerthrow of her, whom I esteeme more pretiousthen mine owne life, and the rather, sithence I am predestinate to be vnhappie. Let me I pray you be pardoned in this, because I know my selfe euery way vnwor∣thie of so rich a curtesie, hauing receiued but too much fauour alreadie at your hands, in that you haue vouchsafed to permit me to enioy your more then Angelicall presence, thus long and all alone. Neuertheles, I most humbly thanke you, as much for the prof∣fer thereof, as if I had enioyed the same, I being euery way contented and satisfied, as I would my selfe. Thus did I excuse my selfe, as one vnworthie of so great a kindnesse, (making daintie of the matter) when my Ladie, seeming as it were (to be angrie, that I refused the same) and somewhat blushing through Choller, thus replyed. Well shepheard, well, I now perceiue that you will not accept of this small fauour, because vo would haue some colour to complaine of mee, after my departure from you. Willingly I offer it, then willinglie accept it: for say that anie thing otherwise then well, should happen vnto me about this matter, yet would not I haue thee to think I loue thee so ill, as I would lay anie blame vpon thee at all. More pleasing is a hurt come (by chaunce) from a friend, then a pleasure or good turne done vnto vs, procee∣ding from an enemie. Then if I may doe any thing with thee, let mee intreat thee, to doe as I will haue thee, which if thou wilt not, then wilt thou make me to think thou neuer didst affect me. The refusall of a gift, presented in good will, argueth a peruerse minde of him a∣gainst the giuer, that doeth refuse the same: Euen so, I cannot imagine otherwise of thee, but that thou rather hatest mee, then louest me truely, and therefore doe as thou pleasest. But I will call the heauens to witnesse of mine offer, proceeding from a pure good will, to the ende the blame shall be thine, and not mine, (if hereaster without cause) thou shalt exclaime against me. Therefore, if euer thou meanest that I shall remember thy loue, and that I shall thinke thou hast euer affected mee, with a chaste and an vnspotted heart, then let me in∣treat thee, to accept of this gift, which as I knowe it will be pleasing vnto thee, so shall it be no way hurtfull vnto me at all. Seeing then, (said I) louely Diana, that such is thy pleasure, I will obey the same whether I liue or die: and not a little will I glorie herein, that I haue liued to fulfill the will of so great and gracious a Ladie as your selfe: swearing by those your Diamond eyes, that what mischaunce so euer shall hereafter light vpon mee, I neuer will accuse you for the same. Wherevpon, I gentlie tooke her Iuory soft hand, which I kissed, bedeawing it with many a louing teare. O sweet thought thereof, ô pleasing remembrance of that good
Fortune, and ô sacred memory of that blessed time, although they cost me dearely, not long after. That poore vassall who findeth himselfe punished, for presuming to haue hunted within the Parkes of his Lord, receiueth not halfe so deepe a conceit of his dis∣pleasure, as this Fauour made mee afterwards to endure. So much was my delight, as I seemed to be rauished therewithall, nothing in the world being able to haue contented mee so much, as that did. That thing which a man loueth, and hath a minde vnto, hee thinketh can neuer be too deerly bought: Euen so, I found nothing so precious in my thoughts, as was those kisses, which I then enioyed: Alas, neuer doe I thinke thereof, but that I am ready for to sownd. That wicked Tyrant Dennis, beeing driuen out of his kingdome of Sicile, neuer thought himselfe so wretched, (when he remembred his vtter ouerthrow) as I doe, when I call to minde my former life and happines. I stood still as a stone, sighing and crying out, as indeed I had reason, for two causes especially. The one was the absence of my Ladie, the other, the losse of that sweete con∣tentment, which I then enioyed, and was to giue ouer presently. But the day now beginneth to be late, and therefore I will briefly make an ende of this my more then wofull Tragedie. No sooner had I let goe my Ladies hands, but that the whole troupe of Nymphes were arriued, they all saluting Diana their Gouernesse, who was not slowe to returne them the like kindnes againe. Alas, this was that dismall day, which did me both good and bad, and all at one time together: wherin I may compare her vnto the Viper, which being venomous, doth sting deadly, and yet neuertheles, serueth for many necessary helpes and vses; For then was it, when my Mistris, (still setled in her first resolution) tooke leaue of all the Nymphes, her companions, to goe and inclose her selfe within some solitarie Cell, for none could dis∣swade her from the same, althogh with sighes & teares she was perswaded to the contrary. Whilst I poore wretch, being not able to endure to behold so pittifull a departure, weeping and crying out, like an other Niobe, conueyed my selfe behinde a Rocke, to be∣waile my losse at the more leisure. O how heauy were the complaintes I made as then? how dolefull the mournings? how bitter the laments? and how pittifull was the moestfull sound of my dying voice? I must needs make you acquainted with some part of them, because I haue no other delight, then to call to minde these my forepassed miseries. Be these then (cried I out) the last speeches, that euer I shall make vnto my deare Mistris? and thou (most glorious Sunne) is it possible that I should be able to behold this blacke gloomy day, when thou thy selfe hast hid thy head before times, for lesse matter then this? If so, why then doest thou not now hide thy selfe? to the ende thou mayest not view the most wretched Cai∣tiffe that euer liued. Who euer knew a bodie to liue without a soule, breath, or blood? no more shall mine do, for thou holdest my soule and heart (louely Diana.) The cruell Destinies shall not de∣priue thee of mee, but of my life also. In losing of thee, I will lose my selfe: neither shall mine eyes see any more, since they cannot behold thy gracious presence. Vnfortunate I, that did not a while since go kill my selfe, before I was depriued from my chiefest ioy, I now liuing to be but a common receptacle for all mischaunces what∣soeuer. As possible is it for a man to support vpon his shoulders, the huge weight of the Heauens, as for mee to beare the absence of thee my sacred Diana. Since the nourish∣ment of my life is gone, what can mine Eyes behold to see? seeing their Sunne is Eclip∣sed, who shall giue light vnto mine heart? and how shall my hope flourish greene, since all comforts be quite blasted and gone? How many Louers haue there bene, that haue either dyed with griefe, or else haue slaine themselues, with their owne swords, onely because they haue lost their faire Mis∣triffes? What then should let or hinder mee, but that (in like manner) I may followe their examples? The Marchant that hath no marchandise, shutteth vp his shoppe, and liueth idlely:
Euen so, I hauing lost my Saint, must shut vp mine eyes, with the sweet slumber of death. O blessed Eyes, in that you haue beheld so perfect a beautie, but farre more blessed, if being depriued of her, you likewise depriue your selues of all light. O royall Recluse, that shalt enioy the companie of my Diana; Ah, why am not I transformed into thee? what shall I doe, or what shall become of mee? whither should I goe, or what should I say? and what can I hope for, that may please me in this world? Too long haue I liued, since the longer I liue, the more my paie increaseth: Dis∣patch then (forlorne and forsaken Shepheard) seeing thou art exiled, from what thou most of all didst delight in, whilst yee mine Eyes, who of late serued to contemplate so diuine a countenance, shall now stand me in stead, to raine downe bitter teares: and thou my Tongue, who of late wert an instrument to commend such rare and diuine vertues, shalt serue me (now) to lament their losse, and bid them all Adien. Must I then bid Adieu vnto those golden locks, which serued as bands to tye my heart must I bid Adieu to those faire and daintie tresses, curling in cirkles, and wauing with the winde, resembling those of the Paphian Goddesse? shall I neuer see you more, after you are inclosed within those vnooth walls? Must I needs bid Adieu vnto that goodly and spacious Forhead, smooth as Gette, and free from euerie wrinkle and frowne? that For head whereas all Vertue lodgeth, the seat of Iustice, and receit of all Chastitie? Must I needs languish and pine away, without seeing you any more? Oh vnhappie day of my byrth, ô miserable my chaunce, and vn∣fortunate the time wherein I liue. Must I needs bid Adieu vnto those thinne and slender Eye-lids, the foes of care, and enemies vnto griefe, descending (vault-wise) like a fine Arche of Ebonie, delightfull to behold, but farre more pleasant to touch? Is it possible I can liue, and not see you? I can∣not. Now woe is mee, I cannot: needes must yee take my life away, my sorrowfull life must you take away with you. But chiefly you faire Eyes, must I needs bid you Adieu? my two glorious Sunnes, haue you resolued neuer to shine more? and must I needs still liue in darknesse? O Saphire Eyes, the throne of LOVE the bright lamps of Chastitie, the lodges of vertue, & true mirrours of honest & maiestike modestie, must I needs beforsaken of you? Cruell as you are, you first inflamed my hart, rauishing the same, whilst it consumed with the fire of desire; yet thinke not for all this, that I will leaue you: your glaunces shall be my guides, and your lookes the pathes, wherein I will trace; I can no more lose or leaue you, then the Traueller can walke in the thick darke wood, without the light of the day. O faire Mouth, and must I needs bid thee Adieu? wo is me, & shall I neuer see thee more? Ah sacred Mouth, wherin my soule reposed, the happie chaire of my chaste Desires, resembling a garden of Musk roses, and Cloue gilly-flowers, from whence proceeded so many wise and hunnie speeches, charming our indes, as the great Priest of Thracia did the stones and Trees, with the sound of his bewitchitching Harpe: shall it be said I shall neuer see you more? it cannot be. Arcas shall neuer be seene to ioy in this world, when he is depriued of the heauenly sound of thy Harmonious voyce. And yee faire louely Cheekes, shall I bid you Adieu? Cheeks vermillion, without cunning or painting, whose naturall Die is the Lillie, sweetly mixed with the Damask-rose, neuer can I part from you, without parting from life & all. Ah beautious Brests, & must I needs bid you Adieu? where reposed the nine Muses, with their sage brother. Brests more faire then Summers day, and far more white then Moun∣tain snow: sweet lobby of vertue it selfe, and pleasant prison of my intangled heart. Ne∣uer shall I be able to bid you Adieu? sooner must my dayes be shortned, and my wret∣ched selfe cut off, before my time appointed. In the meane space (liue thou my peerlesse Saint) in all happines, full of ioy, and freed from all annoy: liue to be honoured, both of Gods and men. Adieu for euer and a day, the light of my soule, & life of my minde: fare∣well & Adieu, my gratious, sweet, chaste, vertuous and religious Mistris: Heauens graunt thee all happinesse, according vnto thine owne contentment, whilst I take my course to die, despite of the maleuolent starres, that haue so long prolonged my life. But yet before my death, leaue yee mine Eyes (some teares) to accompanie (in weeping) so ma∣nie faire and goodly Nymphes, (who as well as your selfe, mourne for the losse of their
best Gonernesse, and yet it is not for braue and generous mindes to shead teares, but ra∣ther for base Cowards, weake Women, and little powling Children. Cato when hee died, neuer wept at all, so wee without lamenting, will giue vp the Ghost: it shall suffice, that the goary droppes of my purple blood, shall be in stead of salt teares. Too much haue I sighed and sobbed, too much haue I wailed and wept, and o∣uermuch haue I lamented and cryed out. And yet before my fatall houre approach, I will leaue some pittious signes of my griese behinde mee, that the world may see after my death, how rare and constant my loue hath alwayes bene. Herevpon, I made an ende of my speech, falling downe (through very faintnesse) all along vpon the grassie ground, whilest holding mine armes acrosse, (as a token of my gricuous cares) and lifting vp mine eyes towardes the heauens, I began afresh to weepe most bitterly. That done, I began to apprehend so liuely a passion of exceeding bitter sorrow, that the very conceit thereof, made mee to sownd, and so, for a long time, I lay, (as it were) berest of all my senses. At the last I reuiued, and therewithall rose vp, when taking my knife, I engraued in the Rocke, these mournfull Verses following. Vnto the soundlesse Vaults of Hell below, Ile waile noy griefes (remedilesse) amaine: Whilst frightfull Ghosts, as pittifull shall shew, And Flitie Rocks, remorse take of my paine. Yea Death it selfe, my bitter paines shall know, To witnesse that my life in noy hath laine. For Louers true, can neuer die indeed, Whose loyall hearts, a beanenly fire doth feed. My Course beeing layd along within my Graue, Shall shew his teares, his torments, and his loue? And (for his minde; did neuer change nor waue) Farre brighter then the Sunne, the same shall prone, By him the picture of his Lady he shall haue, Which (he being dead) afresh shall make him mone. Like to the fire, in ashes contred, Which (though at shew no flame) yet is not dead. LOVE is not tarn'de by Death, but still doth liue, Although that life doth flit and passe away: Then (Lady) thinke not though by death (thou grieue My bodie) that thou LOVE canst make decay, As long as Fancie, oth thy beautie driue, Into my soule? No, this will bide for eye. Within my heart, thy beautie printed is, LOVE in my Tombe, to harbor will not isse. Thinkst thou, Ile leaue to loue thee being dead, When thy faire portraiture reuiues my sight? If mortall voice, from Tombes, haue some men lead, Restoring vnto them their senses right. Then how much more, ought LOVE be houonred, Whom (then the greatest Gods) is more of might? Then think not though my Corse in Vault thou see, That from thy loue, (as thou wouldst) I am free.
Below in Monument still shalt thou heare, How I will sigh, for (without soule) thy Fire Shall hold mee vp; whilst liuing I'le appeare, (Being dead) as fore my death, I did desire. Nor deadly pangs thereof, will I once feare, Nor part from thee, as thou wouldst faine require. For in thy life, so cruell th'ast not beene, But in my Death, as loyall I'le be seene. Yet is my Fortune better farre then thine, For, without breach of Faith (as thou hast done) I shall haue leaue to plaine of sorrow mine, Thou thinkst (in killing mee a Martyrdome, More tedious (then before) mee to assigne, But th'art deceiu'd, a wrong Race hast thou runne. For whilst I liu'd, thy Rigour was my bane, But now being dead, I freed am from the same. Death then, both thee and mee preserues from ill, Thee, that no more thy Beautie I molest: Mee, that I feele not now thy cruell will, O happie Death, that two desires hath blest. Then let mee die, thy minde for to fulfill, Yet first I will, this Rock shall be possest, Of this my dolefull verse, true witnesse, How (vndeseru'd) I brought was to distresse. For though (to die) it shall mee mickle please, Yet must I grieue at thy lost Companie: Then Rocks, Caues, Woods, Groues, Springs, and gree∣nie Leaze, Witnes you all, LOVE Arcas made to die. To noyse this in the world, doe neuer cease, If I report shall, where as dead I lie, How all of you (although by Nature wilde, Yet (then my Mistris) are more meeke and milde. No sooner had I engrauen these Verses, but that I got me vp vnto the toppe of the same Rock, minding to cast my selfe downe into the swelling Seas, when vpon the sud∣daine, an other new conceit came into my braine, which was to see, if I could deuise a meane, how I might restore Diana againe, not onely vnto my selfe, but also vnto the o∣ther Nymphs, who (as well as I) sore lamented the losse of her departure. Wherevpon (I knowing that she would not be perswaded, by any reasons whatso∣euer, to be reclaimed or altered from her first determination) I went and sought out her Friends and Parents, vnto whome I bewrayed the intention of their faire daughter, per∣swading them, with all the earnest speeches I could, & by all the liuely reasons as might be deuised, that they should not in any wise permit her, to haue her will therein. They hearing mee tell so straunge a Tale, were wonderfully amazed and daunted therewith: (For Diana neuer meant to haue made them priuie, in this her secret busi∣nesse,) promised mee, that they would so worke, as they would (if they could) crosse her in this her resouled purpose, they themselues being much vnwilling she should take vpon her any such Austere and Melancholike course. Wherevpon, I being glad, that they iumped with mee in opinion, (hauing recei∣ued hearty thankes from them, for my kinde Intelligences,) came away wonderfullie well pleased, in that I had spedde so well. And not long after, they tooke so good an or∣der, as the faire Nymph, (although very much against her will) was constrained to obey their hests, and giuing ouer her former resolution, liuing amongst vs, as shee had vsed before.
But alas, as hee that buildeth goodly houses, oftentimes erecteth his graue, it be∣ing his chaunce to be slaine therein: Euen so I, thinking to prolong mine owne life, framed mine owne proper death, and ouer throwe. For my Mistris (who before time) was wont still to vse mee kindely, shewing me good countenance when she saw me, (although for the most part, shee was sadde and heauy in her minde, because shee was barred from her most wished for De∣signe) came at the length to know that I onely was the chiefe cause that her Parents had so much hindered and crossed her against her will. As that Maister, who bearing great affection vnto one of his seruants (particularly) both hateth and detesteth the same man, after he findeth how hee is run-away, and hath robbed him of his goods and Treasure. Euen so, no sooner came these dismall newes vnto her cares, but that suddainly she began to alter her minde towardes mee, hating mee vnto death; yea, and that in so cru∣ell a manner, as shee beganne (now) to loath mee, a thousand times more then euer she had loued me before. Wherevpon shee vowed in her minde to be reuenged vpon me, imagining and deuising in her selfe, how she might best doe it. But alas, what need had she, to haue troubled herselfe so much? For shee needed no other to execute this spite∣full malice towards me, then her owne poore selfe. Thus we see, how chaungeable and vncertaine, the fortunes of Louers are in their Loues. For one morning, I finding her alone, beganne (as I was wont to salute her: when shee presently) looking as redde as any re, (with extreame choller) began thus to requite my kindnesse. O cruell and vngratefull wretch, out of my sight, if thou meanest that I shall liue: Is this the reward for so many curtesies as thou hast receiued at my hands, to seeke most Traitreously to hinder mee in my sacred and religious intention? Away I say, and out of my sight, for I forbid thee my presence, and thinke (or else It shall goe hardly with me) but that I will most grieuously plague thee, for thy vnthank∣full and leaud dealing. In the meane while, I commaund thee vpon paine of death, that thou neuer pre∣sume to come (againe) before me; Cruell, vngratefull, false-harted, and wicked Creature as thou art, that hast thus requited mee with euill for good, most iniuriously opposing thy selfe against my most iust and godly desires. And hauing so said, away she flung, swelling for very rage and anger, and not so much as (once) staying to heare what answere I could make in mine owne defence. That woman whom her husband hath taken tardie, as guiltie of some hainous fa∣cultie, is not halfe so heauie & sorrowfull, neither so confounded with feare and shame, as I was then. Long did I stand stone still, as if my feete had growne vnto the ground, nei∣ther was I able, or had the power, to open or lift vp mine eyes, so much had grie seazed vpon me, as I thought verily, I should haue dyed (as then) in that place. In the ende, comming vnto my selfe againe, and remembring the more then cruell threatnings of my dread Mistris, without wailing any more, or bethinking me of any o∣ther deuise, how to excuse my selfe, I ran vp vnto the toppe of the Rocke, vpon which I had bene so often before. That done, I closed both mine eyes, flinging my selfe downe from thence into the maine Sea, resoluing to drowne me within the bottome of the same. No sooner was I in the water, but I began to repent mee of my rash enterprise, whilst the feare of death (be∣ing not farre off) so terrified and affrighted mee, as I beganne to swimme most lustily in the waues to saue my life. Thus as I was tumbled and tossed too and fro by the churlish Surges, a certaine Shippe (by great good fortune, sailed by) the Marriners and Sailers whereof, being mo∣ued with pittie, tooke mee vp by a rope, being verie heauie and sadde, as you may well suppose. And within a while after, whether it were by reason the inward griefe I conceiued for my Ladies vnkindnesse, or because of the great paine and labour which I had taken in swimming, I know not, but I fell to be most extreamely sicke in the Shippe, vpon the suddaine.
They doubting least I would die, as those who were very vnwilling to haue any diseased folks in their vessell (although forie for the same) yet forced, and as it were halfe against their wills, set me on land in this desart, leauing me some victualls to liue vpon, vntill better foretune should happen. In the end I recouered my health againe, and am miserable ARCAS, confined to fiue in this comfortlesse wildernesse, and depriued the company of my deare Mistris for euer: my comfort is, that my dayes will soone be shortned, and that I haue not long to liue. And thus (good Father) haue you heard the true & dolefull discourse of my more, then wretched misfortunes, which will neuer end, vntill my life shall part, from this his vnwelcome mansion. I doubt I haue troubled you, in being ouer long, but (alas) it was sore against my will, for sooner (if I could) would I haue sinisht the same. Not a whit, (answered the olde Magitian,) for you rather haue pleased mee very much, and I like your discourse maruailous well. And God (I pray) comfort you, for great need haue you thereof. But it is (now very neere night;) Let vs then goe (replied the Shepheard) seeing I haue (now) set downe, and re∣ported the restlesse liues, the pittifull complaints, and the most lamentable kindes of such as haue loued. FINIS. Nec morte, moritur Amor.
LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS Creede, dvvelling in the old Change, neere old Fishstreete, at the Signe of the Eagle and Childe, 1610.
