18009 99855380 20870
Money is my Master: Yet once it was a servant unto mee, But now for want of Money I am in misery, Yet I doe hope to find some remedy. To the tune of, Better late thrive then never. I Have bin the Master of money good store, but now alas 'tis nothing so, For now I am growne very excéeding poore, and cannot well tell what to doe: 'Tis want of this money for that was my friend, And when I had store I it lewdely did spend, I thought I should never of it séene an end, This money is many mens master their master, 'Tis money is now growne my master. Perhaps some will say it is but as drosse, but I say it is a fine mettall, For he that wants money is possest with a crosse, and is like to enjoy but a ltittle: For hee that hath money may have what hée will. Looke what he desireth his mind to fullfill, With brave entertainement and kind welcome still, 'Tis money is many mens master their master, This money, &c. Whereas I had store of silver and gold, then I was respected with Gallants, But now I have none their love is growne cold, and I'm more rejected then valliants. Those that I have feasted with wine & good cheare From me stand a loft & will not come mee neare, Because I want meanes it puts me in feare. 'Tis money is many mens master their Master, 'Tis money, &c. Thus lack of this money makes all men foregoe me, as if they ne're saw me before, But if I had mony i'm sure they would know me and I should have company store: They would come unto me with tales and with lyes, And many brave projects they soon would devise, But let men be carefull, such are cunning spies, 'Tis money is many mens master their master, 'Tis money, &c. Now I all alone may sit like an asse, whilst others are frollickly drinking, And freely carrowsing the cup and the glasse, I to my selfe sadly am thinking, How they are in danger to fall in the snare. Wherein I am tangled with griefe & with care, Therefore I advise you such lewdnesse forbeare, 'Tis money is many mens master their master, 'Tis money, &c. This money's a servant likewise I may say, to them that doe carefully use it, But it is uncertaine and soone runns away, and specially if once you abuse it: I meane if you wast it in drinking and pride, At Cards Dice and whores full fast it will slide, Leave off all such follies for thus I have tri'd, That money becometh my master my master, 'Tis money that now is my Master.
The second part, To the same tune. LIkewise there are ome to money are slaves, and doe estéem it as their God, Then more that they have the more stil they crave but those are most impudent bad: For money was made for to passe to and fro, As for them that hard it 'twill turne to their woe, But for my owne part I did never doe so. For money is now grown my master my master, 'Tis money is now growne my master. This money is growne such a conquerer, as Alexander was never greater, He gaind all his credit and honour by warre But money now wins it more better: There are many brave sparkes march in silver & gold, That the face of a foe they did scarce e're behold, It is their great maintenance that makes them bold And these are right masters of mony of mony, O these are, &c. This fine Master Money is growne such a man, that many would faine enter in it, But ner'e since those witches from Lācaster came, could I have the fortune to gaine it: 'Twill one day be better but certaine ne're worse, If ere I get Money againe in my purse, Ile lay a gray groat Ile take a better course, And seeke to be a master of money of money, I faine would, &c. This lack of this Money doth trouble my mind, that I am full sorely tormented, I have much a doe a kind Hostis to find, that will with me now be contented: Quoth she give me Money for I ill not score, She saies she hath chalke enough behind the dore, But I must intreat her to set up some more, Till I can be, &c. Now he that hath Money though't be but a boy, he shall be made welcome most friendly, The love of brave Gallants be soone may enjoy, and he shall be used most kindly: Theres no age nor wit no strength can prevaile, 'Tis Money may do't for it is a sure baile, and he that hath it can seldome times faile, This money, &c. Now thus to conclude and so end my ditty, you that have money make good use on't, For friendship is cold in Country Towne & Citty if once you be driven to want, Therefore now bee warned, for here you may sée The griefes & the sorrowes that now possesse me, And this was all long of my bad husbandrie. 'Tis Money is many mens master their master, 'Tis money is now growne my master. FINIS. Printed at London for Francis Coules.
