18507.77 S119974 99855178 20653
The 14. of September. A RELATION OF MANY MEMORA∣ble Passages from ROME, ITALY, SPAINE, FRANCE, GERMANY, the LOVV-COVNTRIES, the PALATINATE, and other Places: WITH Some Famous Exploits performed at BERGEN-VPZOM since the 4. of this Moneth, Stilo Nouo. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Barthol. Downes, and William Shefford, 1622.
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
ADVERTISEMENTS From Forraine Parts. SIR, I Haue (though later) sent you the occurrents of Newes frō diuers places; If they come not to your hands so soone as perad∣uenture you doe expect, impute it not to any neg∣ligence or want of good will towards you, but rather, for that I would first be possest truly of the truth of what I send you, which I can by no meanes be if I shall post you ouer Newes vpon the first report, which can neither be so true, nor so particular, and therefore vnlesse I receiue writing (from each seuerall place, of each seuerall action) from men of the best credit, I will not offer it to your serious view, neither will I write you the same things which I writ you before as neere as I can; yet peraduenture some passages may be reported againe which the circumstance of time may make different: So for present, commen∣ding vnto you such things as I haue receiued, by this Post, doe take leaue, From Don Hage, this 6. of September, 1622.
FROM VIENNA the eighteenth of August, 1622. LAst Sunday, had the eldest sonne of the late Marquesse Ed∣wardsten Fortunatus of Baden Audience of the Emperour, and solicited very earnestly to bee enstalled into the vpper Marquessat of Baden. His Maiesty and the Empresse, with the young Prince and Princesse, were last Munday in the Iesuites Colledge with great deuotion, where they receiued the holy Sacrament. His maiestie caused his Priuie Councell to sit yesterday, where he himselfe was present. This day they went all together with a strong Conuoy to the Cloyster Nieuborgh to hun∣ting. The Prince of Lichtenstein, is lookt for heere daily to receiue the Order of the Golden-Fleece. Likewise here is lookt daily for certaine Commissioners, namely, the Lord Gondtacker of Lichtenstein, the Lord Heghenmuller, the Lord Doctor Mosmuller, the Lord Iohn Bapti∣sta Spindler of Egh, besides the Lord George Mullner the Secretary of Lucts, which are to
be sent into the Countrey of Enns, to enquire in all places of the Rebels; And according to their offences to giue them iust Iudgement: What further will ensue time will reueale. From Spyer the 26. of August. THe 21. of this Moneth the Enemy shot very fiercely vpon Heidelbergh, so that it was heard here very easily, but they within de∣fend themselues brauely. We also vndestand, that those of Franckendall are resolued to resist and defend themselues. From Wormes the 29. of August. CErtaine daies agoe the Arch-Duke Leo∣pold went from hence againe, and left some of his Forces here, taking with him two Companies of the Townes Garisons; his whole Armie lieth round about this City. The Crabats pilledge as far euen vnto Franc∣kendall, all the souldiers which they light on there abouts, they put vnto the sword. Our Ci∣tizens were forced to deliuer all their great Vn∣der-wood vnto them to make fagots of them, to fill vp the Towne-dirches withall, for the same Towne is giuen booty vnto the Crabats. From Hanaw the first of September. 1622. THe Enemies shot daily at Heidlebergh vp∣on the Schliebacher side, for the Bauarians haue taken in a Sconce beneath the Parke, which Count Iohn of Nassaw did raise, notwithstan∣ding as yet they doe little hurt.
The Garison at Tilpergh did sally forth not long since, and tooke those Instruments and Engines, of the which the Bauarians would haue made a Bridge ouer the Riuer of Necker, and carried them into the Castle. Euen now there was brought from Stein to Laudenbourgh, some 30. small Boats, whether they shall be vsed to the making of a Bridge or not, we doe not know. Leopoldus is come to Wormes againe, but his forces lie at Landan and thereabouts, and be∣cause it is reported, that Count Mansfield is to come vp againe, all the passages are strongly be∣set against his ariuall here. From Franckfort the 2. of September. WE haue certaine newes out of the Palati∣nate, that the Archduke Leopoldus is gone from Wormes towards Spire againe, but hath left some forces there for a certaine time, whose number encreaseth dayly more and more, and the most part of his Army lyeth round about the same City, in the next Villages adioyning there∣vnto. It is supposed that Frankendale shall be set vpon, which Towne is resolued to defend it selfe to the last man. Heidlebergh is besieged againe by the Bauari∣ans, as already is mentioned, and play very fiercely with their Ordnance vpon it.
From Cullen the 3. of September. THe last Sunday they began to shoot with two halfe Cannons on this side very hot∣ly, vpon the Fort Papnmuts, but that did not continue long, for they within discharged their Ordnances from two of their Bulwarkes vpon the enemies batteries, and dismounted both their halfe Cannons, one of them hauing the mouth of him shot away, the other burst in the side. And the same battery by the meanes of the often shooting is so ruinated and spoyled, that it is thought the Country people will haue a fort∣nights worke before they can repaire it againe. Few dayes agoe they of the Fort went abroad into the land of Berghen, from whence they tooke certaine Cattle, and carried them into the Sconse with them. From Dusseldorpe the 7. of September. THere was carryed last thursday from hence two pieces of Artillery more into the Lea∣ger before the Fort Papenmuts, they within as we vnderstand haue great store of prouision, and they practise dayly, yet in the like manner to prouide for themselues hauing at this instant such good opportunity, seeing the Sconse before it vpon the cleue side is quite battered downe by them within.
From Dordrechtden the 3. of September. THe 20. of August, in the euening, from se∣uen of the clocke vntill three after mid∣night, there was a great assault giuen before Berghen vp zome, wherein were slaine eight hun∣dred of the enemies side, amongst which were many great persons, besides sixe hundred of them were hurt, and certaine of them taken Pri∣soners: of our side there was slaine 30. and 80. wounded, and the enemy was forced to forsake the halfe Moone, but kept the Liuie. Spinola did write Letters vnto the Arch-dut∣chesse, the contents whereof was, that he must haue more forces to become Master of Bergen vp zome, entreating her Highnesse to write to the aforesaid Monsire Tilly, for certaine thousand Souldiers to assist him. From Gochdan the 2. of September. THe 30. of August, Count Henry Vanden∣bergh, arose with his whole Campe before this Towne, with an intent to beate Count Mansfield, with the helpe of Don Cordua, but when he perceiued that Count Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswicke were arriued with their for∣ces in Brabant, he came the same day backe a∣gaine to Venlo, where he marched ouer the bridge and quartered his whole Army about six thou∣sand strong at Venlo, and in certaine Villages thereabouts.
From the Fort called Gravenweerdt, or Schen ckes∣sconse the 25. of August. the olde style. The Prince of Orange, lyeth as yet here within the Fort, and his Campe on the other side the River Wael, in their old quarter. Certaine dayes agoe, when hee vnderstood, that Count Henry Vanden∣bergh, was determined to make himselfe Master of the Towne Griet, he sent in all haste 2000. Muska∣teers thither, and other necessaries belonging to the defence of the same Towne, and caused it to bee strengthened round about. Likewise we vnderstand that the aboue named Count was gone from the Towne Goch, taking his way towards Vente ouer the bridge, yet returnes backe againe, sending certaine of his troopes towards our Campe, to try their for∣tunes. Intending to make an assault vpon those quar∣ters where our horse men lay, but this was betimes discovered by some of our forces, wherefore there rose an Alarum in our leaguer, by reason whereof, the enemie saved themselues by flight. From the Campe of his Excellency the twentie sixe of August, there went from hence, Monsieur Marquet, with foure other persons in a boate into Breda, where he is to stay, sixe or seaven dayes, the reason whereof is as yet kept secret. Certaine daies agoe, there went out of our Campe, two thousand Swimmers, but whether is not knowne, in regard they are not as yet returnd. The Prince hath sent for certaine boates from Arnhem Niumegen, and other places there-abouts (as we vnderstand) to breake vp his Campe. Al∣so
wee heare that certaine souldiers the 25.26.27. in the night time tooke shipping, and that many Officers haue shipt their baggage alreadie. Wee haue certaine advertisement that Count Mansfeild and the Duke of Brunswick are safely arri∣ved at Tilborgh about Breda, where dayly comes more and more vnto them, which by the meanes of their wearines could not follow, so that it is ho∣ped within few dayes their Campe will bee by the fourth part strengthened, what enterprise they will afterward attempt, time will disclose. This weeke and the next all the Directors and Assistants for the West Indian Companie, shall be chosen in these vnited Provinces. God grant that the same Navigation may haue a prosperous pro∣ceeding and a fortunate returne. From Rome, the 6. of August. The Persian Ambassadour hath requested the Pope that he would giue way to his Master, that he might bring in the Greekes Religion into his king∣dome. And that he would be pleased to exhort the Christian Princes to make warre against the Turke, to recover the holy Land which the Pope hath promised to consider of, and to returne him an an∣swere. At Naples are fiue Gallies prepared and furni∣shed with Spanish souldiers, vnder the Command of Don Francisco Mauriques to ioyne with the Spa∣nish Navie: The Pope hath likewise consented that his Gallies arrived at Civita Vecchia from Naples,
should ayde the Spanish Navie. The Councell of State in Spaine, hath conclu∣ded that sixe hundred thousand crownes should be made over for the defence of Veltolina. And four∣teene Hollanders haue fought neere Lifebon, with nine of the King of Spaines shippes, where of they sunke seaven. From Venice, the 12 of August. From Millaine we are certified, that the Fort of Saint Marie in Engedin holdes out as yet, and that eight hundred Spanish, and Leopoldish Souldiers are come into Veltoline. And the King of Spaine was to take his Iourney into Italie. The Ambassador of this Seignory, the Lord Lando, is lookt for here speedily from England. From Breslaw, the 14. of August. The Emperour will send three thousand Hun∣garians and other Souldiers into this Countrey to defend the same, And will put one thousand Spaniards in Garrison for this Citty, but the Cit∣tizens are displeased with it, where vpon the Duke of Saxon will send his Garrisons here againe. Eight dayes agoe, there happened a great fire at Poesen which burned downe the Cathedrall Church, with two Steeples. The Prince of Poland, is marched with certaine thousands towards Grotra, to besiege the Citty of Riga and to pursue the Swedens. And the King of Pole himselfe in person was suddenly to follow. Yesterday, was held a generall Muster, and here passed by three hundred Muskets which were
taken out of the store-house of the States of Silesia. And the Imperials intend very speedily with all the force they can to assault Glats. The young Count of Thurne hath raysed fiue sconses before the city, for the defence of it. And a hundred of his forces went a pillaging towards Frankenbergh belonging to the Abbot of Coments, And surprising their two troupes of horse, they slue the one, and tooke the other, with the Abbots brother, and a principall Gentleman prisoner, and gott a rich booty, and afterwards they made themselues Masters of Wuns∣chelbergh, and having pillaged it, went their waies. From Vienna, the 17. of August. The 13. of this month is the Emperour and the Empresse received heere in great state and pompe, and the Empresse hath beene presented with many rich gifts, and principally by the Iewes, which pre∣sented vnto her a silver and gilt basen and Ewer. This weeke are sent againe sixtie Waggons with munition, and amongst them sixe hundred bullets, which waighed 45. pound a peice, going to the surprise of Glats, and there are to follow yet more, and about foure thousand Souldiers, which the Emperour hath at Odenburgh with him, and the Emperour hath sent the Count of Harderk besides a Secretary of the Court, to the young Count of Thurne, to perswade him to surrender the Towne to the Emperour. From Prague, the 18. of August. Last Satterday, the Duke of Lichstenteene departed
from Vienna, In the meane time heere are appoin∣ted certaine Lords to be Deputies in his absence. From Glats, wee heare that the Garrisons doe great dammage by pillaging, making their ex∣cursions as farre as Brauna, taking all the booty they can get, and carrying it into the Citty, where∣upon the souldiers in the Garrisons of Moravia and Silesia, haue order given them to march thi∣ther, to make the siege the stronger. Notwithstan∣ding the Old Count of Harderk had order to per∣swade the young Count of Thurne, to surrender the Towne, he could not obtaine it of him, but departed with this answere, that he expected aide out of Hungarie. From Lipsich the 21. day of August. The Duke of Saxons childe is Christened, and the feast with great state and pompe ended, and the companie departed with much ioy and con∣tent. The Lectorall day appointed at Regensburgh, is to bee kept the first of October; The Elector of Saxon, doth purpose to come himselfe in Person, if the rest will doe the like, otherwise hee will send his Ambassadour. And he had rather it had beene kept at Nurnburgh. From Franckfort the 24. day of August. The Magistrates of Franckfort, considering their faire to bee at hand, haue besought Monsieur Tilly, being Generall for the Emperour, and the Duke of Bavaria, that he would giue command to his officers to keepe the wayes cleere, of all Robbers
and Theeues; That the Merchants might haue free accesse to come and trade there, it being not only beneficiall and necessary for the Germane na∣tion and the Empire, but likewise for the Elector and diuers States of this Empire. Whereupon there was the twelfth of this moneth, Pattents published by the foresaid Mon∣sieur Tilly at Laymen, where his chiefe quarter is, To all his Generals, Collonels, Captaines, Lieute∣nants, and other officers, that they shall let passe, and giue free accesse to all Merchants and others, as long as the said Franckfort Mart is to last, from the nineteenth of September ensuing, to the thirtieth, more and aboue eight dayes before the Mart, and eight dayes after, to let them passe freely and secure∣ly with their goods and Merchandize vpon his Highnesse displeasure and penaltie of their liues. Last Sunday the Bavarians tooke in, Necker ground in the Palatinate, and next Munday follow∣ing, Neckerru, whereupon yesterday they besie∣ged Heidlebergh. Last Munday in the euening, the Arch-Duke Leopoldus, with three Companies of souldiers, was let into Wormes, very willingly by the Cittizens. From Cullen the 30. of August. Concerning the besieging of the Fort called Pa∣penmuts, there is little or nothing past of any conse∣quence, for they haue ceased of shooting into it, vpon the Bergh side, because it was to no purpose,
but as yet they worke very hard on this side, vpon the battery at Rhynetorpe, further newes, time will make knowne. There arriued certaine hundreths of souldiours, in the Bishopricke of Halberstadt, who did for a time much hurt in that countrey, whereupon Count Mansfeild, who keepes his Court at Weringrata. Like∣wise the Abbesse at Quodlinburgh, did raise in all hast two thousand men, whom they carryed into Halberstadt, where the Cittizens shut their gates, and sallyed out vpon them. But when the souldiers en∣treated that they might passe quietly away, they tooke prisoner their Generall, and Captaines, and Commanders, the rest were most of them destroyed and scattered, and diuers of them, came to Mayden-Burgh, where they reported, that they will come a∣gaine, stronger then they were, and fetch their pay. From Berghen vp Zome the 2. of September. We heare that of late, the 29. of August. being Munday in the euening, the enemy made another great assault vpon the trenches, but they were al∣waies beaten off againe, with the losse of about some fiue hundred men, being for the most part al∣most all Spaniards, In the meane time they short with their Cannon very fiercely into the Towne through certaine houses and Turrets, yet with∣out any great hurt, so that hitherto they haue pre∣uailed but little; Moreouer, they fell vpon the out-workes in three severall places withall their power, so that the fight continued from fiue
of the clocke in the euening, vntill midnight, so that many chiefe Spaniards and men of worth were slaine. And they within the Towne got a rich boo∣tie, and although the enemy doth striue to get neere the hauen, yet is he mette withall, from the new-workes, so that there is no doubt, he will likewise little prevaile on that side. From Emmericke. Count Henry Vandenbergh, lyeth as yet at a towne called Goch, and few dayes agoe, he had almost his whole Armie brought vpon the Clevish heath all in Armour, to what intent, is as yet vnknowne. From Nannow the 22. of August. We heare for certaine, that Spiers and Wormes are both taken in by Leopoldus, who hath altered the Gouernance, and disasured the Burges, that Heidle∣bergh is besieged and battered; that they cannot long hold out, Frankendale is besieged also, and none can goe out or in, but as yet not battered. Their remaines no more but Mainchem and Densbo∣rough vnbesieged, all which is done by the forces of Leopoldus and Banasia. From the Hage the 4. of September. We heare now for certaine from Breda, that Mans∣feild and the Duke of Brunswicke, arriued at a place, called Osterwick, in the Lant-state neere Breda, within a mile or two at the most, where they are lodged to refresh themselues, hauing mustered 10000 horse, and 4000. foote, in his passage, it is thought he hath
lost no lesse than 4000. Horse and Foot: Gonsa∣los de Cordua (as it is vpon the best intelligence certified) hath not lost of his owne and the countrey Bores lesse then 12. or 13. thousand in seuerall encounters with Mansfield, in his pas∣sage thorow Henault Liege, and Brabant. From Breda we likewise vnderstand for certaine that since Cordua his comming to Spinola his Campe, they haue made seuerall fierce assaults vpon the Towne of Bergen-vpzom, and especi∣ally the first of September Spinola (after he had beene repulsed at a halfe Moone in one of the out workes of the Towne assailed certaine new workes lying towards Breda, twixt two Forts of the Towne, with certaine Spanish and Walloun Companies of D. Cordua: the which workes were kept by a Walloun Commander and cer∣taine Wallouns, and for a long time valiantly de∣fended, but being ouer furiously charged by D. Corduas Souldiers, was surprised and taken. In the meane time comes Coronell Morgan with certaine Companies of the English of his Regiment, and certaine Companies of Scots of Coronell Hendersons Regiment lately deceased, (which Regiment of Scots are since vnder the Command of Sir Francis Henderson being Co∣ronell in his brothers place) and seconds the Wallouns with such resolution and courage, that they put them all to the sword, and possest the workes againe; In which conflict they killed dead in the place 800. of D. Corduas men, and
got great booty by the rifling of their dead men. Since which time (leauing his former course of surprising by furious assaults) he hath begunne another manner of way to gaine the same, (and hath vowed either to take it within a short space of Michaelmasse next, or else to lose his whole Armie) by plying 40. Canons against the same to batter it downe to the ground; but how spee∣dily he can doe the same, time will shew. Further wee vnderstand from Brussels, that Count Mansfield sent a Trumpetter to her High∣nesse, to desire that all prisoners taken may be rendered or ransommed, according to the law of Armes. From Constantinople. SInce the late relation of Turkey sent by Sir Thomas Roe, It is written that there is fallen out a great diuision betwixt the Spahies, which are certaine horsemen, and the Ianisaries, the Ianisaries fauouring the present Emperour, the Spahies fauouring the elder Brother of the late Sultan Osman, and doe labour to set him in the Throne, and to displace Mustapha the present Emperour; so that in the Citie of Constantinople by reason of these Ciuill dissentions, it is very dangerous for all Strangers to make their abode there. It is likewise reported, that the Basshawes in
seuerall countries are gathering together forces, each one to strengthen themselues, seeking op∣portunity euery man to possesse his owne coun∣trie as principall Lord, as it fell out after the death of Alexander the great amongst his twelue Commanders, which possessed euerie man for themselues, and so ceased the vniuersall Mo∣narke of the world. From Rome the 26. of August. THe Pope hauing beene lately very sicke, is recouered againe; for the which there haue beene great Processions, and singing Te Deum laudamus. His Holinesse being highly offended with the Gouernour of Naples, for detaining of his Gallies so long; and the great Princesse which hee expected should haue beene espou∣sed to one of his Nephewes: whereupon hee hath commanded the said Viceroy of Naples to make his appearance at Rome, and craue pardon, but he refuseth the same in regard of his place; and being the King of Spaines Subiect, he cannot doe the same without his leaue, so that it is thought there will grow some discontent be∣twixt the Pope and the King of Spaine, and the rather, for that this Pope was chosen without the consent of any of the Spanish Cardinalls.
From the Hage the 10. of September. Stilo Nouo. IT is written that those of the Towne of Berg, haue this weeke made an assault vpon a sconce or Fort of the Enemies called the Cat. (The said Fort being planted with many Ordnance did more offend the towne then any worke besides) which was so valiantly assailed, that they tooke it in, and brought their Ordnance into the towne, raised the Fort, and made it leuill with the ground, in which seruice there was slaine many men on both sides: But of the certaine truth, and of the more particular manner thereof you shall vnderstand more by the next Post. The Copie of a Letter receiued from Vtrech, this present 13. of September. SIr, I haue no newes to write to you at pre∣sent but this; The Noble Hastroke, Brun∣swicks Brother, had his arme cut off in two places, to the generall griefe of the true hearted. It is also credibly reported (with vs) that Heidle∣berge, Manhem and Frankendale, ate all at once beleiger'd, so that the poore Palatinate has not in all his natiue Country one simple Harbor to shelter himselfe in, nor one piece of ground in command whereon to set his foote. There is a generall fast to be obserued in all the
vnited Prouinces, the 10. of September, accor∣ding to the new stile, so that we doe expect some great matters to be done suddenly, the Count of Mansfield hath well refreshed his men, and en∣creaseth them dayly, o that there is in the field vnder his command about 16. thousand braue Souldiers, Horse and Foote, and it is hoped ere∣long the passages to Spinola his Campe will be more and more streightned, which he fearing doth with the more violence assault the towne dayly. From Middleborough is aduised that the 60. men of warre of the States, which are waiting vpon the West India siluer and gold Fleete, haue taken 12. Spanish ships, comming from Brasilia, very rich laden, and are thought to be worth at least  ound sterling. mes newes from Alepo, that the Eng∣l  llanders haue taken Ormus from the Po , being a City of great importance, and of great trafficke, lying vpon the borders of Persia. From Spinolaes Campe, lying before Berghen vpzom the 2. of September. A Letter printed at Antwerpe. IT is reported by a Gentleman that came a∣long all the way in Count Mansfields Army, from Sedan to Gemblours, where the battell was fought betweene him and Gonzales, that there were some 2000. of his Horse that did mutine
against him, thinking that it was not likely or possible for him with his Army that way to passe that he then intended, and is now past, ha∣uing so strong opposition. Those neuer gaue a stroke in the battell, and if they had fought as the rest of Mansfields forces did, Don Gonzaloes Ar∣my had bin (as is very likely) quite ouerthrowne. We got newes the 30. of August, that Count Mansfield, and the Bishop of Halberstadt, lost in the a foresaid fight aboue 2000. men. Wherefore vpon the same and the next day in the euening, we made here great shewes of mirth, making of Bon-fires, discharging of our ordnance, the Mus∣quiteres gaue likewise 3. volies with their shot, and those which carried Pikes, put bundles of straw on them, and went so with them aloft, to spite the Enemy, it seemeth that our who  was set on fire, and the Pipes, Drums,  ∣pets were euery where brauely so  same was likewise done the next day . The Garrison within Berghen was in  meane time very quiet, but the next day, hauing vnder∣stood that Count Mansfield was safely arriued at Breda, with 14000. horse and foots, and that he hauing slaine 3000. of Gonzaloes foreces, had got∣ten the field, & taken diuers of his pieces of Ord∣nance besides his money and bagage, they began likewise to make signes of ioy, and discharged a∣bundance both of great and small shot, & in the euening they made exceeding great bon-fires, reioycing mightily in regard of the arriuall of their much expected friends, Count Mansfield,
and the Duke of Brunswicke, who as they hoped should be their redeemer, and free them from their enemies. By this precedent Relation or Letter, you may perceiue what Mansfields very enemies doe pub∣lish of his late battel, which some here in England transported with affection, will not beleeue but that he had the worst of it, nay that he was vtter∣ly defeated. The Printers Aduertisemnet. THere was printed the 9. of this month a Relation or booke of newes, wherein were foisted in (with∣out the Licencers knowledge) certaine fabulous pas∣sag  ely that Count Mansfield should haue in hi  00. women or whores, and some o∣t  only false but also scandalous, to cer∣t  Neighbours and friends, which may pe  casion some to thinke the weekely Cun  ssed without any care or regard what is print  published (as formerly when things were d  out order) but I will assure you the contra  atsoeuer is licensed is throughly ex∣amin  nted according to the high or low Duch  opies, or out of Letters of the best cre∣dit fr d the Seas, and that whosoeuer hath or shall ob, or put any thing more then hath beene iudiciously examined and approued, is liable to be se∣uerely punished: therefore expect no such bold at∣tempt from any of vs hereafter. Farewell. FINIS.
