19338 99845859 10787
SINETES Passions vppon his fortunes, offered for an Incense at the shrine of the Ladies which gui∣ded his distempered thoughtes. The Patrons patheticall Po∣sies, Sonets, Maddrigals, and Rowndelayes. Together with Sinetes Dmpe. Plena verecundi culpa pudoris erat. By ROBERT PARRY Gent. AT LONDON Printed by T. P. for William Holme, and are to be sould on Ludgate hill at the signe of the holy Lmbe, 1597.
¶ To the right worshipfull John Salisburie of Lleweni Esquier for the Bodie to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. THe Hope of these, and glasse of future times, O Heros which eu'n enuie itselfe admir's, Vouchsafe to guarde, & patronize my rimes, My humble rime, which nothing else desir's; But to make knowne the greatnes of thy minde, To Honors throne that euer hath been inclyn'd. Geue leaue a while vnto my breathing Muse. To pause vpon the accent's of her smarte, From the respite of this short-taken truce, For to recorde the actios of my Harte: Which vowed hath, to manifest thy worth, That noble fruites to future age bringes foorth. Eu'n thou alone, which strengthn'st my repose, And dest geue life vnto my dead desire,
Which malice daunt'ste, that did thy fame oppose, Now, with reuiuing hope, my quill inspire: So he may write, and I may glorie singe, That time, in time, may plucke out enui's stinge. Renowned Patron, my wayling verse, To whose protect I flye for friendly ayde, Vouchsafe to heare, while I my woes rehearse: Then my poore muse, will neuer be dismaide, To countenance the babling Eccho's frowne, That future age may ring of thy renowne. I that ere-while with Pan his hindes did play, And tun'd the note, that best did please my minde, Content to sing a sheapheards Round-delay; Now by thy might, my Muse the way did finde, With Maddrigals, to store my homely stile, Graed with th'applause, of thy well graced smile. Eu'n thou I say, whose trauaile hope doth yeilde, That honours worth, may reape a due rewarde, Which flyes with natiue plume vnto the fielde; Whose paines deserues thy cuntreys iust regarde: Time cannot dashe, nor enuie blemish those, Whom on fam's strength, haue built their chiest repose, Tis only that, which thou mayst clayme thine owne, Deuouring time, cannot obscure the same, In future age by this thou mayst be knowne,
When as posterities renue thy fame: Then thou being dead, salt lyfe a newe possesse, When workes nor wordes, thy worthynes expresse, Then shall my time a sort of strength remaine, To shielde the florish of thy high renowne, That ruin's force may neu'r graces stain, Which with fames sound, shall through the worlde bee blowne: Yf that th'ocean which includ's our stile, Would passage graunt out of this noble Isle. For steling tyme of muses lowe remaine. Will from the fountaine of her chiefe conceyte, Still out the fame, through Lymbecke of my braine, That glorie takes the honour to repeate: Whose subiect though of royall accents barde, Yet to the same, vouchsafe thy due rewarde, So shall my selfe, and Pen, bequeath their toyle, To sing, and write prayes, which it selfe shall prayse, Which time with cutting Sithe, shall neuer spoyle, That often worthy Heros fame delayes: And I encouraged by thy applause, Shall teach my muse on higher thinges to pause.
Vpon the Authors muse. IF Poets with penne doe purchase praise, Let Parie then possesse his parte: Whose Posies rate, report doeth raise, To Pernasse Mount of due desarte. In house of fame he ought haue place, Yf Ouid eu'r deserued that grace. His pleasaunt vaine, his phrases fine, Sentencious eke, in verse and prose: That they include some grace deuine, His former doinges doe well disoose. With his sweete Muse, & louely layes, Who may compare in these out dayes. But chieflie his SINETES nowe, Hath moued his muse her prize to playe. As if therein she had made a vowe, Some p pie to displaye. There Cupides kke are liuelye seene, With Venus baies, that louelye Queene. Then Momus moment; & Zoylus cease, And foule Mouth Theon leaue to raile: Seeing Parries penne, the best doth please, What doth vour carping then auaile. Whom valiaunt Lyon doth protect: May well all crauing Curres reiect. Habet scintilla calorem. Hu. Gry.
Vpon Sinetes Passions. AH Loue, fond loue, false loue, deceitfu loue, Vnkinde, vnto the kinde, to frend a foe: A Tirant, loyall louers doe thee proue, And faithfull hartes, thou fillest full of woe. Ah blind loue: bliud, but not in woūding blind, Yea blind for why? thy frends thou dost not see, Those which resist, thou lika a childe dost flee, But they which yeilde thrise man-like do thee finde, Still, Still a boy, delightinge still to playe, What play? to slaye, what kinde of play is this: Soe plaies the hungrye hauke, with taken praye: So playes the wilie Catte with captiue Mise. Sinetes mournfull Muse doth this descrie, His haples hapes my plaints doe iustifie. The bloudie beare, which rangeth in the wood, Doth cease to rage, when that shee hath her fill: The hungry woolf, which oft is bath'd in bloud, When greedie paunch is glutted leaues to kill. But Cupide, whom men call the god of loue, (Vniustly call: nay, doe most iustly call: For why, he loues to kill, whom? those which loue) He dayly kills, & is not fild at all. What thinge is rare? to see a Tirant olde,
In prayse of the Booke. CVupid is old, though he a Tirant bee: What old? nay yong, wee Cupid still behould, Though young in sight, yet Tirant old is hee. Old may he be, and Tirants wages haue, Which thousands haue vntimely sent to gra. Happie thou art, Sinetes though vnhappies Vnhappy were the happes, which thee befell, Happy yet in this, that learned Parrye, Thy happles happes, in sugred songes doth tell. Thou shrouded art, vnder the Lions winge, Whose noble Name, all carping curres will quaile, Now neyther Zoil▪ priuily back biting, Not Momus barkes against thee shall preuaile. Sing boldely then, sing (pleasant Nightingale) Sweete warbling tunes, and heauenly harmonye: Feare not filthy byrdes, which would annoy thee, Ioues Eagle, will thee shend against them all. Parrye thou pend'st, the Muses did indite, They sweetely song, their sweet songs thou did'st write. H. P. gentleman.
In prayse of the Booke. FAire Philomele her ratishment hath song▪ But Parry rauisheth with musefull tunes, No soner hath his praise with florish sprong, With Daphins bosome stft with sweete perfumes, But forth his nectar-feasting poezie bloomes, And eke the Delion harper doth lament, In Passions poore SINETES discontent. Amored shepheards wonder at thy wit, And to thy piping lend their listning eare, And in thy praise the mûses frame a writ, Therefore I thought my rûder lines to teare, And skillesse riming bid my hand forbeare: But little candles giue their glimering light, As well as torches in the brighter sight. W. R. Gent.
In prayse of the Booke. THe rarest giftes neede not a Trumpe to sounde, For fame it selfe will vndertake the prayse, The sunne needes not a light for to be founder; But in the height of Sphere giues light alwayes: Flye then thou worke no soile shall thee disgrace, And why thy worthie patron is thy fort, Thou needes not shunne t'approch into ech place, Twy flowring bloome of wit shall thee report. Thy wise and deepe conceytes neede not be grac'd, For dayntie choise here found ech fancies please, Thy mindes repose may neuer be defac'd, Each fancie then thy fancies fame will aise. O that my tong could duely raise thy fame, Yet after age at large shall doe the same. H. P. Gent.
In prayse of the Booke. O Floue of ioy of solace sweete and pleasant vaine, That wanted was thy sugred muse to write and sing, Both Sonetts Maddrigals with dainty ditties playne, What sudden chaunce hath moued to chang thy stile what thing. Yf Prince prelate peere and Parry discontent, Complaynes a like gainst froward fortunes bad intent. Compier, full many shalt thou finde with there estate; Both discontented beare and blame their direfull fate. When all thinges alter kinde that subiect be to change. Then loue the ioy shal likewise turne to sorrow strange. T. S. Esq.
In prayse of the Booke: SWeet is the paine which vertuous trauell brings, High is the place which wisedome doth commend, Sower is the ease of vices root that springs: Loue is the seae which idlenes doth lend. None getteth wealth that puts not from the shore, Paine breedeth honor, vertue winneth fame, Glorie doth follow, courage goes before, Though oft the vent, answeare not the same. Vertuous attempts are voide of all shame, The base whome meanes obscurely doth keepe, Liues voyd of honor, dies without name, And in eternall darknes euer he doth sleepe. Therefore SINETES ti's then no blot, With mournefull Passions to lament thy lot. R. S. Esq.
In prayse of the Booke. THou O too cruell guide of louers traine, Proude in thy tyrannie on yeilded harts, When shall thy thralls forget to mourne and plaine? When wilt thou cease to hurle hatefull darts? Shall all the earth fing through her spatious parts, From out the mouth of euery fordon swayne, That thou in steed of loue, breedst hellish paine, Thou dire Vsurper of caelestiall arts. Shall heauenlie Posie be prophaned still, In woes description to thy peeuish will, Wilt thou in steed of loue, true louers kill, Far be it from a God to doe thus ill. No PARRY no, he doth but shew thee sorrow, That from woes darknes, ioy more light may borro. W. M. Esq.
PASSION. I. FIne ripe coceyts forsake the wearied miude, And fancies faile, whē sorowes surges swaye My pen bath'd in the waues of griefs vnkind Must write of moane, of ruine & decaye: A tragicke note doth fit a tragick chaunce, A heauie heart with sorrowes pipe must daunce. Like PELICAN I wander all alone, The dezart woodes and wildernes so wilde, To senselesse groues, I crye and make my moane, Eu'n from my thoughts all hope is quite eil'd, Left thus to mourne the skriching owle keepes time? With dolefull notes that to the heauens doe clime. Notes that bewaile the griefes of carefull heart, That charge my minde with heapes of deepe annoy, Which vnto none I vowed to impart, But vnto you my drenching dolors ioy: Keepe ladies keepe the closet of my griefe, Yeilde Ladies yeilde, for sorrowe some reliefe. No darke despaire may drowne my drowsie hope, If you giue life vnto my dead desire, Nor ought may daunt my minde, yf you giue scope, To pitties floodes to quench the kindled fire: Fortune is blinde and will not see my paine, Time hath a salue to cure the same againe.
PASSION. Rype griefe hath graft in slumbring harts disp, What still increase the motions of my care, Thinke I of salues my sorrowes to impaire: Then fearefull fitt the torments racke prepare; For him that would presume to thinke of good, When darke despaire drown'd hope in sorrowes flo Seas, floods, and waues, of fortunes weakefull sco. Cease not to roare, to swell, to tosse with winde, Of bale-full hap, (which increase the surge, Of sharpe disgrace) where perrils foord I finde: For to augment the terror of my paine, Where hope of naught but carking care remaine, The stocke is dead, whereon the ympe was graft, Which beare the fruite, that wonted sores did cure, The graft must die, so must the fruit be laft Naked to pinc, and nipping fiostes endure: The braunch consumes when perish'd stock doth faile, When sappe is gone how can the growth preuaile. My sappe is gone which norishment did yeilde, My wythered fruite doth fall before his time, I am the graffe which want my wonted sheilde For stocke decayed I haue no roote to clime: Lende ladies nowe your dolefull notes ech Pittie at least though not asswage my mo
PASSION. III. Nimphs in mournfull sables drest Nith plyant pipes sound dolefull musick note, ewayle your sheapheards fare, that thus opprest, increase of sorrowes set a floate: course doth scarce abide the tuch of time, wearied heart endur'd the bale-full chime. he sound of chime doth sound in lothed eares, could endure such cruell sound to heare, hich doth encrease a heape of dreadfull feares. Where to my soule darke horror doth appeare: Long passed cares renewe againe their course, Fates fatall chaunce doth change from bad to worse. A happie man had I neu'r happie byn, For fortunes sle did cause my greatest fall, To purchase ease by newe encrease of sinne; Were for to make my soule, my bodies thall: Hap then what may, let fortune frowne or smile, res cruell scourge shall not my minde defile. shrines I sill with volumes of my griefe, de I craue to quench the burning fier, brought to CACAS some reliefe; orts may reuiue my dead desier: hope by fortunes passed change, mes the darts wilde to range.
PASSION. IIII. NIghts rest is bard with weried thoughts controle, The pillow moanes bath'd in my drēching teares, The sheetes beare guilt of my distressed soule, Wherein is wrapt a multitude of feares, When stealing nappe doth close my drowfie eies, Then starting, feare sayth it is time to rise. Yf sleepe at all possesse my vytall parts, Then dreadfull dreames with gastly sights appeare, Which do present the cause that wrought my smarts: And doe a fresh renewe forgotten feare; I sleepe in paine, I watch in wretched griefe, Lyef's in dispaire sith hope forbids reliefe. When cursed thoughts there carefull couch forsake, Confused heaps of new encreasing sores. Like wildfier tost in PHLEGETONS firie lake, Or ship that stirrs gainst raging streame with ores: So doth my heart with sorowing sobs neere spent, Striue with the course that cares command hath sent. My moane I make where pities bowre is built, Your gentle brests is mercies chaire of state, A Butt of bane which neu'r for lacke is tilt: Yeildes fresh supplies vnto my frowning fate, Then fortune then cleere once this smothing aire, With salues of hope, after this long dispaire.
PASSION. V. SOund TRITON forth thy heauy dolefull knill, That, rings a peale of eu'r enduring woe, No vacant place but balefull ECCHOS fill: My heart is made a harbour for the foe: That yeildeth foode vnto my cursed cares, And poyson strong with hony ioyn'd prepares. Heau'ns shew your power, earth tremble at my crye, And stony rockes be molyfied with moane, The rurall Gods with mournfull melodie, Lament my chaunce, bewaile choice ech one, Your sheapheard swaine in sables clad with care, Doth for the dead some mourning weeds prepare. The lining doth presage his dying dole, His life is death while others reape his toyle, Who hath not power himselfe for to controle, Is sure the fruite of some aacursed soyle, His tong too long, his wisedome is too short, Who rues in deede the thing he spake iu sport. But Ladies yet condemne not his desire, Though passed deeds his present griefe prore, And lare mishhapps yeild fuell to his fier, That scant he can the scorching heate endure, Whose ayde he craues to mollyfie his paine, With pleasāt sport of some conceyted vaine,
PASSION. VI. INtract of time is pers'd the hardest fliut, Not by the force but by the droppinges fall, My greefes from raging rigor neuer stint: And can I then endure such cursed thrall? Yt were a hell to thinke of such a paine, Which naught but cares doth wrest from gored vain▪ Vaine is my vaine, yet voyde of vaine delight, Curst is the chaunce that chayngeth to extreame, Vnhappie man, subiect to Fortunes might, Can nought but greefe my fatall greefe redeeme, Then welcom griefe though death more welcom weare, Whose force at once might ed tormenting feare. Feare, which doth frett the wearie crased heart, More then the paine, that torment can procure, The heau'ns I call for to record my smart. That thus long did such agonies endure Leaue to aye, loue to be iust yee skie, And martyre those that doe your power despise. Skies fild with flame, of fierie fretting ire, That kindled wrath into my pensiue soule, In LVCANS forge which frameth deepe desire, To sell my life for Fortunes blessed dole; Y dole, I ce sweete Ladie to asswage, The dism  of IANVS daughters rag.
PASSION. VII. SCarce warme I burne, yet freeze in fierie flame, Displeased still, I rest content withall, Yet male-content againe, eu'n with the same; What freedom wrought, eft-soones hath made me thrall, Thus contrarie these coutraries I taste, Thus borne to beare I liue my life to waste. Life is a death, when dolors taste doth sway. And death a life to such as crosses beare, My thred is spoon to be the VVLTV spray, That Tiger-like▪ my ell death doth sweare: Thoughts, force my lingring life, to weare and pine, Conceyt will kill the stoutest heart in fine. Distressed thus, my light-some hope is past, And darknes doth with horror now appeare, Maister the shippe that hath a broken Mast: Through darkest clouds Sonns goulden beams are cleere. So let the beams and beautie of your grace, Shine through the mist that doth my ioy deface. Hide not the glasse with any wooden case, Let vertues mindes some vertues workes bring foorth, Doe not sweete Nimphs your noble mindes imbase, With any act that shall not be of worth, But let your sonne shine to your sheapheards case, The praise is yours, if you his griefe appease.
PASSION. VIII. VVay-faring thus in wildernes of care, My woefull minde, with thornes of discontent, Doth yeild new thoughts, which torments newe prepare, Then I begyn a gaine for to lament: Where first began the Period of my fall, There first I pause; and rue the summe of all. Thus doe I mourne, thus doe I moane my daies. And itt'terate still my heapes of deepe annoy, Thus doe I liue, and liuing loue to prayse: The thing which doth my comforts hope destroy, How can I liue and lead this wearie life? When life encrease, and death might end the strife. O blessed death, would death but heare my crie, And succour lend, to such as succour want, O happie man yflingering miserie: Had once an end my dolors to supplante, Yet would I feare least death would me forsake, And lothed life my carcas dead awake. Whom heau'ns doe spite & earthes disdaine dispise, He whylome liu'd in pleasures pleasant bower, With patience the low againe may rise, The fretting horse is spent within an houre: For all extreames doe worke extreame effectes, And contrarie yeilde contrarie aspectes.
PASSION. IX. YF wayling may appease the wrathfull Gods, And pittie moue the tyranized heart, My scourged minde with firie burning rods, Maye paye the tribute of my restles smart, With sacrifice of salt and brinish teares, Which yeilde newe life to late departed feares. No floode so heigh but hath as lo an ebb, No storme so great but hath a caulme ensuies, No man so mad to weaue his sorrowes webb, And being condemnd his pardon will refuse: Floods, stormes, and webbs, of griefe, of care, of paitre, Mayfall, may cease, may be vndone againe. Floods, stormes, nor webs, of my new budding woe, Will fall, or cease, or be vndone at all, The more I striue, the stronger is the bowe, Which will not bend but to my greater fall: And still doth shoote the arrowes of disdaine, My hope being dead to wound, to kill againe. Dead hope except my froward fortnne change, Which bends her browe, and yeildes no hope to me, But that I must in wildest dezartes rainge, With sauage rude and Tigers to agree; No force, for there the Driads I shall finde With musickes note for to refresh my minde.
PASSION. X. LEaue soule to mourne for that which hath no cure, Yt is in vaine to striue against the winde, Set vp thy rest; that nothing can endure, In such extreames, except it be assignd, Bv th'mperiall powers that guide the starrs, To trie thee here that sende such deadly warrs. These miseries vn-thought approch'd the place, Where first I ken'd the pell which ensu'd, But all to late: for then did hope deface, My passedioyes which heauenly I viewd: Looking astance on that which came behinde, My heart pen'd vp in sorrowes fould I finde. You Ladies then the Nurses of my hope, Which may asswage the swelling of my minde, Affoorde vnto my captiue soule some scope, Whome to your wills is willingly inclin'd, With firme repose of vncontrouled thought, Whoe, but your dome, accounteth all for nought. By PHEBVS beames, is cherished ech wight, By PHEBVS beames, the dead obtaineth life, When ATROP cutts (which is our ioyes delight) The twisted twine with stroke of fatall kniffe: Can you not then helpe dead to life againe, And comfortyeild that PHEBVS beames retaine.
PASSION. XI. O lampe that guides the circle of the globe, Yf pitties fruite doth nestle in thy brest, Scorne not in pride, the humble to disroabe, With nakednes from his enioyed rest; That willing yeildes vnto thy sacred doome, Thoughe web of care be knit in sorrowes loome. You scoffing ECCHOS that repeat my crie, And answere make when to the woods I moane, Yfanie say I faine, you may replie, And witnes that vnder this curse I groane, Who better knowes, if that the priest did ken, All that he ought? then clark that said Amen. You are the Sextons of my haplesse plaints, That say amen vnto my dolefull songes, And you doe knowe, my Ladies are the saints▪ (With sweete conceyts) that may redresse my wrongs, Applaude their praise, record my deepe despaire, With shrill, short sound, of new abrupted ayer, Nay prating sound cease for to brag my paine, Thou hast no skill to itterat my smart, Let such repeate that hath a copio us vaine, Th'xtreamest panges and langor of my heart; My Ladies may expresse my inward griefe, Whose changed note may sound me some reliefe.
PASSION. XII. VVaste is the soile where naught but thistles grow, And barrē ground will nothing yeild but weeds, Vnhappie is such that soweth not to mowe, When hope is lost in care, then comfort bleeds; Waste soyle, voyde hope, thistles and weedes encrease, In my mindes waste, that waste for want of peace. Peace with my soule (although my bodie warrs) Would qualifie the rigor of my paine, But that I want and must endure the scarrs, To ranckle, which doe now begin againe, When vlcers bleed, then daungers doe ensue, And carefull thoughts my bleeding sores renew. Renewed thus I count the clocke of care, No minute past without the tast of smart, Not as the diall, which doth oft declare: The time to passe, yet not perceau'd to stait; Poets faine, time swiftly to flie away, Yet time is slow, when sorrowe surges sway. As rotten ragges being dipt, the water drawes, By soaking fits out of the vessell cleane, Eu'n so from me doth sorrowes droth (which thawes, Mycongeal'd heart, with cruell cursed speene) Soake out the ioyce and moysture of my braine, For dropping eies can not from teares refraine.
PASSION. XIII. GVyded by fits, with malencholy looke, I laie me downe vpon the winding banke, To heare the musicke of the running brooke, And smell the grasse that was both fresh and ranke: There I complaine, there ament my state, That thus am crost with fortunes deadly hate Then to the brooke, I thus begyn to moane, Thou warbling streame that doest refresh my care, To my disled griefe, and doest alone, Giue place, and passage free prepare: The same to bring vnto the boundles Seas, Which there attend Sir NETVNS minde to please. Thou searching scowrer of the grossest mould, And element most subtile, fresh, and pure, That windest about dame TERRA thowsand fould, Behould the martirdome which I endure: That passeth through the Limbecke of my heart, And setts my minde, with force of gauled smart. Say to thy selfe in still and silent sorte, Doth fortune thus SINETES true confound? Ah Goddesse blind that loues such cruell sport, To thy dishonour this will sure redownde, Leaue of, knit thy bended browes on him, That daylie doth in seas of sorrowes swimme.
PASSION. XIIII. HArpies, and hagges, torment my fearefull gost, No part is freed, from horror, and despaire, My carcas thus in CARONS boate is tost, MEDVSA doth with cursed snakie hayre, Trans-naue quite, the vertue of my minde, Vnto a stone, that is deaffe, dumme, and blinde. Might but my soule enioye the fruite of rest, And purge the sting, that wrought my bitter bane, That hope mihht once my desp'rat minde inuest, And strenngth encrease, to bannish thoughts profane: Then would I ioy to see such happie day, That once I might be freed from decay. Sure I beleeue, though ioy could bannish care, And that I might possesse a quiet minde, And should winde out my selfe from sorrowes snae, To cleanse my thoughts from fruites of errors blinde: Yet would remembraunce of my passed paine, Where griefe I left, force to begyn againe. Then were my case far worser then before, For vlcers cut yeilde corosiues extreame, Salues hardly can, the former health restore, And naught but death can totur'd mindes redeeme: Then must I rest contented with my lot, Sih sorrowes now can not dissolue the knot.
PASSION. XV. BEnighted thus with clouds of new-sprong charge, My swelling heart (puffd vp by force of heate, Supprest) did burne, till teares did fier enlarge; Then water quench'd the flame, and frost the sweate; A dolefull choise of two euills one to name, To fie in frost or freese in firie flame. The time was come, that all my ioyes should end, Then straying to me was this vn-wonted care, And so much more my scalding sighes I spend: For as I could I did my minde prepare; For to endure these floods of deepe annoy, That drown'd my hope, and rob'd me of my ioy. O time accurs'd that eu'r I knewe that day, Which hath dis-roabde my minde of sweete content, For then were hatch'd the birdes of my decay: When vn-awares my listning eare I lent, To SIRENS song, and CIRCES cursed charmes, That train'd my minde, to worke his maisters harmes. No musick then could better please mine eare, Nor obiect seeme more precious to mine eye, Then that which did my cruell torments reare, Where but content I nothing could espie, Yet fairest flowers haue filthie Adders nest, And I haue found in pleasures vaine vnrest.
PASSION. XVI. YEilding consent hauing vnlocked the gate, The garde which kept my minde in reasons folde, Then fond desire wrought in my Minde debate, How of my friends I might liue vn-controulde: To follie then the restrained raines I lent, Of libertie, which now I doe repent. What toyes so vaine which then I did not taste, What acte so badde I would not seeme to proue, I thought that time could neuer my ioyes waste: Nor checke the pride of mine vntamed loue Till on a heape my ioyes and follies toule, The Bell of care, my louing ioyes controule. Then ga I sighe, euen with a sad lament, And pause vppon the remnent of my life, Then that seemed greate which lest did discontent: When as repentance sharpened sorrowes Knife, To exte the Iudgement of the lawe, On him, thereof that neuer stoode in awe. When frendes forsooke, and enemies did prie, To worke reuenge for some vn-modest parte, Then gan my soule, with sorrowes to discrie: The guilte of sinne, that lodged in my hearte, Whose memory did racke my senses soe; That strech't they were beyond the bonds of woe.
PASSION. XVII. ENgendrd griefe from seede of pleasures vaine, Inforcing still the agents of my smart, From sinnes aspect, my minde could not refraine, For fretting lust did cynge my broyled heart, Till loth to yeilde, yet could not choise but yeild, When as remorce perforce did win the field. Then of two harmes making a choise of one, To salue my soule, I paunde my life a thrall, And gaue consent to that which makes me moane, Whereof proceedes the fruite of bitter gall, Which pen'd my minde that sared in the skies, In basest sould, where in dispaire it lies. An abiect throwne before the face of wrath, That date not view what I of late enioyed, Of new-cut grasse naught but a rotten swath, After the raine the vertue hath destroyed, My drooping thoughts forsake their wonted se, And back decline their sorrowes to repeate. Thus feeling smart opens the new sar'd vaine, That bled so fast till lifes blood neere is spent, And now inclosd in Laborinth of paine, I still expect the MIMOTAV to rent, The bondes which doe restraine my libertie, Clos'd in the ue of woefull miserie.
PASSION. XVIII. LOng loathed lookes, of my forepassed life, Are glutted with the sense of fond desire, And discontent did agrauate my strife, When hope did staie, my stamring steps t'aspire: Being tyed by fayth my fatall fortunes woe, To this base chaunce; I must embrace my foe. Lo he which sometimes thought great scorne to se, Stamp made of purest mould to frowne on him, And thought the Queene of loue might well agree, To taste his skill that in conceyte did swimme, And dee'd a toy, for to deserue a smile, Of coyest she that eu'r did man beguile. Whose ouer-weening wits and cake aspiring though, Like finest lawe which wanteth not his bracke, By fortun's spite was sodenly ou'r-raught, And swelling sayle endur'd the greater wracke: The greatar oake the lowder is his fall, The higher minde th' uneasier is the thrall: The sillie flie in spyders web ihrauld, The more he striues the more entangled lies, Euen so my minde that with conceyte is gauld, No way to scape the Laborinth he spies, The more he seekes his follies to avoyde, The more he loues the fruite himselfe auoyde.
PASSION. XIX. YF fortunes crosse be bitter to endure, That frets the minde which tasteth her despite, The same being past, when changes new procure, Some offer which might wearied mind delight, But that fore-chance, his latter fate preuent, Then will he rue the fruite of fond intent. The freeman thinkes it small for to be bound, Not knowing then the daunger which ensues, But freedome lost dispaire doth straight confound, Confused thoughts, which bring vntimely newes, For bondage come, and libertie being lost, What is the the thing whereof we then can boast. Who would not seeme for to condemne his eye, That first did lust, and heart that gaue consent, When fruite thereof proues seede of miserie, But more when as some kindly glaunces lent, Yeilde constant hope if that his minde were free, Some better happe in time obtain'd might bee. You iudges of my heauie dolefull song, To whose ge doomes my selfe I doe submit, Yf worth, may not obtaine his worth; tis wrong, Such is the fate of those which dayly flit: Such was my chace to make my prime choise, That to be  I onely might reioyce.
PASSION. XX. ZEale is but cold, where loue-lesse law restraine, The soaring Hawke, to cease vpon his pray, Which from the fruite of his intent refraine, Expecting once for to behould the day: Which being expir'd may yeilde some hope of rest, Yf future happs may be foretould iest. So SIEILL sayd, SINETES doubted thoe, She did affyme, he still did feare the worse, She prophesied a freedome of his woe, And he did doubt that fate would alter course: For though on him that Fortune false did smile, Yet sure he thought it was but to beguile. MEDEA did make AESON young againe, She thought to gaine a daughters name therefore, But she that doth a daughters name obtaine, With art can not her fathers weale restore: For bound he is, and freedome cannot sway, Excepte that he whoe gaue doe take away. Sweete ladies then what helpe is to be had, That time decreede may once be expir'd, But that meane time you doe with comforts glad, And dayne a smile where no more is desir'd, Yeilde poore SINETES hope though in his graue, That in your mindes his worthes you will ingraue.
PASSION. XXI. AGreeu'd in graue of mindes dispayting crosse, Not in the graue which cancelleth annoy, Yf fate will not againe restore his losse, The fatall graue, he craueth to enioy: For fortune doth bu spite, to smile againe, When former frownes, did cut the artire vaine. Suppose you came vnto a gardn fine, And might there choose one of the fairest flowers, So choise being made as fancie did incline, Yet walking there to view the fruitfull bowers, Amongst those groues, a thowsand flowers you finde, Then former choise better to please your minde. Where fight is free, but handling, is deni'd, And if you touch, you may not taste the fruit, Though neu'r so faine, least Garden-keeper spi'd, And would ympeach your crime with blazing bruite, How much agreeu'd would you be then in heart, That better choise befell not to your part. Would you not curse the rashnes of your braine, That moued seach which could not be vnsaide, And Fortune ban which laide this subtill traine, When you did finde how much you were betraide: No doubt you would hinke this a heauie crosse. Exept you myght in chosing, change your choise▪
PASSION. XXII. BEtrayed thus with lust of luring sight, The flower is cropt which now I may not change, The garden's free to view what might delight. But passed coice restraines my minde to range: So that beholding still what I desire: It fuell yeilds vnto the kindled fier. The memorie of what I might obtaine! If I were free, extenuates my ioy, This is the roote of mine endured paine, Though this be great, yet not my chiefe annoy, With dayly showers, new weedes spring, and increase, Which fruite out-growes, and future hope decrease. Enuying fortune thrise be thou accurst, Who not content to make me what I am, Amongst the meane to be accounted worst, That from one bad, vnto a worser came, And heaped coales a new vpon my head, To bring me home vnto my loathed bed. Bed of disgrace, when stealing time gaue light, Discouering the messages of fame, Which witnes bare how deere I bought delight, That for good will enioyed nought but blame: And payde therefore eu'n at the deerest rate, For had I wist doth alwaies come to late.
PASSION. XXIII. ECclipsed with the blemish of disgrace, Coms ATROPOS the messenger of night, And sayth I must, newe sorrowes now embrace, Who hath in charge to cancell my delight: A cruell doome thus to ou'rcharge my minde Where hope dispaires true comforts fruit to finde. Yf former cause did formall griefe applie, And formall griefe in time encreased more, This treble cause of woefull miserie, Will make me yeilde to cruell fortunes lore: That doth deuise newe tortures to encrease, My martyrdome, the wrath-full Gods to please. Might carcas cras'd with battring engyns noyde, Content (the strength being scaled and defac'd,) The cruell executioner deuoyd, Of pitties fruite, which Iustice neu'r embrac'd: Then Fortune would be wearied to torment, My wracked minde, thus cloth'd with sad lament. But sith I must endure these paines extreame, Now let me sigh and breath this fatall doome, For death I craue this thraldome to redeame. If death would heare the crie of such a groome; If not, you Gods heare now my mournfull verse, Wherein my cares with teares I doe rehearse.
PASSION. XXIIII. TRembling with feare my thread-bare comfort left, To feede vppon the obiect of my smart, And to repeat the cause which thus bereft, The hope, the ioy, and comfort of my hart: Sing then with me such as will mourne and moane, Eise I must sing with mourning teares alone. For Fortunes clouded-brow doth threatnings send, And scorning bandes a smile from stormie face, Disdayning comforts of my cares to lend, Intending still to keepe me in disgrace: As seruile drudge to her commaunding will, In cruell spights that hath a tried skill. O sacred muse with melodie deplore, And decke the hearse with mournfull ornaments, Which doth to me renewed griefe restore, And fil'd my face with sorrowes sad laments: Whose life was deer, whose death must be my dole, Which wringes my thoughtes, and racks my vexed soule. You louely sweetes to whom I doe appeale, Attire your selues in Sables with the rest, For to assist with mone my burning zeale, The smoke whereof hath neere my minde supprest: In cloudie stormes it yeildeth much reliefe, To haue a friende for to impart our griefe.
PASSION. XXV. HECTOR in time did scoure the greekish hoast, And made them flee like Bees vnto the hiue, Yet in the end his valiant minde did cot, The price of life, when rashly he did strue. Against such power, that rather time would yeilde; Then force should want to vanquish him in fielde. Braue HERCVLES whome CERBRVS might not tame, Could not withstand the dart of destinie, And rash attempts to gaine a worthy name, Bringes loftie mindes to woefull miserie; Ou'r-weening thought of a self-willed minde, Hath made me loose, what more I cannot finde. Braue man, braue minde, and fitte to feare the foe, But wordes or deedes, with fate can not preuaile, Pittie it were, life should be prised so, For passed deedes, wordes cannot nowe auaile: So it befell, so destinie assign'd, They went before, and we must come behinde. Againe I call where ayde I hope to haue, To you I call that may my call commaunde, Come tune your trebled notes of care I craue, And sooth the humor of a fonde demaunde: Yf you doe salue with comfort mine annoy, The prayse is yours, though I the ease enioy.
PASSION. XXVI. VVEaried with cloudes of tempest-beaten sense, Whole armies of reproches fill my sayle, Marching with life, that hath but weake defence, But in dispaire I looke not to preuaile: For vnto me befell a worser spite, Then any thing that yet my pen could write. Far worse it is then what is worst of all, Mine eye bewrayes the care I take therefore, Th'annotomie of my accursed thrall, The more I striue the paine encreaseth more, For that doth make the new heal'd scar to bleede, And woundes againe; ô would it kild with speede. Twise launced sore the thirde time now is search'd, The first was paine, which scant I could endure, The second hath my crased carcas pearch'd, The third and last did latest harme procure. And by as much the second past the first, Eu'n by so much, or more, the last is worst: Three harmes in one, conspired to betray, The guiltles thought, scant wayned from dispaire, Scarce first had end, before the next did sway, Third came too soone his ioyes to ympaire; But last it was that most did vexe my minde, Though former twayne did not come much behinde.
PASSION. XXVII. O Pale death inexorable monster, That seis'd vpon the remnant of my hope, Who can thy spites with grauest wisedome conster? That to thy selfe doest only giue a scope, To choose the same that worst might be spared, And doest refuse those that are prepared. With cutting sythe why hast thou rack'd together, The future hope of my declyning state, And left me cut behind alone to wither, For to bewaile the rigor of their fate? O gentle death now let me beg and craue, To follow them that now be clos'd in graue. Else if I liue, let him that ruleth all, Ioue sole commaunder both of thee, and thine, Giue thee in charge, remembrance for to fall, That racketh still this wracked heart of mine: Then may I hope some rest for to enioy, Though loaden now with burthens of annoy. Faire choysest dames that patronize my ioy, Now ioyne with me, in prayer to IVPITER, That I may die, if dying may destroy, The liuing griefe which leades me thus to erre: Or if I liue, let life be cloathed soe, That new attire may banish former woe.
PASSION. XXVIII. LITICIOVS thoughts will graunt no quiet rest. For care is close intombed in my minde, And memorie of passed woes molet, Such as in vaine expect some ease to finde: When ripping of the cares long past and gone, Will make a fresh the stoutest heart to grone. Ymprouident prosperitie is caught, Within the net of new confused shame; For still the vn-respectiue mindes are fraught With heape of toye, that bring vntimely blame; My follies first did leade me to this case, When I began to treade the louers maze. Vn-warie peace on fat-fed pleasures stall, Whose wanton thought, made weake with lust & eas; Did guide my steps to this vntimely thrall, And destinie my sorrowes did encrease: Being tangled thus in Labrinth of dispaire, New-sprong effects my ioyed hope impaire. Sing Muses, sing, the ruines of my time, Reade in my face the Kalender of care, With tragick notes repeate my passed crime. My wrinckled browe records how hard I fate: All must consume so shall my care haue ende, When as no sap is left for life to spende,
PASSION. XXIX. FOre'd to endure the burthen of my charge, Which loades my minde with more then I can beare, Drench'd in dispaire, rowing'n cares cursed barge, I trie the foordes which dangers new doe rearo: Wherein I wade too farre for to returne, For all in vaine against the pricke I spurne. Against the pricke I spurne, the more I striue, The deeper wo it makes within my minde, For of true ioye it doth my poore heart shriue, When feare doth leade and hope doth come behinde, Thus like the Mer-maide pain'd, I watch deaths dome, And reereat my selfe with glasse and come. With glasse and combe I trifle thus the time, Fit bables for those which are children twise, The flood of care, late fild with mud and slime, My swelling heart, which nowe beginns to rise, Against her banke, and often doth rebell, When paines extreame do pleasures sappe expell. You handmaides which doe waite on beauties Queene. Or rather peeres to beauties excellence, In my distresse you which so well are seene, For future harmes now lende your prouidence: That though I paine, and pine eun to my graue, Yet after I may hope some rest to haue.
PASSION. XXX. REplie and say my fortune is so base, That you disdaine to lend me any ayde, Sav it is soe, such crosses to embrace, (Amidst those stormes) I must not be afravde, But rarher scorne, proude fortune to her face, Which thus with spite doth worke my deepe disgrace. Shall I now mourne for what cannot be had, Great follie were my labour so to loose, Nay rather seeke some comfort for to glad, The drooping hart that knowes not what to choose: For chaunces whose euent be desperate, Redresse craues speede, or else it coms too late. Too late the succour coms the fort being sackt, And comfort, when no comfort can preuaile, Is torture to the minde alreadle rackt, When in th'effect true comforts fruite doth faile: Then lend your ayde before my wracke be such, That past recal the paines encrease too much. Now must I sturre to catch a liuely hould, While fortune bends her frowning brow on me, Who cannot shift being young will neu'r be ould, And he that striues with froward destinie: In fortunes front must seeke a hould to finde, Else 'twill not be: for she is balde behinde.
PASSION. XXXI. Eyes weepe no more, hart breath no fighing sobs, Cease to repeate ô quill thy maisters griefe, The theefe is knowne which hope of quiet robs: And courage must (not weakenes) gaine reliefe; Leaue of to moane, with Fortune be content, No case is found by this thy sad lament. Teares cannot quench the heate of kindled fier. Nor sighing sobs restore thy former state, Pen cannot write the accents of desire, Nor courage quaile the force of frowning fate: Yeilding cannot helpe, force cannot preuaile, Against the stormie windes no ship can saile. Enuye not Death, he claymeth but his due, Fortune cannot her crabbed nature leaue, Why doest thou then these sighing sobs renewe, And fate reuile that did thy hope deceaue? Now debts are payde, call home thy wits againe, Desire not that which thou shalt wish in vaine. Thus rest content with this thy fatall chaunce, For that will checke thy angry fortunes pride, With enuies pipe that leades a scornefull daunce, And with disdaine thy sorrowes doth deride: With patience thou mayst ou'rcome at length, And more then this repose no trust in strength.
PASSION, XXXII. SVppose deere Dames you giue me such aduise, This cannot please the humor of my minde, For flesh is fraile, and cannot thus dispise, The thinge whereto our nature is inclin'd: Nurture may striue, but nature must preuaile; Well may I trie, yet shall, not misse to faile. What if I should endeauour to intreat, Fortune no doubt would heare my carefull crie, Sweete Fortune then giue care I will repeate, The totall some of this my miserie: I want my will, I would what may not be, Vnlesse thou doest yeilde some reliefe to me. I seeke no more but quiet to enioy, Yeilde me my right, and that is all I craue, Not to dispease I doe my minde imploy, (With chastest thought) but comforts fruite to haue, I seeke and sue not to a Goddesse blinde, But vnto thee in hope some ease to finde. Some one will reade that knoweth mine intent, Let such but pause and canuas my desart, And pittie him which thus his youth hath spent. Then zealous thought of honour set apart: Giue all their due and staine not vertues name, With trifling trash that bringeth but defame.
PASSION. XXXIII. THe fit is come, my trembling flesh doth feare, These idle toyes fore-runners of my griefe, Prognosticate what torment I must beare, I see me thinkes the agents of reliefe, Repulst by force of the tormentors hand, Seeking in vaine his strength for to withstand. Yeild then I must vnto the cursed stroke, That shall weare out the remnant of my dayes, And be content to beare the seruile yoke, Which sorrowes charge from sorrowes store defrayes: For being enroul'd within the booke of woe, I must not scorne for to embrace my foe. And for my follies which sometimes yeild ease, To cleere the smoke of cloudie ATHOS fier, Their force cannot my fettered thoughts release, But rather doe encerease my fond desire: And as ACTEONS dogs, spar'd not their Lord, To hunt me from my rest, so they accord. O harsh accord of woefull harmonie, That naught can tune but solemne notes of care, Wherein is crost the fruite of charitie, Whereof I want (to salue my griefes) a share, Then past redresse, I must remaine content, To cherish that which frowning fortune sent▪
PASSION, XXXIIII. O Heau'ns recorde the somme of my request, Confesse I seeke nothing but what is iust, Some case of that which doth my minde molest, Eare all my hope be buried in the dust: Ye angrie stars let my submission pay, The ransome of my captiue hartes decay. Tis not obscure that I long pennance bore, To purge the guilt of my fore-passed crime, Let tribute paide, make euen with the score, Which in Fates booke care crost of auntient time: Then doubtles I some comfort shall obtaine, Though Fortune doe my sacrifice disdaine. Yet let me yeild, it booteth not to striue, Of force I must giue place to higher powers, Too weake I am, for such as me cortiue, Without I might raine downe some Golden showers: So DANAE no doubt I might enioye, To beare a sonne his Graund-sier to destroy. Haue I forgot my Ladies yet to moue, Whose sole applause may pleade their sheapheards woe, Tis you alone that shall my deedes approue, For like the weees, that fairest flowers out-grow, My cares ou'r-spread the relique of my ioye, And fatall feare did fadeing hope destroye.
PASSION. XXXV. NEPTVNE the wrathfull EOLVS appease, Call TRITON foorth to summon a retreyte, Of raging stormes, which doe my rest disease, How they beyond their limmits past repeate: And though EOLVS may the windes encrease, Yet tell them this, thou canst commaund the seas. IOVE prince of all, stop greedie fortunes iawees, Send MERCVRIE for to edict thy will, And let her knowe sh hath transgresd thy lawes: Which all the Gods are subiect to fulfill: For though she spite and spend her bitter gall, Giue her to knowe, that thou commaundest all. What though she may wring poore SINETES minde, The same to heale thou hast a salue in store, Send patience to checke this Goddesse is blinde, For all in vaine these sorrowes I deplore: When hope is drown'd in slymie sudds of care, And patient lies fast in furies snare. The raging force of agues burning fits, (With potions cold) doth yeilde at last to cure, Eche thing extreame in time decreasing flits; And patient may best my ease procure: The sound (though weake) by foode recouer'th strength, So may my sores obtaine some salue at length.
PASSION. XXXVI. REpyning fretts and sturs the angrie minde, That patience (which is the nursing foode,) In such extreames, can no disgestion finde; No more then meate encreaseth sick-mens blood: The one by course to choller altereth faste, The other turn'd to excrements doth waste. Who so by art would cure infected mindes, Must mildely first prepare the sickly thought, When faulkner good a sorrie feather findes, He first beginns to pare and prune the naught: And better graffes; then keepes his hauke on fiste, My troubled minde of such a salue hath miste. For first we should learne to forget the cause, Before a salue may be thereto applyed, Then may the gulfe which waytes with open iawes; For to deuoure therewith be satisfied: And this obseru'd, roote perisheth in time, Which fed the cause the subiects of my rime. Who hath such strength to moderate extreames, That without change his countenance may beare, When that doth perish which he well esteemes; Which sodenly procures a dreadfull feare: No heart so hard for to endure the same, Who then is he that can my weaknes blame.
PASSION. XXXVII. OFt haue I sightht, and to my selfe thus sayde, O poore vnhappie relique left to paine, Thus wrong'd by death which hath my death delayed Whose eares thou fist, with prayers though in vaine: Leaue to intreate the fiend that forst to fall, And doth triumph thus glutted with thy thrall. Seest not that time cannot so long endure, But that thou must needes haue some speedy end, Of that which doth thy sorrowes thus procure, What needeth then thy breath in vaine to spend: For date of time which shortly wastes away, Being once expir'd, thy sorrowes must decay. The greatest fier PIACKMON sendeth forth, Will soone be quench'd, when matter none is left, And here we see that men of greatest worth, When sap is gone, will soone of breath bereft: Why should I thinke death would my time delay, Syth that which feedeth life doth fade away. Nothing so hard but time at last doth weare, Naught wanteth rest but will consume in fine, How can my heart which doth my sorrowes beare, Chuse but with speede consume away and pinc, Death will at last stretch out his angrie arme, Inforst by time, to end my endlesse harme.
PASSION. XXXVIII. BOwes not my body with the force of age, Ys not the skyn far wyder then my face, And flesh consum'd by force of wrathfull age, What doe not siluer hayres yeilde goodly grace: And be not these the kalendars of time, Which witnes that in cares I spend my prime. Were none of these my blood still waxeth could, And I doe feele a weakenes in my minde, Feare disposest my wonted courage bould. Dimnes of thought doth make my senses blinde: Benomn'd I am in euerie part at length, That cleane I lost the force of former strength. These tokens shew my paine not long shall last, Nor I (thoughe steele) be able to endure, These torments, which encrease the surging blast, Then let me not my greater harmes procure: By fearing paine more then the force of paine, Which feeble strength could not in me refraine. Should I suppose I could exceede the dayes, Which are layde downe to finish all my cares, And doth encrease the cause which hope delayes, Then let me yeilde, to him that still prepares: A salue, to such as call to him for ayde, And to abide the brunt are neu'r dismayde:
PASSION. XXXIX. EStranged from the fruite of quiete rest, How can I choose but waste, and weare away, Whose accents new with feeling force molest The troubled thoughts which carefull minde dismay: Who would the some of sorrowes all display, Within my life let him the same suruay. Some one repeates, he roules the restles stone With SISIPHVS: an other Tatals payne Doth beare: the third is rack'd with IXION: And others do like TITIVS complayne: But yet the worst of their accurst annoyes, Eu'n is the best and chiefest of my ioyes. Walke I abroad to meete some companie, For to remoue these cursed eates away, Eche man I meet, a mappe of miserie Presents, to worke my ruine and decay: His humor stor'd with pleasure and delight, Vnto my minde new cares effect inuite. And as in stormes copartners yeild content, And maketh lesse the burthen of the minde, Eu'n so a man in seas of sorowes spent, And knowes not where a mate therein to finde, Must needs endure the torment all alone, When to the winde he makes his ruthles moane.
PASSION. XL. REst I at home, remembrance rackes my minde, The obiect which doth feede my hungrie thought, For nothing there remaynes for me to finde, But euen the sound which I haue deerely bought, Repentance, purchas'd with hastie brayne, Which stores my mind with heapes of loath, d disdayne. For idle heads build castles in the ayre, And being alone am I there where I am? No sure I view full many a countrey fayre, And forren thoughts doe feede my fancies flame, Eu'n thus I weare and waste away the time, Declining when I haue most minde to clime. The day expir'd, the nights approach supplies, Where dreames with feare preuert my quiet rest, And MORPHEVS a sopor sweete demes, Which after toyle should be my mornings feast. Sometimes I bathe my carefull couch with teares, From soundest sleepe, a wak'd with starting feares. Iturne and tosse: for Bodies ease is scant When minde is fraught with burthens of annoy, And cares my ioyes with spreding bows supplant, Dispayre doth hope with vglie face destroy. Thus discontents plant accentes of my griefe, Which do suppresse the agents of reliefe.
PASSION. XLI. TIme draweth on to frustrate my desires, Which vent will giue to my abortiue cares, For to burst foorth to cruell flaming fiers, Which wastes my life, fast fettred in the snares: Of discontents, and then shall cease to moane, When matter wantes for griefe to feede vpon. Yeilde then content till sorrowes wearied be, Let them complaine what toyle they doe endure, Both day and night in persecuting thee, Then they will cease thy torments to procure▪ And for to reape vnto themselues some ease, Thy will consent thy bondage to release. Then shall the beau'ns confesse they did thee wrong, And earth possest with such a tyrannie, Shall curse the seedes, whereof thy woes are sprong, All moaning thus thy woefull miserie: O man thus borne in spite of angrie starrs, Whose selfe-conceyte worke to him deadly warrs. Could all the Gods being ioin'd in one consent, Frame such a one which art no time could cure, Though SATVRNE had some crooked nature lent, Thinges of such force but fieldome are in vre: And though they be yet cannot much preuaile, Yf fate giue place vnto our swelling sayle.
PASSION. XLII. PLant seated in a loose vnstable soyle, Know'st not the state of this deceiuing time, Howe cruell FATE returne with world of spoyle, After the sacke of a most fertile clime: What doth earth hould? or sea or ayre contayne, But a congealed heape or errors vaine. Our dayes doe moue like shadowes on the wall, What doth not moue like shadowes light effect? Howers flie full fast to bring vs vnto thrall, What doth not flie like shortest howers aspect: Waues dos ou'r-flowe the sandes that be so wide, What doth not swell as doth the flowing tyde. The fruites made ripe by force of hastie time, Doe soonest fade the blossome being decayed, And as the flowing waues swell in their prime, So flies it fast like shadowes forme display'd, The day is full of labore paynefull toyle, The day is full of dolors deadly spoyle. Pale death doth knocke eu'n at thy princely gate: With like demaunde, as at the cottage poore, Doth pale death knocke with iust demaund; no hate, Ingraf'd with wrong, to these extreames do sture: For he destroyes as well Captayne boulde, As poorest wretch fram'd of this earthly moulde.
PASSION. XLIII. ARm'd to offend death maketh choyse of none, Nor difference to worke his sauage will, But all alike none by  is gone, Vnto the pot, his hūngrie mawe : One house of death is common vnto all, One lawe of death doeth gouerne great and small. Flowers, grasse, mist▪ doth fall, doth wither, doth fade, With winde in time, to th'aire, flowers, grasse, & mist we be, For here being sent to dig, and delue with spade; Our workes bring foorth the fruite of misene: As flowers fall, grasse wither, mist fades away, So doth our daies, fall, wither and decay. What thinge so sure but falleth at the last, Or what so firme but minates in time, Who is so wise that can endure the blast? Which doth forbid the hastie for to clime: Of thinges that shalbe dust let no man store, Dust we shalbe, and dust we weare before. Yf choyse be made, or difference take place, Eu'n with that choyce death waxeth more vnmil'd, The fairest flowers fall soonest to disgrace▪ And worser thinges scape often vndefil'd. So many bad doe daies enioye, When din of death doe better sort destroye,
PASSION. XLIIII. REsted by choyse our dayes we finish here, And IOVE himselfe the choyse thereof hath made, Being lou'd we die, IOVE lou's as doth appeere: By motions which errors doe inuade, So those whom IOVE with princely care doth loue, Them he doth chase his Godhead to approue. O happie man of whom IOVE made a choyse, O happie man whom IVPITER doth loue, Whom IOVE accepts he onely may reioyce, Whom IOVE takes to himselfe he doth reproue: Yf chosen thus, and loued so by IOVE, Or though reprou'd, why should we fat in loue. He onely shall the flaming wals enioy, That gardes the thorne of IOVES imperiall eate, And shall behould that prince which may destroy, PHEBVS brigt beams which feedeth vs with heate▪ No sorrowes then, nor griefe shall him molest, Being lath'd by IOVE vnto his heau'nly feast, So shall he est amongst the chiefest starrs, There a new star plac'd for to yeilde vs light, And by his death shall end these terren warrs, And life a newe begyn to leade vpright; And shall no more behould the theater, Where tragick eu'll leade mortall men to erre.
PASSION. XLV. REstes any thing more lighter then a haire, No haire but doth IOVES godhead high reproue, What is more light then birds which sparrowes rere, Yet sparrowes witnes that there is a IOVE: Is any thing of greater weight then life, And shall life passe in mistie cloudes of strife? Yt may not be that I should so beleeue, Life comes to vs eu'n by the heu'ns decree, To such conceyt I may o credit giue, Life flies away by dynt of destinye, Life we possesse by force of IOVES commaund, Life we must yeild, if IVPITER demaund. For borne we are, and die we stalbe sure, Because we are of purpose borne to die, But not content with our estates vnsure, Nor pleased yet death should our patience trie: IOVE did commaund, and death obaves his will, So let it rest IOVES doome for to fulfill. IOVE did commaund, which must not be gain-said, He spake the word, and all did yeild consent, He made a beck, and roaring seas obayed, Then with our states why are we not content? He wills vs from these worldly cares refrayne, And his edict must eu'r and eu'r remayne.
PASSION. XLVI. YF this be thus? then farewell all my ioy, Which I possest before these cares encroc'hd, IOVE made a choyse, death did his choise destroy, O would that death had vnto me approch'd: More welcome sure had been his deadly dart, Then these annoyes which breede encreasing smart. Farewell my ioy, I doe renounce thy smile, I hate the thing which cause of ioy may yeild, Least fayned hope should certaine FATE beguyle, Despaire hath wonne the honor of the field, My loue, my life, my ioy is gone before, Death may alone my hope of ease restore. Then as the faithfull which embrace the toole, And kisse the same, which life doth take away, Who well were taught in high IEHOVAS schoole, That beares the bag of simple truth alway: So will I clippe and kisse this world of paine, Which Ioue hath sent to coole my wandring braine. Embracing death and loathing lifes repose, I rest content and watch the happie time, I seeke not now to triumphe ou'r my foes, Yet heere would faine end both my life and rime: But that I vowed ou'r as your sheapheard true, With hand and hart to serue and honour you. FINIS.
THE Patrone his pa∣thetical Posies, Sonets, Maddri∣galls, & Rown∣delayes. Together With SINETIS Dompe. Plena vercū∣di culpa pu∣doris erat.
POSIE. I The patrones conceyte: DOmesticke Goddes of the Sea-whal'd Isle, Heau' erected trophies of thy prayes, AVORAS blush, that beautifies thy smile, Sh'nes far more bright then Phoebus goulden rayes, Natures chiefe pride, the map of beauties grace, Loues louely swee, which vertue doth embrace. Of-spring of dds, borne of the salt-sea foame, Thoughts,  that doth to Pallas bower inclines A Commet, that in starrie night doth gloame. And doth presage of misteries diuine? An ornament, bedeck'd with goulden tyres, A pearle in camp'd in strength of chaste desires. Reposed rest of ADON'S ardent looke. Thy Christall-pointed eies (like Saphyres blue, Set in the snowe) doe hide a bayted hooke: Which doth intrap by force of Goulden hue: Were ADON here to viewe thy VENVS eye, Could ADON such a VENVS suite denye. Olympus Queene, that doth commaunde the skyes, Whose shining beam's doe light the westerne Isle, No base aspect in thy sweee bodie lies, Thy fauou doe the stealing time beguile: For precious breath so doth perfume the ayre, That all applaude thou on art sweete and faire.
POSIE. I The Patrones Conceyte. THe Radian beam's of natur's purest die, With honours Equipage long liue thy fame, Whose siluer arkes, surpasing Christall skie, Doth force loue Queene to reuerence thy name: Starrs doe inuay, that earth retaineth thee, From making Fourth amongst the graces Three. Heau'ns newe ioy, earth's possessed wonder, The welkins ptide, if they might thee embraece, As they did IOVES loue that kills with thunder, Thy memorie her beautie doth deface. Liue long thou star, which in the North doth shine, That noble worth's may fill thy sacred shrine. Ype graft with vertue in her tender yeeres, Deriuing honour from her noble stocke, Which Needles weare? for honour still appeer's, Within her browe, which doth fames cradle rocke: Whose searching wit, dipt in MINERVAS vaine, Fraught with content, doth Pallas prayses staine, HIBBLA hath Bees, stor'd with a sweete encrease, And shee hath beautie, furnished with grace, Liue stinges doe pricke, though hony's taste to please, So woundes her beautie those which it embrace: A Lampe of glorie shines in the alone, Liue long in earth thou match-lesse Paragone.
POSIE. II The Patrone's affection. LAunterne of loue the patrone due of lore, Light some beame my affection to guide, Amongst the drerie throbbes encreasing sore, Sore in the vaile of heart where I them hide: Languishing in delight I doe delight to pine, And can I pine a more contented paine, Hart once mine-owne, is nowe possesion thine, Yeilde then to yeilde this hearts due entertaine. Honour is the guest, let bounty be my prize, Truth be the page of my admired light, Occasion be thou prest at my aduize, Regarding hand, and hart, t'attend her ight. Or else my heart and minde I hould in hand: Doe then my hope confirme that hope may stand. POSIE. III. The patrones phantasie. TOrmented heart in thrall, Yea thrall to loue, Respecting will, Heart-breaking gaine doth grow, Euer DOLOBELLA, Time so will proue, Binding distresse. O gem wilt thou allowe, This fortune my will Repose-lesse of ease, Vnlesse thou LDA, Ouer-spread my heart, Cutting all my ruth, dayne, Disdaine to cease, I yeilde to fate, and welcome endles Smart.
POSIE. IIII. The Patrons pauze in ode. DImpl's florish, beauties grace, Fortune smileth in thy face, Eye bewrayeth honours flower. Loue is norish'd in thy bower, In thy bended brow doth lye, Zeale imprest with chastitie. IOVE's darling deere, Opale lippes of corall hue, Rarer die then cheries newe, Arkes where reason cannot trie, Beauties riches which doth lye, Entomb'd in that fayrest frame, Touch of breath perfumes the same. Orubie cleere: Ripe ADOn fled VENVS bower, Aming at thy sweetest flower, His ardent loue forst the same, Wonted agents of his flame: Or be to whose enstamed fier, Loue inl'd him to aspire. Hope of our time, Oriad's of the hills drawe neere, Nayad's come before your peere: Flower of nature shining shoes,
Riper then the falling rose, Entermingled with white flower, Stayn'd with vermilion's power. Nest'ld in our clime. The siluer swans sing in poe, Silent notes of newe-spronge woe, Tuned notes of cares I fing, Organ of the muses springe, Natures pride inforceth me, Eu'n to rue my destinie. Starre shew thy might, 'Helens beautie is defac'd, Io's graces are disgrac'd, Reaching not the twentith part, Of thy gloases true desart, But no maruaile thou alone, Eu'n art VENYS paragone. Arm'd with delight. Iris coulors are to base, She would make APELLES gaze, Resting by the siluer streame, Tossing nature seame by seame, Pointing at the Christall skie, Arguing her maiestie,
Loues rampire stronge. Hayre of Amber, fresh of hue, Wau'd with goulden wyers newe, Riches of the finest mould, Rarest glorie to behould, Ympe with natures vertue graft, Engines newe for dolors fraught, Eu'n there are spronge, A Iem fram'd with Diamounds, In whose voice true concord sounds, Ioy to all that ken thy smile, In thee doth vertue fame beguile, In whose beautie burneth fier, Which disgraceth Queene desier: Saunce all compare, Loue it selfe being brought to gaze, Learnes to treade the louers maze: Lying vncou'red in thy looke. Left for to nclaspe the Booke: Where enroul'd thy fame remaines, That IVNOS blush of glory staines: Blot out my care. Spheare containing all in all, Onely fram'd to make men thrall: Onix deck, d with honours worth,
On whose beautie bringeth foorth: Smiles ou'r-clouded with disdaine, Which loyall heart doth paine: Voyde of disgrace, AVRORA'S blush that decks thy smile, Wayting louers to begnile: Where curious thoughts built the nest, Which neu'r yeildes to louers rest: Wasting still the yeilding eye, Whilst he doth the beautie spie. Rea'd in her face. Lampe enric'hd with honours flower, Blossome gracing VENVS bower: Bearing plumes of feathers white. Wherein Turtles doe delighte, Sense would seeme to weake to finde, Reason's depth in modest minde: Yeilding desire. Lode-starre of my happie choyse, In thee alone I doe reioyce: O happie man whose hap is such, To be made happie by thy tutch: Thy worth and worthynes could mou, The stoutest to incline to loue, Enflam'd with fier.
POSIE. V. The dittie to Sospiros. THe wound of hart doth cause my fighes to spring And sighes doe oft report my hartie sore, This sore of heatt doth woefull tidings bring, That loue is lacke and I doe grieue therefore: O fighes why doe you rise and take no rest, O heart why art thou thus with them possest. My heart in selfe it selfe would pine away, if that sometimes sighes musicke I shoulde misse, This bitter ioy and pleasant paine must staie, The greatest griefe in now my greatest blisse: The night I grone the day I teare my heart, I loue these sighes I triumph in their smart When minde and thought are clogged with their car, And that my heart is readie for to breake, Then eu'rie sigh doth question how it fares, nd heart to them replies that it is weake. et afr sighes the heart is some-what glad, s without sower the sweete is neuer had.
My wish and will for succour doe aspire, Vnto the seate of my endeered trust, But want and woe ensuing my desire, My heart doth quaile and after sigh it must: Yet wish I must and well I may delight, Though sighes for wants and woes doe me affright. These sighes Ile entertertaine though they me noy, For they doe like the cause from where they rise, They bring in post newes of my mynded ioy, And as they passe they message me no lies: And yet they leaue behinde them such a want, That minde and ioy I finde to be but scant, O will you neuer cease me sighes to grieue, And maye not hope keepe you in calme repose, Let me some respite haue, hart to relieue, Lest that your selues and you fullie lose: Sighes doe aspire till they obtaine their will, Sighes will not cease they seeke my heart to kill.
POSIE. 6 The patrones Dilemma. OF stately stones the Diamound is kinge, Whose splendor doth dazell the gazing eye, The Onix gloze, is yed to honors winge. Whose vertu's gouern'd by th'mperiall skie: These graces all in thee combin'd remaine, For glorie thine their glories still doth staine. Shall I not speake of Rubies glorious blaze, That blazeth still, like blazing star that shoes. Or cease to write how men at th, Opale gaze. Whose beautie shines like perles of dewe on rose: These vertues all (compar'd with thine) are base, For nature gaue thee excellent of grace. The Topas chast thou doest in kind excell, The Hyacinth that strangers loue procures, Hath not such force, nor can not worke so well, As honors beautie still in thee alures; Yris sheews not more coulors in her kind, Then vertues be with in thy noble mind.
The windie Histmos shews, and bright aspects, Comes far behind this faire Angragos worth, The Lupinar hath not more chast affects. Then glorie of th'vnspotted minde brings foorth. My paines encrease thy graces to repeate, For cold despaire driues out of hope the heate. Yf Saunus fort which doth expell deceate, Or Agathes which happie bouldnes yeild's, And eke Luperius whose vertues greate, Doth glad the minde; all which are found in fields: Yf these I had to comfort my despaire, Hope yet might hope to win & weare thy faire.
POSIE. VII. The Palmers Dittie vppon his Almes. FAvre Dole the flower of beawties glorious shine, Whose sweete sweet grace true guerdon doth deserue. My Orisons I offer to thy shrine, That beauties name in glories state preserue: My hap (ô haplesse ha) that gaue th'applause, Thy beautie view'd when trembling hart did pause. Were I a King, I would resigne my Crowne, To gaine the name of Palmers happie kinde, I would not craue to liue in high renowne, If Dole I had to satisfie my minde: Then I for Dole a Palmers name would craue, If Palmer might be sure his dole to haue. POSIE. VIII. The Patrones Adiew. YF loue deserues the fruit of loues desire, Hope loathes my loue to liue in hope of right: Time after triall once may quench my fire, Oh salue the sore and cherish my delight: Rue lawles force, which feruent zeale procures, Obtaine a hart like to the Emerauld pure: Dayne hope to graunt where feare dispaire allures, In deepe distresse naught but true faith is sure.
POSIE. IX. Fides in Fortunam. MOst sacred is the sweete where fortune swayes, Deuine the sound of her enchaunting voice, Noe hope of rest, wher hope, true hope delayes, Thongh I dispaire I may not change me choise: For hue I well, though fortune me dispise, To honour her, that scornes my enterprise. To bandie lookes will ease my thrauled heart, With lookes, my life shalbe at her commanode, Yf so much grace to faith she will impart: With lookes againe, to answere my demaunde; And that I may still loue her to my graue, With purest faith, is all that I doe craue. Let Phoebus drawe his shining beam's away, Let heauns forsake to graunt me any light, Let foode me faile; let hope, my hope delay; Let eares not heare; let watch-full eies want sight: Let sense, my sense, with furie fell confound, Before that faith, to fortune false be found. Thy eu'r sworne friende, and seruant to thy end. Hath made a vowe and promise with his soule, His fortun's ight wi couage to defend, Again proudest  his offer dare controle: My ch is sure if Fore grace her swayne, And cllors giue her quarrell to maintaine.
Colours they are of purest Indian die, For none but such doth Fortune vse to lend. Whose sight may moue the coward neu'r to flie, And all his force against his foe to bend. Then let sweet soule thy colours be my guide, And hap what maye, thy doome I will abide. Then write thy Censure with thy prettie hand, I will obay the sentence of thy minde, And graue the same in table faire to stand: So that, ensuing age the same may finde: For monument in goulden letters wrought, To whet with sight the accents of my thought.
POSIE. X. My sorrow is ioy. SOwre is the sweet that sorrow doth mainetaine, Yet sorrow's good, that yeildeth mickle ioy, True ioy he hath, that can from ioy refrayne. Which haruest's still the fruites of deepe annoy: Yet I enthraulde in blind CVPIDOS sare, With fond conceyte in sorrows ioy I fare. Fortun's my ioy, which sorrow still doth yeild, Her frowne I count a fauour to my soule; Sorrow doth away, and ioy hath lost the field, Yet fame in minde doth often ioy enrole: But when I thinke for whome I beare this smart, It yeilds new ioy vnto my carefull hart.
POSIE. XI. An almon for a Parrat. DIsdainfull dames that mountaines moue in thought, And thinke they may Ioues thunder-bolt controule, Who past compare ech oue doe set at naught, With spuemish scorn's that nowe in rethorick roule: Yet scorne that will be scorn'd of proude disdaine, I scorne to beire the scornes of finest braine. Gestures, nor lookes of simpring coy conceyts, Shall make me moue for stately ladies mocks: Then SIRENS cease to trap with your deceyts, Least that your barkes meete vnexpected rocks: For calmest ebbe may yeild the roughest tide, And change of time, may change in time your pride. Leaue to conuerse if needes you must inuay. Let meaner sort feede on their meane entent, And soare on still, the larke is fled awaye, Some one in time will pay what you haue lent, Poore hungrie gnatts faile not on wormes to feede, When go shaukes misse on hoped pray to speede.
POSIE. XII. The authors muse vpon his Conceyte. FAire, fairest, faire; if passing faire, be faire, Let not your deed's obscure your beauties faire, The Queene so faire of Fearies not more fayer, Which doth excell with fancies chiefest fayer, Fayre to the worldes faire admiring wonder, Fayrer then IOVES loue that kill's with thunder. Eu'n to your swayne you seeme prides passing faire, That naught desires but fortun's faire to reape, Yf fortune then will driue me to dispaire, No change can make your sweetest faire so cheape, But that I must, and will liue in exile, Before your thoughtes with thought I will defile. Fayre fierce to faith, when fortune bend her browes. Yet fortune sweete be thou reclaym'd againe: For vnto rhee I offer all my vowes, That may appease the rigor of my paine: Yeilde wished hope after this stormie blast, That clm's repose may worke content at last,
POSIE. 13 Fides ad fortunam. THe goulden Phebus (longing ost) is seene, To pricke his furious stedes to run in haste, To clip and coll faire Thetis louely Queene, In pensiue thoughts lest he the time should waste, So I make speede thy selfe for to embrace, Beinge almost tyr'd in pursuite of the chase. For houndes vncoupled, range the forrest wide, The stance being prun'd, I watch the rowsed game, And to the marke my shaftes full well I guide: The craftie Doo takes on then to be lame: But hauing past the daunger of my bowe, She, limping leaues, and hastes away to goe. Thus I being surest of my hoped sport, Still misse the fairest marke that eu'r was kend, Words doe abound of comfort to exhorte, But deedes are slowe sure promises to end; The hope then left is game to rowse a newe, (Till deedes supplie) and feede my selfe with view. Fortune hath sayde, and I beleeued that, Renewed hope might ease my heart neere spent: Despaire in sequell oft my hope doth squat; That doubtfull I remaine still discontent, Wherefore to faith if faith remaine in thee, With faithfull wordes let deedes in one agree. FINIS.
Sonetto. 1 REade these my lines the the carrecters of care, Sweete Nymph these lynes reade ou'r & ou'r againe, View in this glasse (that glorie doth prepare,) The depth of worthes which in thee doth remaine, Heare I set foorth the garden of thy grace, With plentie stor'd of choyse and sweetest flowers, Where I for thee abortiue thoughtes embrace; When in conceyte hope lodgeth in thy bowers. Heare shalt thou finde the Orphans of my hope, Shad'wed with vaile eu'n of thy rare defeart, Of all my thoughtes here shalt thou finde the scope, Which to the worlde thy honour shalt ympart. Thus will I say when skies aduaunce thy name, Liue HELENS peere eternized thy fame.
Sonetto. 2 FArewell my hope thy hap did thee not steede, And thou my hap vnhappie come to mee, Farewell my trust which voide wast of all meede, And thou heart-sore attend my miserie, Farewell my hold which wast to stronge to hold, And thou my ruine welcome to my gaine, Farewell my life which dead are in my monld, And life no life torment my hart with paine Farewell my chiefe that conquerst with thy looke, And thraldome I appeale to riûe my heart, Farewell my thought, thy thougt she wll not brooke, Yet thinke I will for that I feele the smart. Farewell my choise I lastly doe thee chuse, I cannot chuse another to my will: Farewell my comfort comfortles o muse, And sorrowe weake thy wrath my ioy to spill. Farewell long stay for winde to fill thy sayle, Come banishment. Adieû, loue must preuayle.
Sonetto. 3 EMerald of treasure eternall spring, Nurst by the graces day-starre shine on hie, Ingendring perfect blisse with valens ring: Twisting loûe and liking with constancie. Now stanchlesse hart redres & soule-sick wound, Enwrap the same in foldes of fresh desire, Let loûe be waking haruest hope be found, And liuing spring to quench this flame of er. Vnto your excellent loûe sole commaund, Seing ês you may prooure I me commend, Into your counsels grace voutch my demaund, Heate burning ioy sustaine in ioyfull end. So shall my muse your name ay coronize, I will it blaze to all posterities.
Sonetto. 4 RElieûe my minde being oûerprest with care, O heare my sorowes for I doe complaine, Non may thē help saue you the cure being rare, Ah put me not to death with lingring paine. Lest that my death to you shall nothing gaine, Enforced loûe dislikes which is not meete, Equalitie of loûe doth neuer paine. You paragon most pretious pure and sweete. Reioyce your louers hart with loûe for loûe, Vnlace dislike and let be far disdaine, Both one in one and let affection mooûe: Since that in hart affection doth remaine. Vntie distresse to finde my blisfull sport, Let not your hart be cruell to the meeke, Attend my harts desire in humble sort: Soone grant my humble hart what it doth seeke.
Sonetto. 5 REtire you thoughts vnto your wonted place, Or let your place be where your thought are prent; Newe ioyes approching with a kindely grace: And hope that blossoms on affections dent. Excelling worth lyeth buried in my brest, Loue eke concealing paine in tombe of heart, Each ioy is griefe wherewith thou art opprest; Yound is thy griefe but sudden old thy smart. Rich is thy choyce desire hath twise a neede, Eu'n so my hope would reape hope to sustaine, Bearing in my heart the wish of heartie deede, Sealing selfe and lore high concealed vaine. Vnspotted trust and truth ty'd to the same, Loue keeping awe as awefull trust shall prooue, Amongst the stings where heart doth feele the flame, Such is the meaning of my fixed loue, Such be her hart my dolors to remooue.
Sonetto. 6 UPpon the sandes where raging sea doth roare, With fearefull found, I standing with desire, The element his billowes sendes to shoare, And takes away my ioy to my great ire. So water tho did seeke to quench my fire, Whose surie (I beheld) with rash rebound, That would furflow my life, ô rage to dire, My hearts high rocke was ret which stood on ground: But high commaund retreait she made him sound, Who once immite his furie did surcease, And way-white waûes to vieû her did redoünd, Breaking at her sight her empire to complease. And blustring windes their forces did release, Least that their tûmult might her eares offend, And with a calmie fawne breath'd to her ease, Thus was my wish to port they should her send. So waûie seas and windes once made me sad, So wâuie seas and windes haûe made me glad. Amore é mare.
Sonetto. 7 MArching in the plaine field of my conceyte, I might behold a tent which was at rest, My forces I did bend but ah deceite: There left I freedome last which is now least. For when I thought to fight with Mars for best, There Cupid was which brought me to distresse, Of foe when I thought to make a conquest. Loûe and desire in tent did me oppresse. These captaines twaine from tormēt may surcease, If they did know the lore I beare in minde, They may as Turtles one procure thy ease, O that to me of twaine one would be kinde. Thou tēt that holdst in night such turtle doûes, Reioice, embrace the twayne of world the loûes.
Sonetto. 8 OF all the bûddes that yeild to men delight, Sweete eglantine that sentest in the aire, Art worthie pen of gold thy praise to dight: Thy flowers of bloome make world both green & faire, To wearied sence thou comfort dost repaire, Thy pleasure from the eye doth neuer stray, To fancies hest thou art a stately chaire: And wounded hartes desire thou canst allay. More bright then sun thou stand'st in window bay, And to thy light the sûnne may not come neere, Thou lasting flower dost euerlasting stay: O that within thy flowers I might appeere. As I did passe sweete sent to hart did clime, O thou sweete branch the sweetnes of my time.
Sonetto. 9 AS eye bewrayeth the secretes of my minde, I did regard an Eglantine most faire, That sprong in sight of sun that brightly shind, And yet no sunne her springing could empayre. I did reioyce to come within her aire, Her sweetenes to receiue within my brest: O that her set in hart ay might I weare, With griping griefe heart should not be opprest, Heart panting sore would cease or take some rest, And feare disloyall vanish would away, Then ouer griefe in triumph were I blest, To be reuiued when life went to decay, With shadow hide me from these hart-breake showers, And with thy sent refresh me in thy bowers.
Sonetto. 10 THe onely helpe that some distressed haûe, To keepe the life though lingring in the paine, Is that a time some place will find to saue, The losse of heart procured by disdaine. Nowe place is faire yet hope I doe retaine, That distance neuer altereth the minde, The height of hills doth make the lowly plaine, The rising sunne in skie feares not the winde: And yet I see place is somewhat vnkinde, To offer me the lack of her sweete face, Which cannot solac'd be till I it find: To free my heart and loûe of loûes disgrace, O place if thou didst take her from my eye, Bring her in place where place may remedie:
Sonetto. 11 VVHen chirping byrds did chaunt their musickeslayes, For to salute Dame Flora with her traine, And vesta cloth'd with chaung of fresh arayes, For to adorne Hopes happie entertayne: Then sweetest Brire that shylded our repose, Sent odours sweete, from her fresh hanging bowes, And Philomel' oft-changed notes did close, Which did accorde eu'n with our hallow'd vowes. But then; ah then, our discontent began, A barking Dog step'd foorth with scolding rage, And Musick chang'd to notes of singing Swanne, That March wee must with swiftest Equipage. Loose not sweete bird thy voice, nor briet thy set: Wee'le meete againe when fortunes frownes be spent.
Sonetto. 12 LIue long sweet bde, that to encrease our ioy, Made soleme pause, betweene thy chirping layes; When stately brier shilded our anoye, And sheltred vs from peeping Phebus raves: Sweet Philomel' recorde not our delightes, In Musicks sounde, but to the subtill ayre; Least any should participate our spites, Wrought by a sudden Cerberus repayre. The pleasing sound our spirites did reuiue, The sweet, sweet sent, refresh'd our yeilding sence, The happy toutch, most to delight did striue, But caytiffe dog did hynder our pretence. Then happie Byrd farewell, that eas'd my paine, Farewell sweet brier, till fortune smile againe.
Sonetto. 13 UUHen Lordlin Tytan lodged in the west, And EBON darknes ou'r-swayde the light, LATONAS beams decreasing were supprest, When silent streames did murmur  ere delight. Then I entrench'd neere to a noble marke, With courage bould a speare I tooke in hand, To wyn my will fired with honours sparke, Or loose my life in my commaunders band. My speare I brake vpon my gentle foe, Which being perform'd the second I did charge, But honours force would not be quailed so: The third I tooke my thoughts for to enlarge; Then call'd I was for treason armes to take, And wisedome would my former charge forsake.
Sonetto. 14 SHould feare pale feare make me forgoe my minde, Or legions of monsters make me quaile, No no, I was not borne of so base kinde, As dreadfull sighes would make my heart to faile. Yet care commaund that honors my conceyte, Made me forsake what my desire embrac'd, And loth I was that riualls should repeate: My armes should be by humane force vnlac'd, Which made me yeilde vnto the tyms restraynt, And leaue the charge of that most noble fight, Where kindnes more then force could make me faint, To shild my fame from fortunes cancred spite. Thus I did charge, thus I discharg'd my launce, And so I rest contented with my chaunce.
Sonetto. 15 AS fond conceyt doth moue the wauering minde, Of artlesse sottes that knowe not wisedoms lore, Inconstant still to chang with eu'rie winde, Whose base desires wants fruites of vertues store. So doth the arte and knowledge of the wise, Stirre vp his minde in honors foorde to wade, With feruent zeale base changlinges to dispise, And their weake strength, with courage to muade. Whose mind being arm'd with true loues strong defence, He gyrdes his loynes with bondes of constancie, And scornes that ought should alter his pretence, Or stayne his name, with blot of infamie. Thus wisedome is not giuen to manye, And but to such for to be constant anye.
Sonetto. 16 NEu'r-resting chariot of the firie god Emboss'd with beames of his eternall light, Waytes at her beck when she but shakes her rod Of her commaund; who is the heau'ns delight: AVRORAs shine doth blush to see her grace, Nymphes gather flowers to make her chaplets fine, Engendered griefe my hoped fauour deface, Loue hates to liue when longing makes it pine: Euen so her faire makes longing deere to me, HELEN the faire was not so faire as she.
Sonetto. 17 NO care so great nor thoughts so pining seeme, Enioving hope to reape the hearts desire; Which makes me more your beauties grace esteeme, Opprest with heate of PAPHOS holy fier. Appoint some place to ease my thrauled minde, Not freed yet from thy late luring looke; Emove thy time and solace shalt thou finde, Let VVLCAN toyle to forge his bayted hooke: Eyes glorious glaunce will trayne him to the lure, Heau'ns do repine thou shouldst his frownes endure
Sonetto. 18 NAmelesse the flower that workes my discontent, Endlesse the cares for her I doe sustaine, Waste is the soyle which shadowes my content Once lende a salue to cure my curelesse paine. Ah deere, how deere I purchase my delight? Not longe when first I view'd thy sweetest fayre. Except thy beauty lend my darknes light, Long shall that looke my heauie lookes ympayre; Esteeme of him that liues to honour thee, Hopes true repose shall then be lodg'd in mee.
Sonetto. 19. NO sooner I had thy beautie espied, Cl washed from the dreggs of vices stayne, But heart to thee with constant loue was tyed; And thou perhapps wilt yeilde me but disdayne: Yf thou  not my loue with loue require, I shall weare out in paine my dismall dayes, But if thy heart once harbour my delight; Then shall I liue thy heart to loue and praise. Yeilde thy consent to cure my fatall wounde, And let desert preuaile to gayne thy grace, So secret truth shall eu'r in me abounde; Yf we may meete in some conuenient place: And then be sure his name I will deface, That should be seene to speake in thy disgrace.
Sonetto. 20 CAmpaspe's fayre fresh-paynted forme embrac'd, By the rare Father of the paynters art, Could yeilde small ioy except that she had grac'd, His liuely cuning by her good desart, Yet he reioyc'd her counterfeyte to kisse, Which she neu'r sawe though he the same profan'd, How infinite is then my ioyfull blisse, That still enioy the Id'ea of thy hande; Thy gloue it is mine onlye comfort left, Which thy sweete hande made happie with her touch, This is the Idole that my heart infeoft, With loues sweete hope; which I adore to much. That I retayne a monument for thee, Though without life; life it affordes to me.
Sonetto. 21 SWeete ladie I loue, by stelth my loue doth creepe, Vnto the depth of my profounde conceytes, Not daring when I wake I dreame a sleepe, Thus stealing loue by inward signes entreate: Though merrie gale bydes anchor vp to waye, And canuas store swells with a puffing blaste, Yet feare of storme doth make vs keepe the baye, For he is safe that fitts on shoare at laste: So loue embrac'd when others presence fear'd, Makes sweete proue sower whē shadowes substance seem And Mars himselfe when Vulcans net he tear'd: Doth witnes feare doth stolen loue redeeme. When sweete repose doth calme the troubled minde, Feare of suspect doth leaue his sting behinde.
Sonetto. 22 MY heart enthraul'd eu'n with mine owne desire, Makes me to be, more then I dare to seeme, For ielosie may kindle enuies fire, To hazard that which strength cannot redeeme: The fayrest rose, on statelyest stalke that growes, Drawes a delight his odours sweee to smell, Whose pricke sometime doth sting at later close, Which makes suspect the wished sent t' expell. Loue pries my minde to gather fayrest flowers, And feare forbids lest garden keeper spie, Whose ielosie raes downe vntimely showers, And Argos-like doth loues repose discrie: Thus doth thy fayre my secret glaunce detect, For ielosie doth dayly breede suspect.
Sonetto. 23 UUHen sweete repose in loues fayre bower doth rest Enchamp'd with vaile of an vnfain'd desire, Then carefull thoughtes the fearefull mindes in∣uest, Lest ARGVS should espie the kindled fire: For where the dicte of such as may commaunde, Forbidds the same, which louers must embrace, There feare, and care, together doe demaund; Account of thinges which honour may deface: So is their ioyes with fearefull passions mixt, Which doth encrease the ardencie of loue, On the forbidden thinges our eyes are fixt; Whose accents still doth loues affections moue: Thus stolen loue is eu'r with feare possest, shadowes glymse oft feares the friendly guest.
Sonetto. 24 THimpatient rage of fretting Ielosie, Suspectes the winde that comes from Cupids winges, Whose watch preuents the oportunitie, Whose louers seeke to cure his noysome stinges: Eche looke, a feare, infuseth to the minde, That gauled is with such a base conceyte, Which makes them proue to their hearts ioyes vnkinde? When louesweete-ones, of sorrowe, sucke the teate: Yf one but speake to doe another right, Suspect sayth then, of smoke there commeth fier His good deserts are houlden in despite? And rancor doth his cruell fate conspire. So Ielosie still breedeth base suspect, Whose fruitelesse feare there owne good name detet.
Sonetto. 25 IF Argus, with his hundred eyes, did watch In vaine, when oft loue did his cunning blynde▪ Who doubtes but shee that meanes to make a match? For to performe, both time, and place can finde. And to abridge a woman of her will, Is to powre oyle in fie, to quench the flame: For then far more she is inclined still, (Though once despisd) againe to seeke the same. Loue doth commaund, and it must be obayde; The sacred deitie of the god is much, Whose maiestie makes louers oft afrayde, That to his shrine with bended knee they crutch. This is the cause, let women beare no blame, Who would not play if they did like the game.
Sonetto. 26 VVHeare true desire, (in simpathie of minde) Hath ioin'd the heartes, with APHRODITES de∣light; There louing zeale, (to swete aspect inclin'd) Will finde a time in spite of fortunes might. ARGVS forefight, whose wake-full heedie eyes Seeke to preuent the wynged Gods commaunde) Is all to weake his charmes for to surprise; Gainst whose resolue his cuning could not stande: Yet if in Delphos sleepie laye the God, Authoritie gainst Hundreth eies had fayld, But MERCVRIE, with his enchaunting rod; Brought all a sleepe; when Argus Ioue assayld: Then since such happ to watching is assign'd, Nothinge is harde where willing is the minde.
Sonetto. 27 Daungers altered delayes in loue. THe heart inthraul'd with loues ttractiue force, (Whose hope doth martch with honours equipage, When reason doth his true desertes remorse) Must take his time his sorrowes to assuage: For cheeries ripe will not so long endure, But will in time, fade, wither, and decay, That which this day, could finest witts allure; To morrowe, CORIDON doth cast away, The Iron being hot who list not for to strike, Shall sure, being colde, neu'r forge it to his minde, And all those partes, moueth loue to like; Doe oft (in time) make loue to proue vnkinde. Eu'n so in time daunger attends delaye, For time and tide for no mans pleasures staye.
Sonetto. 28 VVAs o watch'd by Argus in the downes? What did not then the winged god inchaunt, The heardmans yes, obaying Iunos forwnes: What needes loues crosse so much to make her vaunt▪ The brazen tower could not his valour quaile, Who scorn'd that Dana should liue a maide: Loues inward force gainst enuy will preuaile, And hap what may: his lawes must be obayd. What though fayre starre thy glorie is obscur'd: And cou'rd with a thicke and foggie cloude: Yet Titan when he hath the heau'ns invr'd, Will cleere the stormes which fatall frowues did shrowde▪ And though that fate abridgeth our delight, Yet time I hope will cleare this cloudie spight.
Sonetto. 29 THe fluent streame, whose stealing course being stayed, Breakes out vnto a geater deluge rage, The force of fier with violence delayed, Makes all thinges weake his furie to asswage: Desire contrould, will agrauate desire, And fancie crost will fancies force encrease, When louing thoughtes will motiue loue inspire, Enuies oppose can not their bondes release: Thus currents small doe proue the greatest streames, Small cinders doe encrease, to raging flame, The hardest hartes are pearc'd with beauties beames, I hide my griefe yet loue discou'rs the same: Sweete beautie is the sparke of my desire, And sparkes in time may breede a flaming fier.
Sonetto. 30 SWeete beautie in thy face doth still appeere, Myne onely ioye and best beloued deere: Myne onlye deere and best belou'd content, Reuiue my heart and lyinge spirrits spent: The onlye agent of my thoughtes delight, Embrace my loue and doe not me despight: Secure my feares and solace cares content, With hopes repast t auour mine entent; The sier will out if fuell doe but want, And loue in time will die if it be scant: Let then desire yeilde fuell to your minde, That loue be not blowen out with euerie winde. So shall my heart like Etnas lasting flame, Burne with your loue and ioye still in the same.
Sonetto. 31 I Lo, inforst by loues vnlouing charmes, My loue is pure, my loue is chast, and true, And that I loue, the greater is my harmes: Yf loue doth purchase hate, then loue adiew. Why should not loue be recompens'd with loue, And true desire, obtayne his due desert, Yf beautie stirre thee to disdayne to moue? When mighty stormes oppresse my troubled hart: Knowe then that truth, may beauties blaze dismay, And loyall hartes, scorne periur'd beauties pride, Yeilde then in time, prolonge not my delay? Lest others should your beauties grace deride: So shall your worthes eternished remaine, And gaine his loue which others pride disdaine.
To Paris darling. UUre I sheapheard as I am a woodman, Thy Paris would I be if not thy goodman▪ And yet might I performe to thee that dutie, Yf thou wilt add that fauour to thy beautie. Nowe that these feastes make other minions frolike, Why is my loue, my doue, so melancholike: O but I neere gesse, what the cause should be, Which to tell, tel-tale paper, were but follie; Ile therefore for this time conceale it wholye: For that must counsell betwixt thee and mee, Twivt thee and me where none may heere nor see. Buen matina. Sweete at this mourne I chaunced, To peepe into che chamber; loe I glaunced. And sawe white sheetes, thy whyter skinne disclosing; And soft-sweete cheeke on pyllowe soft reposing: Then sayde were I that pillowe, Dere for thy loue I would not weare the willowe.
Maddrigall. MAdame, that nowe I kisse your white handes la∣ter Then wild my louing dutie, Retayner to thy beautie: The water crost my wishe, to crosse the water. Yet thinke not (sweete) those gallants helde thee deerer, Who for thy beauties, then the sunnneshine cleerer: Eu'n seas vneu'n haue coasted, But thou art wise and know'st it. No; thy Leander, whose hartes firie matter, Cannot be quench'd, by the deuyding water, Will with his oare-like armes quite sheare a sunder The waues that floate him vnder: Yf when I shall so trie mee, In thy sweete circled armes I may respire mee.
Rounde-delay. Could-st they none other spite me, When but once fortune friendly did indite me: Thy selfe thou should'st absent mee? And all vnkinde, vnkinde, to more torment me. I haue not thus deserued, To be with tell-tale Tantalus hunger-starued: That hauing store of dishes, I could not feede according to my wishes? But this he for reuealinge, Gods counsell bide: and I for yours concealing: In this yet doe we varie, That desert to his, is quite contrary? Then ô most kinde and cruell, (Except thou minde to starue thy beauties fuell) For all my loue, fayth, dutye, Let me but pray, I pray thee on thy beautie? And thou my new-borne dittie, Desire her for my second dishe but pittie.
Maddrigall. I Loue, iust loue, not luste, thus constant liue I: My yfes deere loue mislikes me, Yet her sweete fayre doth like me: Yf loue dislikes; to like and loue why should I? Yf she be coy why should her loue be trustie? Yf she be slowe; why should I be so hastie? Yet loyall hart hath vow'd it, And constant truth performes it: Fayre; to thy beauties fayre, firme haue I vowed, Sound is the seede that my resolue hath sowed: But weede is the fruite that my fate hath mowed. Yet luste I banish, louing True zeale, I liue, yet still dying: Thus still to be constant eu're haue I plodded.
Rounde-delay. MVch griefe did still torment me, In this regard thou doest thy selfe absent me; Thy beautie (ah) delightes me? And this thou know'st to well and therefore spites me. So womens mindes doe varie, And change of ayre doth worke quite contrarie; Proofe tried my truth and trust too, Still to be thine, most constant, firme, and iust too: Therefore shouldest regard me, And loue for loue (fayre loue) thou should'st award me, For since I still attend thee, Howe canst thou choose vnkinde (vnkinde) but friend me, Fayne I alone would finde thee, That my hearts griefe (swete hart) might thē vnbinde thee: For were I with thee resident, I doubt not I, to be of thy heart president; Yeilde then to loue (loue kinde is) Else would I had byn blinde, eu'n as loue blinde is.
Sinetes Dumpe. YE angrie starrs, doe you enuie my estate, Because content is lodged in my minde; And therefore will you needes reproue my fate? That discontent in glorie lookes to finde: My thoughtes were far aboue my fortunes bent, Which was your fault to frame vnequall partes, Except it were of purpose to torment. Gloring in cloudes to smother my desertes: When I did yeilde vnto the times despite, And stroke downe sayle lest shypracke would ensue, Inforcing nature to subdue delight? A cuning bayte within my way you threwe. Ys't then my fault if feathered thoughtes aspire, Clippe not the winges, that gaue them force to flie, Eyther giue scope vnto my wish'd desire; Or salue my sores with present remedie. Who seekes by art his nature to suppresse, In vaine doth striue against the raging streame, My soaring minde procured my distresse? The braunch will growe vnlesse you cut the steame.
Thus if I should ympugne my fantasies, Invaine it were my nature to oppose, Then yeilde I must vnto these myseries? Or to the heau'ns my secret griefes disclose. Heau'ns then beare witnes of my secret smart, For you alone are priuie to my paines, Because to her I dare not once ympart: Howe loue insculpt within my brest remaynes. The feruent heate of hartes reposed zeale, Doth vrge me still for to embrace her fayre, To whom for grace and fauour I appeale: My only refuge for to salue dispayre. Yet all in vaine I throb my breath-lesse playntes, When feare doth daunte my once vn-daunted minde, But neede-lesse feare: for fewe of them are saintes. Yet duties care deniall lookes to finde. Thus as my thoughtes doe cope with Ioues desire, And scorne the meane shoulde once their riuall bee, So fearefull loue doth burne like glowing fier, And threates reuenge if I make suite to thee.
The one perswades, that beauties bower is stor'd, With pittie, and grace, for to requite my loue? The other sayth the subtill serpent (gor'd: With pearsing darte that Ielosies approue) Will soone infect the vertue of thy shyne, To giue repulse; regarding no desert, Though nought I seeke but thou should'st know I pyne: And in thy minde thou would'st my worthes insert. Knowe sou'raigne beautie of thy noble race, And flower of all that beare thy parents name, That I desire thy presence to embrace. To glut mine eyes with looking on the same. Which is an obiect that doth please mine eye, Then will I arme my selfe against the storme, For to endure this cursed miserie: For hope will helpe my charge for to performe. Then will I say to my disquiet minde, Reioyce thou mayst doe seruice to her lookes, What needst thou care although e be vnkinde. Let it suffice thy name is in her okes.
Though crost for follye of thy soaring minde, Yet art thou blest her name is in thy ringes, At last thou shalt ōf her some comfort finde? Though she be now dispos'd to clippe thy winges: Yf thou art bashfull to discou'r thy minde, Let thy ringe tell that she thou doest adore, Yf then thou mayst not some contentment finde? In mourning weedes thy woefull happs deplore: Thy habyte then will sure reueale thy care, She will enquire thy cause of thy annoy, Then mayst thou seighe if thou canst not declare? Howe that her favre hath thus obscur'd thy ioy: She then no doubt will soone conceaue thy minde, When in thy lookes thy ruines will appeere, And with a smile thy thraulled chaynes un-binde; Whose bright-beam'd sun thy cloudy stormes wil cleere: And graunt thee that (at last) thou lou'st so deere. FINIS.
Posse & nolle nobile. A worthie man deserues a worthie motte, As badge thereby his nature to declare, Wherefore the fates of purpose did alot? To this braue squire, this simbole sweete and rare: Of might to spoyle, but yet of mercie spare. A simbole sure to Salisberie due by right, Whose still doth ioyne his mercy with his might. Though lyon like his Posse might take place, Yet like a Lambe he Nolle vseth aye, Right like himselfe (the flower of Salisberies race) Who neuer as yet a poore man would dismay: But princockes pride he vs'd to daunt alway: And so doth still: whereby is knowen full well His noble minde and manhood to excell.
All crauen curres that coms of castrell kinde, Are knownefull well whē they there might would straine▪ The poore t' oppresse that would there fauour finde? Or yeilde himselfe their freinpship to attayne: Then seruile sottes triumphes in might a mayne. But such as coms from noble lyons race, (Like this braue squire) who yeildes receaues to grace. Haud ficta loquor. Hugh Gryffyth Gent.
THE Lamentation of a Male-content v∣pon this Enigma. Maister thy desiers or liue in Despaire. Ouid Hoc si crimen erit cri¦men amoris eris. Yf this a fault bee found in me, Blame loue that wrought the misterie
¶ To the Honorable minded vnknowne, the Name-lesse wisheth perfect health and perpetuall happines. DEáre Patronesse of my haplesse lamentati∣ons; guided by the sterne of thy beauty, which hath the ful commaund of my hart, and wearied with tiranyzing ouer my selfe, in forcible suppressing the agonies of my afflicted minde, by smothering the feruen∣cie of my desires, in the cloudie center of dumme silence: at the last with the raging violence of a stopped streame, for wante of course in the intelligible parte of my minde; I am driuen to ouer-flowe the bankes of reason, and in de∣spite of my selfe to yeilde vp the raynes to vncontrouled desire; which insuing Poem willfullie manyfest vnto you, with the obseruation of my coed fancyes: Written vppon a dreame, wherein me thou I heard a voyce from
a Cloude pronouncing these wordes ensuing. Maister hy desires or liue in despaire, and albeit I helde dreames but phantasies, which commonly doe fall out by contraries; my fortunes being so far inferior to my thoughts, maketh me to doubt the sequell thereof. Yet noble beautie of this sea-bound Region disdayne not to reade ende, and pittie if you will vouchsafe to mity gate the heauines of my martyred heart, which neere stifled with the dampe of my discontentments, lamentably beggeth for comfort at your handes. Yours euer true, secret, and faithfull. Namelesse.
The lamentation of a Male-content. Maister thy desires, or liue in despaire▪ DEpose desires, or in despaire re∣maine, A heauy doome, what my desires de∣pose? How can I from my chiefest ioyes re∣fraine? And march  retire frō hopes repose. Maister desire; this seemeth st : What voie is this that doth   use?
If Iupiter that frō his throne doth see, My secret woes which ruin's cares induce. Then mightie Ioue impugne not my content, For thou hast been in such an error trayn'd, What god soeu'r, yet pittie my lament, That cannot from my sweet desires be wayn'd. Yeilde me no reasons to disswade my course, Though some obiecte, who clym's may hap to fall, The bad is good for to avoyde a worse: And better venter then to liue in thrall. Or in dispayre remayne; a cruell threate, Ay me remaine still in despayre I muste, Feare which forbids my languor to repeate? Hath cou'red hope with vayle of sad distruste: For that her sonne which doth obscure my sight, Shines alwayes cleere, whose beams reflecte  mee. The greater still doth drowne the lesser lig▪ So I am blinde when I would faynest see: Opposed by the starre that lendes me hop▪ I glutt mine eyes with sweete aspects conte▪ All are but shadowes hem'd in narrow scope? Within the orb of wearied mindes lamen: Lookes cannot   motions canot ▪ So eyes and ge  doe play their part,
Giue her no knowledge that I am in loue: For with dessembled myrth I hide my smart. Repugnant feare controuleth my desire, When I woulde speake dispayre pluckes backe the raynes, But yet no chekes can quench the kindled fire; For fantasie to be controul'de disdaynes: The marke is fayre, for beautie giueth ayme, Yet maiestie forbids the meane to shoote, The same is it that gaue my heart the mayme, With whom to striue I feare it is not boote: Could but my pen, finde out the way to write, The moan I make, the flint to teares would melt, Or that I could the worthy prayse indite; Of that rare Iemfor whom these paines I felt: The world would wonder for to reade my verse, That nature coulde frame such a perfect stampe, Yet as I can I will the same reherse: And for to light this Isle set out this lampe. O blooming blossomes with the rising sunne, Cou'rd with the dewe distilled from the skies, You are like shewes that be vnspected donne? And seeme but miste which from the cloudes arise. When this fayre Nymph sh orth her golden shine, She scales the pride u'n of th re skie,
Ech blossom'd flower to honour her incli, There vertues all vpon her shrine do lye, The Gods built vp a trophie of renowne. Honour to add to her admired grace, The Queene of beautie must resigne her Crowne▪ To her whose fayre doth her proud fayre disgrace. How can I then maister my sweete desire, That takes no rest but in this heau'nly bower, Fuell is scant to kindle reasons fire? My minde inclosed lyes in fancies tower. The heau'ns are sad when she is Male-content, And Phaebus doth inome his goulden beams, In Ebon darknes till her cares be spent: Hyding himselfe within the Oce'n streames. But when her frownes be turn'd to smiles againe▪ He lendes his light out of a Cloudie tower, Thus the superior bodies doe remaine, Subiect to this Semy-goddesse power: Can I resist what Ioue could not controule, Who can resist the power of beauties force, 'Tis to well knowne vnto my troubled soule, Bootelesse I strie vnlesse she ke remorse: Remorse sayd I, how  she pittie take, On him that yet durst  for pittie craue,
She doth not knowe I languish for her sake: How am I like her sweete resolue to haue. Had she but knowne the secrets of my thought, How he sweete fayre is shrined in my heart, And but for her I count my life for nought? Yt would neu'r grieue me to abide this smart. But she whose Orbe with Roses circled is, Both red and white of purest die on earth, Doth oft of course shew me a heau'n of blisse, When modest smile is strayn'd with sudden mirth: This is the ase that my desires enioy, This is the cause that hath procur'd desire, And this doire hath sommon'd myne anoye: Loe see the ruite of such as would aspire. I heere a threate of this my fonde intent, Yet cannot haue the thinge I loue so deere, O heau'ns beare witnes how my dayes are spent? In sighes, in sobbs, in sad and mournefull cheere: Eche night my bed, I bath with brirush teares. And turne me still in hope to haue some rest, When first I sleepe my minde (incamp'd with feares) Makes me to starte with trembing care possest: Thē thoughts approch vnto my troubled braine And nowe I thinke that ne for whom I pine,
Eu'n couched doth in happie bed remaine: And so in minde, I doe behould her shine, Then I begyn for to commend the fate, Of that sweete bed, perfum'd by her sweete breath, And with my selfe eu'n thus I doe debate▪ What rarest beautie there appeares in death; Her spirits moue with such a liuely grace, That death doth seeme in her an ornament, Whose stately tower the pillow doth embrace; And clipping kisse repos'd with sweete content. Art can not paynt how thus she Nature feedes, Or liuing death her fayre seemes to possesse, Wherein no doubt the carelesse gazer reedes: The Calender of his accurst distresse. These thoghes encrease the heate of my desire, Whose accents banish'd reason from the stage, My bed beres guilt of this my burning fire: That accessarie was of this my rage. For when ech place denied me scope of thought, He gaue repose vnto my wearied minde, To feede vpon what to my harmes I sought, Which now a poyson to infect I finde: The night being spent in these vnhal'wed cares, The dayes aproch doth  desires crease,
Her goulden trammels which my senses snares: Like towring Fawlcon doth on my sight cease. To view this starre I rowle my light-lesse eye Asqu'int, and then sights force is cleane bereft, That sense can not her sweetest fayre descrie, Which hath my heart in sobbing sorowes left. Then like the theefe that shunns the Iudges face, I flie her sight that may iudge my desire, Although in heart her presence I embrace; For still my thoughtes to her sweete fayre aspire. Her noble brest eu'n is that bowre of blisse, Which in it selfe doth harbor my delight, My stay of life therein intombed is, Which lock'd retaynes from wished hope his right: From wished hope his right, ah bootelesse hope, That soothes his maister in his ruins course, In vaine I striue, too large is honours scope, That to his center hath a still recourse. ught Palmers come and sit in Princes throane, To beg for Dole to satisfie there want, Shall I to her uenter to make my moane, Whom for to serue I am right worthy scant. No sure, the Roe which swift beasts out-ran, Would scorne to see the bearded goate contend,
Yet Paris thought the godesse striefe to scanne▪ When he did Venus beautie in Ide defrude: Why shall not I her loue hope to obtayne, Though Veus peere, or yet rather peerelesse, Paris a sheaphard I a homely swayne, He want on, I chast Helen would possesse. No Phereclea barke with treason stor'd, Loaden with heape of desembling layes, Nor cruell darts with friendes deere blood begor'd, Did guide my course to view thy glorious rayes. Was't to reuenge of auncestors the wronge, As Paris did; these passions me molest? No, without fraude of pure affection spronge, True loue, yea lone which robb me of my rest. Thy Idea ymprest is in my heart, And gonlden trammels shrined in my minde, That if dome fignes doe not my griefe ympart, And hope of thee my entertaynment finde. I shall weare out the remnant of my dayes, In cursed cares, and sorowes deepe despayre, Diuine sweete Nymph cut off my fates delayes: And let consent salue this thy ioyes ympayre. For my desires, with ombling waues, are tst, Within th'Ocean of thy swee utie,
And I in wildernes of cares am lost, Deuising still how to performe my duety: None knows my minde nor yet what I doe meane, In vaine it is to thunder foorth my griefe, And thus to spend my selfe on such a spleane, When sure I am not to obtaine reliefe: What though she reade these ruin's of my time, She will not thinke that ought by her is ment▪ For my meane fancies are too base to clime: Or once to ayme the Period of my bent. That soares aloft eu'n in the racking Cloudes, Beyonde the reach of any mortall sight, And in bright Phoebus beams her honour shrowd's. Which doth from thence encrease fayre Tytanslight. So that no fight vnlesse the Eagle eyed, (For feare of taynt) dare gaze on this bright sonne, But happie is he that peeping hath espyed, The vayle that cou'rs the fayre this third hath spo: Sometimes mine dye (forgetting duties charge) Gaze on those orbes that be so orient fayre, Where anchor-lesse they sayle in fancies barge, And feede themselues eu'n with thy heau'nly payre: Then while she doth on other obiectes looke, They thinke a vauntage for to steale a sight,
Forgetting that they snatch the bayted hooke: But being encountred by those circlets bright, They doe retire for to prepare excuse, And blush for feare least that they were descried, Or that her eye would messuage heere the newes, When as they had vnto my glavnces pried: Thus would I faine that she did know my case, And yet aoth she should my fancies knowe, Lest that she would my little hope deface, And being my friend begyn to be m foe. Haue I not d that hollow fearefull voice, Sound in mine cares? which late pronounc'd my care, Had she de so, it had byn past all choice: For th I h byn  fast in snare. But sith this Eo of abpted ayre, Breathe  these threates from bowels of conceyte, Yt shall not Coward-like cyre my despayre, But  giue me courage to entreate. Then  patronesse of my repose▪ Diuine the mng of my pure intent, And though that feare forbids me to disclose, My inward care, that banisheth content. Yet haue remorse on him that liuing dyes, Vnlesse thou take comon on his fate,
Whose wynged thought in pensiue passion lyes, Fenced with vaile of sorowes deepe debate. Eu'r-during care possesseth my poore minde, Once freede from the badge of discontent, To be thy thrall my soaring thoughtes inclinde, View then my playntes which do my hap lament. Dayne to regarde the silent griefes I beare, Hoping that signes add inward motions pleade, True tokens of vnfained loue, yet feare, Eclipseth still the hope I had to speede. Bashfull I am, sweete loue speake thou for mee, Ah well thou know'st the some of my desire, Loue made me thrall and thou canst make me free, Then lende me hope to quench the kindled fire▪ I only craue that thou should'st knowe I oue, And that I spend my dayes in care for thee, Thou art the sterne which wearied barke doth moue, Ane to the harbour of thy grace I flee. Not for my selfe alone, these pāssions striue, And torture still my neere-decayde heart, Nor yet of malyce others to corriue, But secret matters which the heau'ns ymp, For to encrease thy noble beauties race: That barren lyes for want of timely seede, The braunch, spread Palme the blossom'd buds deface, Note s is true when thou my Poem reede.
Yf barren Sara vnto Abraham gaue, Agar her mayde, his seede to multiplie, That She a childe by her brought foorth might haue? For to fulfill the sacred Prophesie: Why should not I being mou'd by loues desire, And stir'd by motion of the heau'nly powers, Yeilde to the furie of this hallowed fie, Whose heate cannot be quench'd with stormie shower. Depose the scruple of a double zeale, For time once lost cannot be had againe, From all the worlde to thee I doe appeale: Though thou shouldst hate, my loue shall still remaine. I vowe to be true vnto thee alone, nd eu'r in heart none other to embrace. Nowe let fonde Eccho itterate my moane▪ And part in Cloudes, my fates hope to deface. I still will sing the glorie of thy name, And glutt my selfe in praysing thy sweete fayre, My pen is bound for to aduaunce thy fame; Vnto the heau'nly region of the ayre: Then Ioue will pine and fret for such a loue, When thundering blasts, of thy renowned grace, Shall, that great God, with thy fayre beautie, moue▪ Which I in heart doe honour and embrace▪ These secret griefes this loue vnknowne doth foe, Whereof I die vnlesse thou take remorse. FINIS.
