23443.5 23170426 26339
Certayne sweete Prayers of the glorious name of Iesus, com∣monly called, Iesus Mattens, with the howers therto belonging: written in Latin aboue two hundred yeres agoe, by H. Su∣sonne. A salutation to be sayd in the Mor∣ning, to the euerlasting wisedome of God. MY Soule hath desired thée in the night season, and I haue also watched for thée in spirite and mind al the morning (O wisedome most excel∣lent) beséeching thée that thy pre∣sence,
whiche I so sore haue longed for, expel from vs al such thinges as are agaynst vs, water the secrets of our hartes with thy manyfolde gra∣ces, and mightily inflame the same with thy loue. And nowe my moste swéete Lorde Iesu Christ, I rise and come earely to thée in the morning, and pray to thée from the botome of my hart. And a thousande thousande of blessed Saints in my name salute thée, and ten hundred thousand thou∣sande glorifie thée, who are euer in thy sight ready at al times to doo thy will and pleasure. I pray also, that the swéete accorde of all creatures may prayse thée in my behalfe, and that thy triumphant name be our
shielde and protection, and blesse vs euermore. Amen. At euery howre this versicle must be sayde. Iesus who is the wisedome of the Father, geue vs health both of bo∣dy and soule. The Mattens. O Lorde open thou my lips. And my mouth shal shew forth thy prayse. O God make spéede to saue me. O Lord make hast to succour me. Glory be to the father, and to the sonne, and to the holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shal be world with∣out ende. Amen. Alleluia From Septuagesima til Easter is said, Prayse be geuen to thée O Lord, the king of eternall glory. The inuitatorie. Pray we to the fountayne of e∣ternall wisedome. And let vs reioyce because his name is glorious. The Psalme. COme let vs reioyce vnto our Lord, let vs sing before God our Sauiour: Let vs come before his presence with thankes geuing, and ioyfully sing to him in Psalmes. Pray we to the fountayne. &c. And let vs reioyce because. &c.
For our God is a great Lord, and a great king ouer all goddes, for he will not put away his people: For in his handes is al the whole earth, and he beholdeth the height of the mountaynes. And let vs reioyce because. &c. For the Sea is his and he made it, and his hands haue fashioned the dry lande: come let vs worship and fall downe before God, and wéepe before our Lorde that made vs, for he is our Lord God, and we are the shéepe of his pasture. Prayse we the fountayne. &c. And let vs reioyce because. &c. To day if you wil heare his voice, harden not your hart, as in the bit∣ter
murmuring in the day of temp∣tation in the wildernes, wher your fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes. And let vs reioyce because. &c. Fourty yeres was I gréeued with this generation, and euer sayd, they erre in their hartes, they haue not knowne my wayes: to whom I sware in my anger, they should not enter into my rest. Pray we to the fountaine of. &c. And let vs reioyce because. &c. Glory be to the father, to ye sonne, and to the holy ghost. As it was in ye beginning, is now, and euer shal be world. &c. And let vs reioyce because. &c.
Prayse we the fountayne of eter∣nall wisdome. And let vs reioyce because his name is glorious. The Hymne. O Iesu méeke, ye swetest thought, That yeldes eche hart true ioy: More swete it is thē yet was ought Thy presence to ioioy. No swéeter tune or note can be More pleasaunt to the eare, Nor thoght foūd out so swéete as he That is Gods sonne and heyre. Thou Iesu hope to sinners all, On thée that cry with willing mind How louing art and naturall, To them that thée doo finde.
To Father thine al glory be, All wisdome eke to thée most pure, The holy ghost in Trinitie, Be praysd for euer to endure. Amē. The Psalme. LEt all the earth sing prayse to God, let them say Psalmes, and glorifie his name. Say to God, O Lorde thy works are terrible: bicause of thy power which is diuers waies knowen, thy enimies will dissemble to thée. Let al the world honour thée, and sing to thée, and say Psalmes vnto thy name. Glory be to the father, and to. &c. As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shal be. &c.
The Antheme. Wisedome hath buylded her an house, she hath hewen out seuen pillers, she hath brought the gentils vnder her subiection, & by her owne might hath troden on the necke of the proude and hye minded. The versicle. I surely will reioyce in our Lorde. The Response. And will reioyce in Iesus who is my God. Our father which art in heauen. &c. And leade vs not into temptation. But deliuer vs from euill. Amen. Lorde we beséeche thée to blesse vs. Iesus who is the wisdome of the father defende vs from all thinges that are agaynst vs. Amen.
The first Lesson. O Wisedome eternall, brightnes of glorie, and the very figure of the substaunce of the father, who haste created all things of nothing, and because thou wouldest bring a∣gaine man to the pleasure of Para∣dise, thou camest downe into this vale of miserie, and by thy holy con¦uersation thou hast shewed him the path that leadeth thither, and hast raunsomed all mankinde, as a most immaculate Lambe: open by thy precious death my hart, that with the eyes of a perfect beliefe I may alwayes boholde thée who art king of kinges, and lorde of Lords. Geue me wisedome to consider of thy
woundes and gréeuous stripes, that more & more I may profite in thée onely, and in thy death, who arte as a booke of charitie for me, & graunt I be vtterly destitute of al vanities so that nowe I be not he whom hi∣therto I haue bene, but that thou abide in me, & I so linked vnto thée, that I neuer swarue or decline frō thée. And good Lorde I beséeche thée haue mercy vpon vs. Thankes be to God. The Response. Sende downe, good Lorde, thy wisdome from the seate of thy Ma∣iestie, that she may labour and be with me, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight at all times.
The versicle. Geue vs, O Lorde, that wisedome that attendeth on thée, that I may knowe what is acceptable in thy sighte at all times. Good Lorde blesse vs. The euerlasting wisedome vouch∣safe to lighten our hartes and sen∣ces. Amen. The seconde Lesson. O My Lord Iesu, most swéete vn∣to me, most blisseful wisedome, the worde of the father, the begin∣ning and ending of all kind of crea∣tures: cast thy eyes mercyfully vp∣pon me, I pray thée, for I am but fleshe and ashes, and I fully per∣swade my selfe that it lyeth not so
muche in me, eyther to wyll any thing, or to runne, but all power commeth from thée, whose mercy assisteth vs al. Consider, I pray thée thy bitter passion which thou suffe∣redst for me a moste wretched and vnworthy sinner, and graciously continue such good will as thou hast hitherto shewed me. O my merciful Lorde forsake me not, O my refuge depart not from me, O my deliue∣rer make haste to succour me, and bury me in thy sepulchre with thée, and mortifie me to the worlde, saue me from all deceiptes of mine eni∣mies, that neither life nor death, nor no happe or chaunce seuer me from thée, but that our loue cōtinue
both now and euer, and be nothing diminished by death it self. And thou good Lord haue mercy vpon vs. Thankes be geuen to God. The response. Geue me, O Lorde, that wisedome that attendeth on thée, and put me not away frō amongst thy children, for I am thy seruant, and sonne of thy handmayde. The versicle. Sende her downe from thy hea∣uenly seate, that she may be with me & labour with me, for I am thy seruaunt, & sonne of thy handmaid. Good Lorde blesse vs. God the holy ghost replenishe vs with ye gift of vnderstanding. Amen.
The third Lesson. O Lorde who art my succour and helper, for that marueylous loue which caused thée to sustaine for my sake a most bitter death on the trée of the crosse: I beséeche thée for thy mercy sake to pardon those sinnes which I most vile sinner haue com∣mitted: and in the wounde of thy side kéepe me from accomplishing of euyll actes, and from all dangers beside: direct my pathes to a good ende, whylest I am tossed in the waues of this life, and graunt I may come to the sighte of eternall glory. And good Lorde haue mercy vpon me. Thankes be to God.
The Response. I haue loued wisdome more then health or any beautie, and haue pre∣ferred her aboue the very light, and so all good things haue chaunced to me because I enioyed her. The versicle. I sayd to Wisdome, Thou art my sister, and I called Prudence my lo∣uer. And al good things chaunced to me when I enioyed her. Glory be to the father, and to the sonne, and to the holy ghost. And all good thinges happened to me by her. This that foloweth is taken out of the song of S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine.
Thou art ye king of glory, O Christ. Thou art the euerlasting sonne of the father. When thou tooke vpon thée to de∣liuer man, thou diddest not abhorre the virgins wombe. When thou haddest ouercome the sharpnes of death, thou opened the kingdome of heauen to al beleuers. Thou sittest on the right hande of God, in the glory of thy father. We beléeue that thou wilt come to be our Iudge. Therfore we beséech thée to helpe thy seruauntes, whom thou hast re∣demed with thy most precious blood. Cause them to be numbred with thy Saints in glory euerlasting.
Saue thy people, O Lord, and blesse thine heritage. Gouerne them, and lift them vp for euer. And we prayse thy name euer world without ende. Vouchsafe, O Lorde, to kéepe vs this day without sinne. Haue mercy vpon vs, O Lorde, haue mercy vpon vs. Let thy mercy light vpon vs, as our trust is in thée. In thée, O Lorde, haue I trusted, let me neuer be confounded. Amen. Those that wil, may say in place of this, that which foloweth. WE prayse thée, O Christ. We blesse thée, O Iesu.
We confesse thée to be the king of kings, and lorde of al lordes. We worship thee who was cruci∣fied, our sweete & louing Redemer. Who saued vs by the shedding of thy blood. Thou art worthy, Lord Iesu our God, to haue prayse, blessing, glory, and honour. All fleshe reioyseth to thee, and all liuing creatures glorifie thy name. Let al things bow vnder thy fete, and al creatures serue thee. Let them prayse & magnifie thee, blesse and glorifie thee for euer. The Laudes. Iesus who is the wisedome of the father, giue vs health both of body
and soule. O God make speede to helpe vs. O Lord make hast to succour vs. Glory be to the father, to the. &c. As it was in the beginning, is. &c. The Psalme. PRayse our Lorde al ye Gentiles, prayse him all ye Nations. For his mercy hath bene shewed in vs, and the truth of our Lorde a∣bydeth for euer. Glory be to the father, to the. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c. The Antheme. Wisdome cryeth out in the stree∣tes: If any man loueth wisdome, let him bowe to me and he shal find her out: and he that hath found her,
happie is he if he can keepe her. The Chapiter. This wisdome I haue loued, and haue sought for her from my youth hitherto, and haue made meanes she might be my wife, and I was taken with her beautie. Answere, Thankes be to God. The Hymne. O Iesu wondrous king, That dost triumph in blisse: To all men thee desiring, Thy ioy exceeding is. No tong hath shewde by speache, Ne letters euer tolde, Nor Iesus loue may teache, But triall can vnfolde.
O pearles Iesus loue, For which I languishe sore, My hart with pleasure moue Of thée my hart and store. All wisedome be to thée, And to thy father glory, The holy ghost prayse wée, One God in persons thrée. Amen. The versicle. Wisedome resteth in his harte. The Response. And prudence abideth in the words of his mouth. The Antheme. O thou wisedome. The song of Zacharias. BLessed be the Lord god of Israel, for he hath visited and redéemed
his people. And hath lifted vp an horne of sal∣uatien, in the house of his seruaunt Dauid. As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophetes, whiche haue béene since the world began. That we should be saued from our enimies, and from the hands of all that hate vs. To shewe mercy to our fathers, and to remember his holy couenant To performe the othe whiche he sware to our father Abraham, of suche things as he would geue vs. That beeing deliuered from the hands of our enimies, we woulde serue him without feare.
In holines & righteousnes before him al the dayes of our life. And thou childe shalt be called the prophet of the highest, for thou shalt go before his face to prepare his wayes. To geue knowledge of saluation to his people, for the remission of sinnes. Through the tender mercy of God, by whiche he hath visited vs springing from an high. To geue light to them that sit in darknes, & in the shadowe of death, to guide our féete in ye way of peace. Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning. &c.
The Antheme. O Thou wisedome which procée∣ded out of the mouth of ye hyest, that reacheth from one ende of the world to an other, who doth strong∣ly place all thinges in a comely or∣der: come and teache vs the way howe to attayne thy wisdome. Lorde heare my prayer. And let my crye come to thée. Let vs pray. O Lord who by thy wisdome whi∣che is eternal, as thou thy selfe art, created man who before was not, and when he was vtterly loste, did most mercyfully redéeme him: graunt we beséeche thée, that tho∣row the inspiration of the said wis∣dome
into our hartes, we may loue thée with all our minds, and runne to thée with all our harte: through our sayde Lorde Iesus Christe thy sonne, who liueth & raigneth with thée in the vnitie of the holy Ghost, God world without ende. Amen. Blesse we the Lorde. Thankes be to God. The euerlasting wisdome blesse & kéepe our minds & bodies. Amen. The Pryme. Iesus who is the wisdome of the father, geue vs health both of body and soule.
O God make spéede to helpe me. O Lord make hast to succor me. Glory be to the father, to ye sonne, and to the holy ghost. As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shal be world with∣out ende. Amen. The Hymne. O loue of Iesu swéete, A hundred folde I say, More gentle to intreate, Then shewe with words I may. Angelical comfort sure, To taste as honey swéete. To heare no better pleasure, And to our hart fine meate. Thou blessed Iesu daunt My hart with loue of thée,
Thy presence doo me graunt, In glory for to sée. To father thine all glory be, Al wisedome eke to thée most pure, The holy ghost in Trinitie, Be praysd for euer to endure. Amē. The Psalme CAuse me to heare of thy mercy in the morning, for I haue put my trust in thée. Let me knowe the way wherein I may walke, for I haue lift vp my hart to thée. Deliuer me from my enimies, O Lord I fled to thée for succour: teach me to do thy wil, for thou art my god Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c.
The Antheme. I loue suche as loue me, and those that earely watche for me, shall finde me. The Chapiter. WIsdome surpasseth wickednes, and spreadeth from coaste to coaste, who doth strongly place all things in a séemely order. Thankes be to God. The Answere. Iesu Christe sonne of the liuing God, haue mercy vpon me. The versicle. Thou that sittest on the righte hande of God, haue mercy vpon vs, Glory be to the father. &c. Iesu Christe sonne of the liuing
God, haue mercy vpon vs. The versicle. Arise, O Lorde, and helpe vs. Aunswere. And deliuer vs for thy holy name sake. O Lorde heare my prayer. And let my cry come vnto thée. Let vs pray. Let the brightnes (O Lorde) of thy eternall wisedome illuminate our harts, that they be not dimmed with the darknes of this world, but that we may come to that countrey where is perpetual light: through our sayde Lorde Iesus Christe thy sonne. And so foorth, as before.
The third howre. Iesus who is the wisedome of the father, geue vs health both of body and soule. O God make spéede to helpe me. O Lord make hast to succour me. Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the. &c. Alleluia. The Hymne. Thy loue, O Iesu, is A passing swéete repaste, Not lothsome ought iwis, But suger all in taste. That thée do tast, they hunger stil, They drinke and yet are dry, They wold none haue by their good will, Saue Iesus him on hye.
A thousande times I thée desire, How glad thou wouldst me make, If thou wilt come as I require, And cause my hunger slake. All wisedome be to thée, And to thy father glory, The holy ghost prayse wée, One God in persons thrée. Amen. The Psalme. THy holy spirite will bring me to ye right path, for thy name sake. O Lorde quicken me in thy righ∣teousnesse. Thou wilt bring my soule out of all miserie: and in thy mercy thou wilt destroy all my enimies. And wilt destroy al those that trou¦ble my soule, for I am thy seruant.
Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c. The Antheme. My sonne if thou couet wisdome, kéepe Iustice, and our Lorde wyll geue her thée. The Chapiter. This wisdome I haue loued and sought for frō my youth, and sought howe I mighte haue her for my spouse, and was rauished with her beautie. Answere. Thanks be to God. Response. I wil surely reioyce in our Lord. The versicle. And solace my self in Iesus my god. I will reioyce in our Lorde.
Glory be to the father. &c. I wil surely reioyce in our Lord. Versicle. Blessed be the name of our Lorde. The Response. Frō hēceforth world without ende. Let vs pray. O God, who by thy eternal wise∣dome madest man, who before that was not at all, & after he was lost diddest mercifully redéeme him: graunt we beséeche thée, that by the same mercy inspiring our harts, we may loue thée with al our harts, and with all our strength runne vnto thée: through our sayd Lord Iesus Christe thy sonne. &c.
The sight howre. Iesus the wisdome of the Father, geue vs health both of body & soule. O God make spéede to helpe me. O Lord make hast to succour me. Glory be to the father. As it was in the. &c. Alleluia. The Hymne. Iesu from whō al bounty springs, A ioy of minde for aye, An vnspeakable wondrous thing, That steales my hart away. Best is for me to leaue this pelfe, And Iesu to séeke out: I will rather forsake my selfe, Thā Iesu leaue yt hath me bought.
O louely Iesu méeke, A hope to them that for thée longs: Thée gracious teares doo séeke, With drierie mournful songs. To father thine al glory be, Al wisedome eke to thée most pure, The holy ghost in Trinitie, Be praysd for euer to endure. Amē. The Psalme. OVr soule paciently loketh for our Lorde, for he is our helper and our refuge. For our hart shal reioice in him, & we haue trust in his holy name. Lord let thy mercy be shewed vnto vs: as we haue put our trust in thee Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c.
The Antheme. Our Lord had possession of me in the beginning of his wayes: he had me before he begonne any of his la∣bours, in the beginning sayth our Lorde. The Chapiter. The brightnes of euerlasting light, the glasse of eternal maiestie, which is cleare without any spot, & the very paterne of his goodnes. Answere. Thankes be to God. The Response. Blessed be the name of our Lorde. The versicle. Frō henceforth world without end. Glory be to the Father. &c. Blessed be the name of our Lorde.
From henceforth world without ende. Versicle. From the rising of the Sunne, to the going downe thereof. Blessed be the name of our Lorde. Let vs pray. GEue eare to vs O merciful god, and shewe the brightnes of thy wisdome vnto our mindes, graunt we may loue thée aboue al thinges, through our said Lorde Iesus. &c. The ninth howre. Iesus the wisdome of the father, geue vs health both of body & soule. O God make spéede to helpe me. O Lord make hast to succour me. Glory be to the. &c. As it was. &c.
The Hymne. What coastes to trace I minde, I Iesu alwayes would: Howe glad if I him finde, But blisse if I him holde. Then clipping and kissing, That passeth pleasure all: In these without staying, I will to Iesus call. Nowe what I sought I finde, And founde I holde at laste: For Iesus loue I pinde, And burnt within full faste. All wisedome be to thée. And to thy father glory, The holy ghost prayse we, One God in persons thrée. Amen.
The Psalme. CReate in me (O Lorde) a pure harte, and renue in me a perfect spirite. Cast me not away from thy face, and take not frō me thy holy spirit. Restore to me the gladnes of thy saluation, and strengthen me with a principal spirite. Glory be to the father, to the. &c. As it was in the beginning, is. &c. The Antheme. Before the déepes and seas were, I was borne: when he went about to create the heauens I was with him, and set al things in order. The Chapiter. WIsdome is more goodly than the sunne and all other starres that
are placed in so goodly an order, and if it be cōpared with the very light, it is certayne it was before yt was. Answere. Thankes be to God. Response. From the rising of the Sunne to the going downe thereof. The versicle. The name of our Lorde is wor∣thy to be praysed. Vntill the going downe therof. Glory be to the father. &c. From the rising of the sunne, tyll the going downe thereof. Ver. Wisedome resteth in his hart. Ans. And prudence in the words of his mouth. Let vs pray.
POwer into our harts (O Lorde) the light of thy wisdome, that we may knowe thée truely, & faythfully loue thée: through our sayde Lorde Iesus Christ thy sonne, who liueth and reigneth with thée in the vnity of the holy Ghost, God world with∣out ende. Amen. Blesse we the Lorde. Thankes be to God. The euerlasting wisedome blesse & kéepe our hartes & bodies. Amen. Euensong. Iesus the wisdome of the Father, geue vs health both of body and soule.
O God make spéede to succour me. O Lorde make hast to helpe me. Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the. &c. Alleluia. The Psalme. OVr lord hath sent redemption to his people, he hath commaunded his testament to be inuiolatly kept for euer. His name is holy and terrible, the feare of our Lorde is the beginning of wisedome. Vnderstanding is good to all suche as doo exercise it, his prayse endu∣reth for euermore. Glory be to the Father. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c.
The Antheme. All wisedome commeth from our Lorde God, and was with him at al times, and is still for euer. The Chapiter. This wisedome I haue loued, and sought for her, since my youth I haue sought how I might enioy her as my spouse, and I was inflamed with her beautie. Answere. Thanks be to God. The Hymne. O Iesu clearer then the sunne, No swéeter balme than thée: No swéete like thée, not one, Aboue al things most frée. Thou art the ende of loue, That giueth delight of minde:
My glory eke art thou, That sauedst all mankinde. Encreace of mercy euermore Thou art, and hope of ioy: Of grace the well and store, That sheldest from anoy. To father thine all glory be, Al wisedome eke to thée most pure, The holy ghost in Trinitie, Be praysd for euer to endure. The versicle. I will surely reioyce in our Lord. Answere. And solace my self in my god Iesus. Antheme. O orient brightnes. &c. The song of the virgin Mary. My soule doth magnifie our Lord. And my spirite hath reioyced in
God my sauiour. For he hath behelde the humilitie of his handmayde: beholde from henceforth all generations shal cal me blessed. For he that is mightie hath mag∣nified me, and holy is his name. And his mercy is alwaies shewed to them that feare him, throughout all generations. He hath shewed strength with his arme, he hath scattered the proude in the imagination of their harts. He hath put downe the mightie from their seate, and hath exalted the humble and méeke. He hath filled the hungry with good thinges, and the riche he hath
sent emptie away. He hath remembred his mercy, & deliuered his seruaunt Israel. As he promised our fathers, and Abraham and his séede for euer. Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginning. &c. Antheme. O orient brightnes of eternall lighte, and sonne of Iustice, come and lighten vs that sit in darknes, and in the shadowe of death. Lorde heare my prayer. And let my crye come to thée. Let vs pray. O God who by thy eternall wise∣dome made man, who before
that time was not at all, and after he fell, diddest mercifully redéeme him: graunt we beséeche thée, that by the same wisdome inspiring our hartes, we may loue thée with all our hartes, and runne vnto thée with all our mighte: through our sayde Lord Iesus Christ thy sonne, who liueth and reigneth with thée in the vnitie of the holy ghost, God worlde without ende. Amen. Blesse we our Lorde. Thankes be to God. The eurlasting wisedome blesse and kéepe our hartes and bodyes. Amen.
Compline. Iesus the wisedome of the father, geue vs health both of body & soule. Conuert vs God our Sauiour. And turne thy wrath away frō vs. O God make spéede to saue me. O Lord make hast to succour me. Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost. As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shal be world with∣out ende. Amen. Alleluia. The Psalme. LIghten mine eyes that I neuer sléepe in death, lest mine enimie at any time say, I haue preuayled ouer him. Those that persecute me will re∣ioyce
if I be moued, but I trust in thy mercy. My harte shall reioyce in thy sal∣uation. I will sing vnto our Lorde, who hath geuen me good things: and sing to the name of the hyest. Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginning. The Antheme. I dwell in the hyest places, and my throne is in the pillers of the cloudes. The Chapiter. WIsedome teacheth sobrietie, righteousnes and vertue, which thinges be most commodious for vs in this life.
Answere. Thanks be to God. Response. In good quietnes, I will sléepe and take my rest. Versicle. If I sléepe and take a nappe with mine eyes. I will sléepe and take my rest. Glory be to the father. &c. In good quietnes I wil sléepe, and take my rest. The Hymne. Nowe Iesus rules in peace, Which tongue can not expresse: My minde desires & will not cease, But néedes wil haue to him accesse. The Saintes in heauen glad, To prayse thée be not slacke: Iesus gladdes the world bad, And for vs peace wt god doth make.
Iesu to heauen did ascende, Vnto his Princely throne: My harte is after Iesus wende, And lefte me all alone. All wisedome be to thée, And to thy father glory, The holy ghost prayse we, One God in persons thrée. Amen. Versicle. His place is made ready in peace. Ans. And his habitation in Sion. The Antheme. O glorious king. The song of Simeon. LOrde nowe lettest thou thy ser∣uant depart in peace, according to thy worde. For mine eyes haue séene thy
saluation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of the people Israel. Glory be to the father, to the son, and to the holy ghost. As it was in the beginning, is nowe, and euer shal be world with∣out ende. Amen. The Antheme. O glorious King, who art alwayes praysed among thy Saintes, and yet no man can speake so worthy∣ly of thée as thy Maiestie requireth, thou Lorde art among vs, and thy holy name is called vpon by vs, for∣sake vs not our God, but at the ex∣treme
day of Iudgement, vouchsafe to place vs among thy chosen ser∣uaunts and Saintes, moste blessed king. Lorde heare my prayer. And let my cry come vnto thée. Let vs pray. Mercyfully (O Lorde) looke vpon our frayltie, and fauourably geue vs a taste of thy celestiall wisdome, that when we haue tasted of the merueylous swéetenes thereof, we may despise all worldly vanitie, and continually with burning de∣sire cleaue vnto thée, who arte the chéefest goodnes that may be: tho∣rough our sayd Lorde Iesus Christ
thy sonne, who liueth and reigneth with thée in the vnitie of the holy ghost, God worlde without ende. Amen. Blesse we our Lorde. Thankes be to God. The euerlasting wisedome blesse and kéepe our mindes and bodyes. Amen.
